A Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/cotgrave1611goog>. Public domain.

a, Original from


PT a
é fs


LI eee
eee
Rey


DICTION ARIE
OF THE FRENCH


AND ENGLISH
TONGVES.


Compiled by Ranpis


CorTGRAYVE.


£ à MP: if
® } FLE An €
LC” Le KÈ ÿ


Ne
Ÿ ri
G S OT END) 4 GE
4 à i = , 4 + : vb: wi
\ 1e IS ZRII Di
? IL 6 AN Q FAN
t s | N
\ > willis 2? 9
L} * ) y
X h, =
à y à
2 4


Tue.


ty


rable, and my very good Lord and Maïfter, .
Sir Wizriam Cs cui Knight, Lord Burghley, and fonne |
~ and heire apparant vnto the Earle of Exceter. 4


oo cer Here prefent voto your Lordfbips view an Ac-
ER AR Ge] count of th expence of many houres, which in your
Vey PERE! feruice, and to mine ovone benefit might haue beene

CNE | otherwife imploied : for floth, howfoeuer, had not
confumed them ; fomewhat I muft haue done the

ls | ‘whilef? ; nor could I haue beftowed them on a|

Worke of lee vfe for your Lordfbip, the French | -

iS being alreadie fo well ynderftood by you, and all
yours. In which regard , as I am particularly bound to acknowledge
your Lordfbips goodne|fe,, bearing ‘with my humor to follow, and allowing me
time to fini{h, it ; {0 haue all they; to-whomit {hall proue of any worth, inf}
Cauféto honour in your Lord{bip that goodnefle, continued along time unto
… | thet, and the common good. No. prinat-confiderationypas fit 10 makeyour|
| Lordjbip often to difpence ‘with th ordinarie attendance of an ordinarie fer- ee
uant. But this is one of the leaf} of your Lord{hips refpetts tothe Publicke; |
and I would be loath to ingage your Judgement, or Honour, on the fuccelfe of |
Jo meane a Peece. My defires haue aimed at more fubftantiall markes ; but |
minz eyes failedthem, and forced meto {pend much of their vigour on this
| Bundle of words ; which though it may be-wnworthie of your Lordfhips great
patience, and perhaps ill forted to the expectation of others, yet is: it the
bef? 7 can at this time make it,and were,how perfect foeuer,no more then due
to your Lordjhip , to whom Loe, for what I haue beene many yeres, wh
foeuer Tamnow, or looke to hier i aes


aes he |


SE,
aA
PE it


Your Lordfh ok PS |


amoft bounden feruan ee ar


a a en


Randle Cotgrane.}


Go gle —


Pah Etteur, ! Auteur de ce livre (Gentilhomme Anglois,a qui fon propre
‘ Pays &;fur cour, le notre ont vn¢ obligationparticuliere, qu’ilz ont à
S9/, pcu d’auttes) apres avoir peniblement veillé &travaillé par plufeurs
Sans, fur, cet œuyre, non moins, certes, ingrat que laborieuz; En fin eft
A icoritraint de le allée partir de fs thains, plutot vaincu de Pimportu-
.nité de fes Amis, & de lanecefité, que le Public ena, que fatisfait en
{on ame de fon, propre ouvrage.Et r’aflure que fion l’eut voulu croire,


de telz mors; qui, poflible, ne feront jamais plus ouyz en ce monde, (quoy que luz) &
dont, i¢ troy, il n'y à perforne qui ai¢ouy patler depuis cent ans, que Iuy; tant fa curiofité a
été grande & exacte à lire toute forte de livres, vieuzSenouveauz, & de cous noz dialeétes.
A cette caufe, peur, poflible, qu'ayant égard à ce que tu voys, nonace que tu ne voyspas, tu
Vaccufes plucot de ce qu’tha dit, que de ce qu’il a eté contraint de laifler ; qui courefois feroit
vn trefor ineftiniable)s'ikett pu trouver,ou pardega, ou en France mefines (où il a eté fi curi-
cuz d'envoyer eépres) qui l'êut pujou voulu refoudtedefes doutes; Ii te{uplie bien fort, fi
tu trouves icy clquésinots qui cefonnent mal auz orcilles, ou mefine qui n'y ayent encore
jamais fonné,de croire,qu ilz ne {ont point de fon invention, mais recueilliz de la multitude


RKdiverfiré denoz Auteurs} que poflible cu n’ auras pas encore luz; & qui, tant bons que |


Manvais,defitent tous d’eftre emenduz. Il pouvoit bien citer le nom, le livre, la page,& le
paflages mais ce n’cur\plus ity eté vn Didionaire, sains vn Labirinte. Cenz qui ne les fau-
ron pas,lesaprendront; Ceuz qui lesfauront, jugeront bien que l’isnorance;poffible,d'vn
feul mor, foit fubftanciel, metaforique; inufité, ou tire de la varieté des Ars, peut fouvent
obfeurcir tout vn fens, & rendre bikie les conceptions les plus gentilles. Permis à qui
voudra d’en vier, ou de les laifler; Bien entendu, toutefois , que ce né feroit pas le pis qui


nous pit arriver, que de remettre fiz, certains mots fur-annez, que nous avons mieuz aimé |


laiffer perdre, qaoy quetrèspropres & fignificatifs ; Et autres denotre propre cru, bien que
dedivers wnt 4 allans plutot mandier chez les Étrangers pour nous exprimer , ou bien


~ | nous taifans du cout, ou parlans parvn long contournement de paroles, que d'ouvrir vn peu
| la bouche ee en prononcer quelques vns qui fembloyent trop revel fd a la douceur


| du palais
| cems-cy- Quant auz fauces del Impreffion, l'Autheur ne les peut totalement prendre fur foy,


noz Damoifelles, ou grater l'oreille delicate de Meffieurs noz Courtifans de ce


neniant pas qu’il n’en foit efchape aflez, comme auffi poffible en quelques endroits, quel.
qué impropre interpretation; efperarit bien toutefois, que les vnes ny les autres ne feront
pas fi grandes que tacourtoifie n'y puifle bien fuppleer. A tant, Il recomande fon œuvre
à ta bonne reception, & moy ie demeure . phere dre Kans


WATS


tiead sh


“


GS Ton trefaffettionné Patriotte,


‘#72 |
x. ra I, L'oissav de Tourval,Parifien À;
ity


il füc encore apres a fe courmenter , pour trouver la fignification |.


a RL


ee OR OPORTO
To the Reader.


=) Vinanum eft errare, fay the Latiniffs, to whom verie many (100 much menin a
À thesr much erring) hane beene exceedingly beholden for an excufervpon sft

| acculations. I (who am no God, nor Angell) either to prement, or toprofit, o~ q
| thers, amwilling ynough to accuse my felfe; and therefore hane caufed {uch i
ouerflipsas haue yet occurred to mine eye or underftanding, to be placed neere
the forheadof this Verball creaturesas leffe afraid fo to di (grace tt, thento de- vs
— cere thofe that foall harbor it ; and chufiog rather to publifh mine owne errors, FE

then to be gusltie of other mens; I will not prefume to oxffirme that thefe be all,no more then I will ac- ;
kaneledge, or gine any account for,fach, as the malicious and ignorant foall captioufly pinch, or |
© | fondly point,at : but my hope i is, that as I haue dealt freely inthe a coneree of thefe, foall that bein 3
4 dicsous will vfe me friendiy in their correËtions of the ref. 3


Errata.


Carlin, worth 40 Quadrins; is to be underflood of the ae
Rr: N the fir/t Page, col. 1. tla agaigne, for, Ilya gaigné. Florentine Quattrino, worth no more then balfeihe ;
: l ns for, volonté. and col. 2, an Adietline, for a French Quadrin.


owne. whofe tone foot is, for who hath mie and | Carminatif. Wind-voidinig,éc ; is rather, cuiting or dif.
Abba, for, pris pire ibereby refining and thinning, grofe bu
Adouber, for Adouber. mors.

deffus, for deflous ; in a phrafe under Aile. An ounce in flead of a graine;in Carrube,

Aorifte. A ; "is, more particularly, a Tenfe of time | Ceinéture de ducil (vader Cein@ure) referred unto


iyo beet Per FE and an , pal Dueil,where it was pere but you fhall find it ex. | *


M in the word Littre.
Le FE ii for Appenfement. Bruflerla chandelle. par ar (under Chandelle) the full
La Perche under DE: the la fuper fluous, and fal fé; vint fuper uous. :
for Percheis mafiuline, feltes, for fefles;in a Proverbe under Charité:


» levrier, for levriers; tna Pronerbe under Chaffe.


B repend, in fiead of repent; in a Pronerbe under Cha
Balife, & Baliffe (tearmed about Orleans Baflis; jute ed a Que Defpendre. %
* more properba cau(ty in a riuer for the turning Hibe le chevre, for la chevre,in a phrafe under Chevre.
fireame unio a Mill, cc. Leger es Luffe-blocke, fhonld be,the Bumkin,
| Bannier, for Banniere;vader Banniere. old, for cold,in the word Cigale. *
| Bardechifer, for Bardachifer. les, for poulets; in a Prouerbe under Cuan
: Bafle.contre, for Bafle-contre. __ Moye trifte & coeur; in a Prowerbe under Coeur, the&
; | Bafton cornu, a Battleaxe; is rather, a aff tipped Sper fluous. — ~
| both ends with borne ; and heretofore ufed Ie Pete 'dumniages, for dommages;under Condlufion. ~
a | Duelloes, or Combats. Comforter, in flead of Conforter; in a po under
? Baten for sees es in, à À froid,vader Batre, ‘Conforter.
treffe, for Contrechange, for Contrefchange. ae PF:
: Fe . a LE SEE ofr eee a? a Proserbe onda Gary 4
nnoeur, for honneur;under Blefler. iol, for Coquiole,and a füper comma in that |
Bord, is more properly an pren anthers: Li Poe rm aa
À edge,of'a garment,erc,then either welt,or hemme:and {Couäné,ed'in fome words that follow it,the Diere fs il “3B
_} Border much more properly to edge, or bind, or com- placed oner thea. - . Ane
paffe with an edging or binding lace,eoc,then either to grand,f for grands;in a Prouerbe vnder Coup. a
- gard, or to border. t, for gratant;is a phrafe under Cul,
ey le cucillier, for la cueillier;ia a Prouerbe under Bouche;
and (in the moft Copies) under Cuillier, 4 D


| se Bride, for se Brider; under Brider.

| Dardiller (a oe ee 4
c or throw darts,verie

19;for 192, in Carat. i | Decicif,in flead o, ers Toes


Go gle


things, for thinkes, in the Laft line of Difcretion.
aye i] tes ig Domaine forain, under
Domaine, |


be ces,
D mo pag ka D 1€
pra (to the ron of vpon) in the beginning of the
wants (10 b r) in) int
nee line of Droit Regiflre, ou contentor (un:
der Droit.)


BE


Mitaines engantées,were better; banded,or put on the
“Biaign’, fo Er
_ Elraignc aigne,
Efcruoëlfe, for Efcrouëlle,

: "+
Fanné, read Fanne. ;
Foret, Js rather a Drill then either a Gimlet, or Piercer.
‘breaker, for breaker ; in FraGeur : And, Aujourd'uy,ÿ#
| lead of Aujourd'huy; vader the fame word,
Franchemulle de mouton. (which (hould be Franche-


mule) may verie well be that in a Weather, which
Franche mule(under Mule) à in an Oxe.


G


| Gai in. be la fa.
Ga ue erin fn


In Generalité, fay 1, there be 21 generall Receiptes,
Borel Printer bath ouer flipped one,vi2.Ri-
n,in the reckoning) wherein 1 followed a late Engl
Author of goad worth: But now find in the later
French(as the lat edition of the Comment vpon Code

_ Henric,and l'Oifeau bis booke of Orders) and by the
report of a iudicious Gentleman, verie lately + 08

3


in France,that there be but 20 ; whereof Rion &
. and lis : q i =
toGo


rred un


5 . H

alfo,as Hayreux; forgotten in Haireux,
i,
à


:—— eae


LL


2 fa ‘ rm Sa Re 7 | A : ink :
| : The Errata.


In Hipothequer (a little before which, Hipotheque ; as -


Hypotheque, mas


and mH
tbe word immouables mit


Douves d'un tonneau. Be as swell the fide-flanes, asthe | Houille, 1s « kind of fea-coale.


I
Dicu, for Dieu; under Yambe.
Tbix, for Ibex; in Ibice,
L

Legion(/ay 1) confified of 6830 fouldiers; which was
the full, and perfect Légion, {ayes Thomas Thoma,
out of Vegetius. 1x Cefars time the fil Legion contai-
ned but 5000 ; And though fometimes before the num-


' ber were greater, as when Scipio went ito Affricke,
Spaanda ‘pie Affricke,


before and after thofe times the moft vjuall rate was
either that, or but 4200. g
M


In Manganefe, a fuperfluons,or,

Marefchaux de France, New there be 10, [ay 1, folowing
sherien my Englifh Autbor,who writ aboue 10 yeares
agoe : Since when there baue becne 12 at one time,
and now 1 doe not worst lero! 9

Veine, for Veines ; in Mefaraique.

Muiere, for Miciire. ‘

Mouelle; as Moelle, Mouette,& Mouettes; 4s Moet-
te,& Moettes, want each of them a Dierefis oner tbe
firfte.

N
Soubs peine nifi, for fous peine de nifi (inmoft bookes.)
P


Panceron, Is rather a little then a great, paunch,
boale, for boule ; ix a phrafe under Pie

Pillorier, fey Pilorier,

Prefluiticr, for Preffurier ; under Preflurier.

A cémma wanting after Tradefmen; inthe pbrafe under


6".


Gurner, fé Garnet; iz Spinelle,
od Mees, fr Pats isin Pre onder |


ulier,
Vv


Veinec oronale, for Veine coronale; under Veine,
mefcraïques, for mefaraiques; in she fame page. —


"3 À Ditio-


IV ME. Sa 2.


afler the Macedonian warre 6300; jet both -


ee ai re V


CUES


F THE


: EOS


«A DICTIONARIE
| French and Englifh Tongues.


A | à à A B A


<The firft letter of all Alpba- Dontil eft à grande ioye,Whereof be is very glad ;
Hy bens ie(eterealeuct) à | wbicb makes bom very merrie eit
Subftantiue : whence; » Is fe faifoienttenir à douze; They made themfèlues
Ileft marqué à l'A : hess be held by twelue : or were fo fierce that twelve were
aright boneft man:or, one | | faine to bold them. M
_inwhomthere is as much | A. preceding the Infinitive mood of averbe, fignifies
vertue, as great worth, as to, feruing 10, for to,of purpofe for; as,S'ila hole à
can be in any man: (From dire ; vn clou à pendre des{acs. Somtimes it either
the monie of Franceseuery |  . giues the verb a participiall fence, as, Il eft à dor-
- : fort whereof hath flamped |  mir,hers fleeping, or new, or necre afleepe ; or, the
onit a particularletter denoting the place wherein it verb being prefent it denotes shefinare, as,Vay cela
was made; now, that which is coined in Paris hath} | à faire,I am to doe that hereafter. :
on it an A,and is,commonly,of the befimettall) Abefore an Adiettine, fometimes makes it admit of an
A. The third perfon Singur of the verbe Avoir, figni- Aduerbiall interpretation; asa. droict,a tort; right-
fies (of it felfe) hath, boldetb, poffe(feth, enioieth ; as, | fully, wrongfully.
Allez a aûû bon credit a : alfa (whenit bath thelo- | ‘A, x fometimes not expreffed, but underftood ; as, Si
cal Adverb y before it) is ; as, Afez y a fi crop n'y a: Dieu plaift, for, s'il plaift à Dieu. :
But when it precedes a Participle in the preterper fect Aachée: f..a dolefull crielamentation,Ay-mee.


Tenfe of another verbe, it isrefrained vntothe firft | Aage: m. age, yeares , dayes ; alfo, an age ; time,
ion bath ; as, il a gaigne ce qu ila peu: Iz éafor.. ù
which (and: i asitisaletter) it is | De ne a grandfire, a gray-beard,
written without Accent. mL iak. _ whofe tone foot is alreadie in the grave.
‘A. an Article, fet before a proper name, or Nowme, fig- | De petit aage ; very yong, a child,an infant, an inno-
nifies,in matters of polfefion, of; as, La maifon a cent,


an x:
Pierre, La femme à Robert: But where the verbe | Avoir de l'aage, to be flrong and luflie : alfogo be well


Eftre goes before,it fignifies To,0r,Vnto ; as,La mai- inyeares,or well flrickeninyeares. |.
fon eft Pierre y Pa to Peter: So doth it alfo Aagé:m.aagée: f. aged,old ; of agesof years ; of full


when it followes verbes that require a Datine cafe ; ese "bredtyeares.
as, JePay donné à toy; cela appartienta moy; or | Abaifle;& Abaiflement; as, Abbaiffe ; & Ab-
that fignifie motion to'aplace ; as, le m'eniray à |” baiflement.
, 3 à ma metairie. pr TS ‘ Abaifler;& Abaifleur; «,Abbaifler;& Abbaifleur, |
‘A.an article,or Prepofition ; figni metimes,As,or | Abandon: m. bandon, free licence, full libertie for o-
For ; eft tenu à perdu; à for; à fable : fometimes thers tovfe a thing ; The quitting, abandonment, or
only, For ; à cette caufe+ fometimes, At ; as, Tume | - na que ms
trouveras à Paris ; à loifir ; à voftre commande- lettre fa foreft en abandon ; Dauer
ment: aif In,or, At ; as, à remps,& lieu : fometimes make it common,for all men that will gather wood, or
Inpr Before ; as, à la prefence du Roy: fometimes | - exe peace © À
(Meco ome ; À cœur 3 adroit; à tort : & Aban faitlarron;Prov, Things carelefly left,layd
‘as in old Authors)à dieu geen, ok of par dieu vp,or looked vnto, make them theeues that otherwife
ie le veux sometimes On, or Vponsas,alundi ; il | — would be honeft : we fay, fifi bind faft find, |
monte à cheval : fometimes To ; 45, à propos ; à Quifaiét nopçes , & maifon, il met le fien en a-
point: al/o Agreeable, or, According to; as, àVor. bandon; Prov. The building of boufes and making
donnance des Arbitres : al/o,Like unto; After the of fealts,are vnlimitted 5 0 a mans fubflance.
he A owe of sas, veltu aq _ gr m.née: Le rap forfaken, for-
l'Efpagnole : fometimes With ; as, à peu de one,quitted,giuen ower,Cafi Of ; open, left at
1H ; à banniere defployée ;vne chaire à accou- - 3 cfitu ed unto, made commonfor, any
doirs ; & (in Blazon ) porte de Synople à trois : man; alfo proferibed,outlawed, ee
| arene Reet AT r Among; 45, à nous Cheval abandonné fur la bride , banging vpon
vel fait eft bien vilain ; Heft à nous grande vinée. the band. UP AT.
: pe volunte, If! sight ne ap wil 2er 1 Chofe trop abando
; | LENS >) LD €


warecouerable, or


© Ré
: PAC, we B


vit


ve . D


Go gle. LE


=~ ABB


* dome, re Hem mate come, co À ; alfe,
10 out.
Abandoriner la vie de tel au’ premier qu ui Ie
pourratuer. to proféribe a man; (is ener to be vn-
derftood of a Soueraigne,or fuch a one as pext under
oe abfèlute and vncontrowlable power ouer


»)
Ad eper à laifirs. fénfhally to yeeld, or be-
come 4 flane, vnto pleafure; wholy to captiuat;or de-
uote,bis thoughts to delights.
Fille qui donne s'abandonne; Pro. A maid that


pa yeeldeth.
. commence bien à mourir qui abandonnefon
delir; Pro, he truly begins co die that quits bis chiefe


Aloo bn pquittersforfa-


rep .4 Plt hat faware flone, onthe Capi-

tell of a

demi m.ie: f. adulterated, fo piesa bar
. dixed,counter feited ; marred, corrupted, d
degenerat,changed out = itowne kind ;

ovwne worfe and worfe

Abaftardit dir.fo aa, adulterat, fo ifticat, of
ter feit ; to change out of it owne kind into a worfe ;
to deprane,corruptybiciat, ileymarre; make worfe ;
alfo,to a ages: t grow worfe cr wore :
(In which fenfe it bath, moft à > the Paffiue
note,Se,before it.)

Abaftar differ ement: m. a7 near Mise icati-


Rae Per chan bie
difleur:m.an es ae ter,coun
a corrupter,deprauer, hip


alc Abate, ; & Abatu. Looke Abbatis; Abba-


sae


pene Abbayér; aad Abbaÿeur.

Abbaifle:m, ce: f. debafed,deietted,pumbled,

PTE vn oe 3 made, or nm

pail aia i na di un
ment:m.4 deoa,

_ bling, proftrating ; b downewards,

fee 3 alfo, a flooping apart


nent de courage. faintheartedneffe, or


ye, aig ey a failing in courage; the
3 alfoglowlineffe of mind. ys
a rs cftar. an impairing, dimi-

bis means.
ee fer deaf mb sdepreffeyde-
sbring downe,make low ; alfo,

Su mie eee mee
iffer la Meee +. ie diferace,dif-
are tread under foot,the Ma-

a Prince.


Go. gle


A B B
Abandonnement:m. an abandonning,quitting,for- | s'abbaiffer 3.10 bumble th before;
Pneu + ee profii- bain 0 yeeld or fubrnit bi elfe ue ut
afscur:man shales Lebife deter dope,
i defection,
TE Abbands dn Abbandonndse Abandon
onfly, rote chy, with bee Abbandonnement ;& Abbandonner; Looke A-
.0 abandon, quit.forfake, fos msn bandonnement;¢> ‘Aband onner,
» à {hake or cafto aed lay open, leaue at ran- batement:m.4 felling,a beating,or breaking,avi-


Abbatis:m. az overthrow ; or overthrowing ; as Ab-


… olently borne,or brought down ; quelled, ruined,ouer- -


Abayement ; Abayer; éabayeut. he Ab.


olent bearing,or bringine downe ; alfo,an abatement;


ôsthe thing thats felled. ;beaten,or berne,downe.
Abbateur. a feller, overthrower, beater, breaker, or
arer,downe of.


Grand abbateur de bois. a fore fellow, horrible
Swaggerer, terrible bugbgare ; one that ouertbrowes
Gall be meets with;(1romically.)
teure:f.4s Abbatement.
ateures. the boughs, leaues, or
Deere 2 dm and beares dovme with bis


brough athicket.
7 A PM f. Abbotlike, Abbay-like ; of, or be-
jose to,an Abbot,or Abbey.


rigs, which a
ead in ru-


batement; 4/9, an vtter defeature, execution, or
fasgheer of men.
batis d'une foreft. ad or the wood,or
= Labbe à up.felled,or fallen downe. -
atis d'une maifon;the ruines of a honfe.
Abbatre. to ell; 10 beat or breake downe;violentiy to
beare, or bring downe ; to ruine, ouerthrom, call to
the ground ; alfà to de efeat utter ly,difcomfit mah
Cela abbat I’'yvrefle. that quels, allaies ,
drunkenneffe ; or makes a man Sober againe.
Fort eft qui abbat, & plus fort qui fe releuesPro.
Seeke, Releuer,
batu:m.ué: f, felled ; beaten, or broken dovne;vi-


ales


throwne,caft to the ground.

Ia le coeur rout abbatu.bis mi prereset deic-
ded, is wholy crefl-
«filles tet a father Of life,no sees fpirit, left

in


Labbatu veut tousiours lui&ter;Prov, fayd of an
obftinat fellow, whom no foile can make leane a Con-
yore ef [uit begua.
hafteau abbatu cf à demy refai@t; Pro: À houfe
ui downe is balfe built up againe.
A er m.a pra or baying of dogges ; Looke Ab-


spe abbay. to boldat bay; alfo, to dela
drine off, with (fe hopes. ve
bayant. fub. as Abbayeur ; a barker dc.
Abbaÿant. part. barking,baying ; srailng.
Abbaÿe: fan Abbay, Monaflerie,Religious houfe.
Abbayé:m.ée:f.barked at ; railed on:
bayement:m.4 barking or baying of dogs: alfo, a
lowd,extreame, and paffionat reuiling of 5 skoulding
atyr
Albbayer obs or bay at ;alfo, to reuile extream- |.
lord
Fos ah pee wie 45 he ie the aoe: ;
id of one that o ines to falfifieser difgrace
ys be wherein he ner mop ri-
nant
Chien qui a e ne mord pas;Pro.The barking
dogge bi es little ; Send He that fayeft moft, cor: ut]
does lea
Qui fert commun nulne le paye, & s’il defaut
“ chafeun


Original from" =
THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


BABAR.  AJBUE


chafcun l'abbaye; Pro. He that ferues a Commu-
naltieis controlled b ge pq ©
Ahomeure eh a barker,arayler


Fast d'abbé. ie fatand ved faces a flerie fa-
Pas d'Abb£.a leafurely walking, flow gate, Alder-


mans pace
_ Table d’ ‘Abbé. a plentifull, or well furnifhed, table.

_ Iliure comme vn Abbé.be fiveares like an Abbot,
Ul. extreamly.
Abbé, & Convent ce n’eft qu'un, mais la bourfe
eft en divers licux: Pro.Thowgh an Abbot , amd Co-
ne baue but one bodié,yet bane they feuerall meanes
‘and minds.)
Homme ne connoit mieux la malice quel Abbé
qui a efté Moine : Pro. Noman can play the knaue
better than an Abbot that bath benea Monke.

Abbec: m. a bait, for fifh:
Abbechés fed, as a yong Dire bird hg the old; alfo, infira-


sinueigled,as
epee :m. md beakefull of; alfo,a.feeding, or
putting into the mouth of, alfa, an inflrutking ; or,in-


agling.
RÉ to fegd,as birds doe their yoong, or faulke-
ners their b, 5 ;t0 put into the mouth of : bence, to
es wi ayoong one ; ; and, to inucagle,allure, intice, a


Abbéest abole, or ouverture, for the palfage of fome
art of a freame thats beld in by a damme,fluice,&rc.
Abbeille:£ a Bee; the ittlebiue-bee , or coma


Abbryuiaqure-f atresia ; Abbreuiation, Abbreni-
ature ;4

Abbreuvé: m. ees “ivaibered, feeped, foked, feafoned
intbronghly we,or mained witsliguor lou

as cloth,n water.
Re a = yee Mere thoughtes are

with,or in,an opinion

Abbreuver. puedo le ndieel towet,
or moiften with water ; fleepe, foke, or feafon., in li-
— alfo,to fhrinke,as Fullers do their cloth, by Wa-


Rehegiatk de quelque opinion.to imbue,poffe papel
wholly, with an opinion ; to imprint, ov fix it int
min ste breed ithe nier ee an aflured perfuafion,


ab = beleefe,thereof.
po die a ape lace for horfes.


breuvoir à es. an open wound, “or


bs ; (whereat flies,if they may quietly,drinke their
pe Ebeaftisbrutifp 507, marten be-


‘Abbriver pare aaa

Abderois.of Abdera;the ancient name of a townein
Thrace ;¢ of another now called Almeria,in Spaine;
and of a certaine ifland neere vato Samotbrace.
Rire Abderois: Prov. 4 continual or vnceffant
laughter; fuch as the Philofopher Democritus (who
was of the firft Abdera) is fayd tohauevfed.

Abdiquer. to abdicate ; torefife, veiett, forfake;re-
figne,gine ouer; ca off expell, put out of fanour 3 al-
û,t0 abrogate,or ifannll ; alfo, to prohibit the oft of.


eAbeille. j ie «a leader out,or away; awithdrawer , or.
(se:fian Abbeffe. ler away.
Abbois:m.bar inet ha Abecé: :m. an Abcee,the Croffe-row,an Alpbabet,or or-
Abbois del’ “nt de gnavingof the ftomach, | derby lifof allibe letters.


edaire:com.in bis Abcee : that but beginnes to
“remet sbence alfo, childifh, yoong, fimple,


Abechement< Abb Abbechement.
her.as Abbe
ADcqueter topecke at.
flimon.aferpent of the kind of dragons.

Abeillanne. the white maftadine grape.
‘Abeillaud:m. a Dorrejor Drone-bee; € Langued.
Abeille£a Beesthe littlebiue,or honnie-bee.

~ Les abeilles ne deuiennent point frelons; Prov.

Abell or well-bred, fpirits neuer degenerat.


am neaft,or ‘an rte Bees.


at his gaie bre
a ucento vie oa
ing s wherein a Stag 15
ford Rendre les abbois , whenwearie of running
- beturas on the hounds, and balls them at, or puis


d them to, a
Rive onnement.# Abonnement. ‘
Ab bordé \ borlées& Abborder a Abordé;
Abordée;and Al
Abbougti:me:fgrawze creaked,or sitheredin the
BF as at ill-thriung tree.
to binder fr frameronin, hens f à care


he ne Bere


abe


| Abend :m ee -mateden brace sr tht bath


| ABDoy ee: her M, pe nn :
oy Mes str Ge ee flim mad de ,0r become flys floor be
mants ; RTS er Abeftin.perpetualy bor burning. niet
cere À Abeftit.to to make a afisor | # tobrk
abbreg ow iene dil, Eine chi; 10 befot with eahtY aE i A


once: na abhor d detefler, loatbers Or, as


Abbrese =f, ro

TES ie aa Dee" | acy tec i

| so qe mere ae am not aliogither againft this opt
abbreniating ; aif 0,48

| Abbre semen SS ma


ets io 223115 AATINON


pe -tofbortenabri bftr att abbreniat,epi-
dt ifey . cart fans, 0.28 61272 OCA


, aber bio at


in à
2


Le": 7 . Er pus. « ir. do dés re dd rat Se Pee STI.
A BL % 1: CAT BO


lebate the À Sor before hand ; at a certaine rate with: made ‘ood
hornet AY “debra for. | te
Abhorrifsant; abborri j ing. ment:m.4 compounding with,or for ; an a-
Abieét:m.cte: rep j i caf, grecing for, a being at acertaine rate with, before-
<a d,caft off,or away ; TT 5 4 making good of one thing with another ; at-
out o pales ‘4 , jeni


of conceit withh foanexe or aliening of one thin,
icétion:f. abiection, vileneffe, abe ne è; ther. * ch ..
baftne/je of bart, faintneffe in courage ouermuch Abonner.7 compound with,or for ; 10 agree before-


militieor undervaluing of bimfelfe. 5 hand, or be at a certaine rate, with,for a thi. ; 10
Abier:m.4 faulcon gentle. good one thing with another F MS to ae or
Abile;& A biller; as Habilese Habiller. « exchange one thing for another.


Abisme;& Abismer; as Abysme;c Abysmer. Abonneur. 42 alienor exchanger; Alfo , as Acque-


isMé:m.ée:f.ingulfed. reur,
Abiuré.abiured, denied by oath ; forfivorne. Abonnim.ie: f Made good; Aifo as Aborné.
( Abiurement: m. am abiuring, forfwearing, denying Abonnir. Tomake ned cf to doe good unto; Alf
AE an oath. abe me ee À
iurer.to abiure.forfweare ; denie with an oath. td: m.A2 arriuall,an approach ; a boordine, ab-
Ablatif:m. the yt br Cafe. berding drawing necreunie a
lation:f. a taking away,or from. De doux abord.Gentle,courteous, affable : of open


unto.
whéereor Corng gr owes, or wherin it hath bene fowed. | Abo : com. Affable,abbordable,approchable,
Ablays:m.Corne crowing,or infheaues. , boor,
Able:f.ablayor eake, fib Abord ade:f.as Abordée.
Ableret:m. 4 hind of {mallfifo-net.. Abordeé. Approached,abboorded, accoafted, boorded,
Ablette: f.a ttle bizy,or bleake. di ave neere unto ;alfo arriued,gr landed at.
Abloquié. Edefices abloquiez ; viz-baillez parle ig rm approach;boor ding abboording,accoa-


b
Ablayé; terres layées de bled;Corne ground;land | _ acce(fe,eafie tobe -poken with,or come


; feigneur direét en Emphyteofe,& Cenfiue. drawing neere vato;alfi,an arriuall, arrining,
“4 Ablation: a wafbing away. or ing at.
; is: m.as Abbois. D'abordée. 4 firf, at frf fight ; as fone as they


Ly Aboli:m.ic: fabolifhed ; rafed,defaced, put out, abro. touched,incountred,or came,togither.
edyextinguifbed,annibilated, Fordoe,difeaulled. Abordement;as Abordée.
F Abolireieab [b; to rafe, deface, blot,or put,out ; to | Aborder. To approach,accoaft,abboord ; boord,or Lay
abrogate, anmbilate, extinguifh, for edoe,difanull. i come,or draw neere unto; alfo, to arrine, or
at.


Sement: m. an abolifhment, or abolifhine : a :
i *” | Aborna c;4s Abournage.


rafing, defacing,abrogating,difanulling,
Abotifornt ERA 2 annibilation, abregati. Aborné ef Limited, fiinted, bounded, knowing
à TERRES Nour law, The leaue giuen by the his bounds, or what be muft truft unto ; hence, com-
king,or mdges;vnto a criminal accufer, to defift from pounded with, or for; agreed beforeband for ; at a
perfècution: In Chancerie, An abfülute, or ge- certaine rate with;upon a former agreement.
ardoms … d rmement, À lniti finting ; alfo, a


ther


\bolition de 8e où ing; a fetting of a certaine
… nerallyveleafe, Quietus ef, or forginencffe of olde | pr “2 habe 7 eae rey bite

debts. Wig ee et SR oct AL, 07 paying for things,otherwife than in kind.
JLettresd'abolition. 4a.abfolute pardon graunted bomen Tobe: baci hatscyic compound with,


ene Sri BO atm Vil- yee À to do 7 “A at a cer-

-, lage, that bath o :@Nicot. Yet others more ge- taime rate for;toreceane,or deliuer by former agree.

Ù nerall, meane by Nbolition,any abfolute or general ment,any thing otberwife than in kind. tea
‘dom. ee sf Abortifim.tue: f. Abortive,zatimely,fill-borne;bred,

Abominable: com. Abominable, execrable, dete- | borne,or brought forib,before a due time.

DU PPS 1532006 Ocufabortif, Az addle egge,0r,an eg whofe fhell is

A ination: f. an abomination, a deteflation, a not yet bard.


= horrible,or execr able thing. : Abouchement: m..4 parley,or conférence. À
miner; Todeteft, diets, loath extreamly; to | Aboucher. To parley,treat, conferre with by word of
baue in abbomination. moutb ; to fpeake face to face vnte.


nentaahundanty copii lent Abouchon: d'ab:Grouelmg, layd on bis face, or on all
€ aime.


2 3 À 3 ing; t j down-
ugh gran ntensienes fitnef,co- me exalfe,floopings bauingsor ling, the face
eue. À rt. | Abouquement:m. A beaping op, as of new made
: A ondant. Abundant, plenifil plentions, copious fault. os bas
Ter i .10 [2 5 3
“4 ) 1 Aduerbially ) Ouer and befides, “TO J prea forthe
moreower. LA


Abonder.Toabound, “| bers or Arch brain i "om
Nr be GE ER renee Abournemen Sp rames Tac
: " exchange,or a- Ce À ‘
… lienation of rents duti À ter;To bring or draw to a bead,or end.

Caled quicted.appeated.pacified. : Le bead,brought ||
Manes. 177222 Gare ro pe Don ry


Original fron


Diaitized CO gle THE: OHIQYSTATE UNIVERSITY


— À -
FOR = oe aa a ‘ i. al


A BRS
necre unto,met at,the end." LM
| Aboutir: Towax ripe;or draw Me head, ast impo-
flume ; alfosto end; to approach,or grow, towards an
end ; to meetiat their Bus alle to touch, affront, a-
* but upon; confine,or beneere, unto in the bead, foot,
envoie top, or end of; 5 alfè, to ar > or
.~ ti
| Aboutir en pointe. To end fharpe, or pointed à 1
: Ea pa ape ea


‘Aboutiffans dune alfa Thotmof ends or pars
_ of aboufe,at the front and backefide thereof.» \
: Aboutifsans d'une heritage. The vimoft bounds,
or limits of an inberitancesat both ends thereof>»
Aboutifgant.Drawiag; | ore svmto « head, or
end; re, sr unto at the
* top or bottome she mors: x = either end ; alfo,
jorapproching, towards. -
Abouti cing A drosisgisi head, a growing to-
Wardsan end :a meeting at their end,ato ;af-


6 pa pes confining, or neerenelfe,at


Apoattietent d’os.as,Epiphyfe.
-Aboutifsement de terres. The vtmoft boundes,
marches lmits,or ends of lands.
r:To-vayoke Oxex; ENorm
Ab ane Paring, Jung raping, ating y wearing


Abregé Éum. An Abridgement,érc;as Abbregé.
Abregé. Se et es Bead
Abregement. as Abbregement.

Abri-m. A couert, fhrowd, fhelter,or foadie place ; a
tee-{hore,fhead, fear,or corner, whereto neither wet,
nor . or come: sims pt of, Je
tie,or of fafe retreit,in aduerfftre.

- Vn piste bon abri pour les nauires. 4 fafe bars

bor for fhipping, in all weathers.

Abricot:m. The Abricot;or Apricocke plum.

ricotier. 47 Apricocktree.

Abrier d'Arbelefte:m.The tree of a Crofebow.

Abrier. To couer, fhrowd, fhelter, fhadow.

Abr igs on:f. 47 abrogation, abolifhment ; repea-


ale
RE To éme


a roton:m.The
Abruption: f Anabruptions a breaking off, a bur-

_ fling afunder.
Abruption d'os. An entire fèperation of fame part
of a bone | Ss the refi,which thereby fiffers a mani-


Abadi emiesk on el eee brutifh.


AbravO Le ce: 3 watered, feafoned,
teeped,or Shrunk in ; cr
water, ert.

Abruver.as Abbreuver-

Arar D mr plc fr brs.

m.Looke Abr

Aer An impoftume,botch,or fvelling ful ems mat.
tar ; acourle of ill humors running out of their
ad ane ow ag ae the emptie fpaces be-


s AB Em sé diuided fèpersted from:
Des cure,darke,fecret, cowert,


EHidden, obfeured, concealed, kept


“VAL BAS


Abfconfement:m.4 hiding,ob{curing,conce
No Tobide, concea ay A or
‘cynte:m.Woormewood; Looke Abfynthe.

‘Ablejntienmcnne.eb ing to Wormwood, bit-
ter ds Wormewood,t perro ihe
Abfence:f.Abfénce. i

‘Abfent. t-Abfen nt mifin wvanting;out the way.

pe, rpm EE Lor kept,got, flit,


able a der rife (tad tech get, or baue out of
e way.
S'abfenter. to flit,be gone, lie bis countrie;play lea
inf tee out of | eben (Ved moft pot =e
wort fence.
‘Alfio oats:
finte:m.Wormyood; Looke,Abfynthe.
Abfinthe.as Abfinte.
Abfolte: f. An abfolute pardon,a generall abfolution,
VR a wick éremitment of offences.
folut:mmute:f.4bfolute.Whence;
th abfolut. Maundie-Thwrfday, Sheere-Thurf-


Abfolution: :f. An abfolution; a forgiuenelfe or forgi-
uing 3 a difcbarge of, or deliuerie on hi abolition
of debts,ywrongs, offences.

Abiolutotre: zcom.Abjaluatorie,pardoning,forgiuing.
Lettre abfolutoire; À Pardon figned.

Abforbé:n.¢e:£ Supped,or drunke wholy vp; deuon-


red, fi. Abe rar
r.Tofupor drinke vp all: to deuour;fvallow,


Abtoudee as Abfouldre.

Abfouldre , To abfolue, to férgiue abfolately,pardon
wboly ; to remit offences vato, to difcharge, delier,
quit from all danger.

“ Abfouls;as Abfous.

Abfoulte;as Abfolre

Abus oute: £.Abfolued,pardoned, forginen quit,
pt go ne difcharged of, or delinered from, the danger


of
Abfoure:t.as ws Abfolteser, À nina chti, par-
don, mA x Fos ss of offence:


Abftenir. To abftaine, arbre sk Ife,
ae esr ean ges me oe
To severe it; to bear with,
D on vntothe time.

oe fm. UE abflerfue, oe or wiping a-

Abibnence Abfimence refi earance.
Rance de guerre. A truce,or furceafing from

Abftradtion. Prem sires at out, or away.

Abftraict:m. 4 eperation,difinit


| Abfraindre. To bind faft, to knit bard, to wrap in


abi maufe:f.clofe,bidden, ee ke, fecret,
4 in obf{curitie,bard to 5 OF UN-


Abifedesm. jerditie sa groffts valikely, or vm
ur esfoolifb,omlike,ab-
rr rea


itve,groffene


ada an vareafè-
> OUR F Bante |=


: I~ Ket 4 rk
SE ATR VY © 4 A’ Ci Ay


Ab mwormewood. |. ernsinostd A loft,or eno morè and (by metaphor) vtterly,

e marin.SeaWormmvood,is of threekinds; | andon a Rdden, to deftroy, se se vo
one Called white féa-wormwood ; the fecotdsbroad- meux: m.eufe: £.Guilphie fil of whirlepools;alfo
leaned {ea-wor nvvod ; the third, Mugwoort worm- -bottomlefe,of an infinit or vnmeaficrable, depth.
wood or,Sothermwood wormmpood. 151: le . as Accablé; Afoymade fafiwith, or vato, a
Abfÿnthe Pontique,Ponticke wormwoodgwhere- | - Cable. dae: ;
of théve be two kinds,the ordinavie and Ace. To faflen with,or vato,a Cable ;alfo,as Ac-


the {mall Ponticke Woxmewood : Some alfs call the

_ White fea wormewoad: Abfynthium, Ponticum ; 0-

thers confound the Ponticketoith the Roman; and it
fèemes (by them) that,that which heretofore waster-
med Ponticke,is now turned into Roman.

… Abfyathe Romain. Romane Wormewood, French
Worrmood, fmall-leaued Wormnvood, Gardenor Cy-
pres Wormewood ; called alfo wormewood gentle, by
veafon of the fivect finell,which,contrarie to all the o-
ther kinds,it yeelds, 11

. Abfynthe de RS mg à . The
Sane’; or finall white wormewood; (fome call the fe-
cond Ponticke, and others the white feawormewood,
Abfÿnthium Santonicum,but not fo properly.)
Petit abfyntheyas Abfynthe marin; e(pectally the

rft, and lft, kinds thereof.

Abus: m. An abufé; deceit, umpoflure, difappoi
flac cee ic; alfoya mifpending, or diforderly im-

ment of: .

Abusé: m. €e:f.Abufed, miffed, wronged : alfo, mis-
Spentyor diferderlybefomere alfo,decermed mnsflaken,
in an error,beguiled,gulled.

ement:m.dn abufing,or mifufing; a mifpending,
or difrdered beftowing of ; alfo, a deceining, dif:p-
pointing,mockerie beguiling. :
Abufément de l'œil,ou, deveuë. Armiflie dim-
neffe inthe eyes, which caufeth them to miftake one
oo and is the auauntcourror of blind-
nelle. i :

Abufer.70 abufe,mifuft,wrong,mifpend,or b P
a 3alfo to pi hart ar: gull, pe sek

guste. 9


| lé alse


Acace: f 4 certaine thornie plant of two kindssa grea-
ter,growing moft in Egypt,cr a leffe,in Pontussalfo,as,
A 3.4 medecinall wice,or liquor drawn from the
feed of the Egyptian thorne Acacia sin feed wher of,
(faies Gerard)the German Apotbecaries bothufe,e>
call. o,the inice of Sloes.
Academié:mée:f. Befotted, puxled, or plundered,
with too much skill,or fudying. *
Acaire. A proper name for aman; and thename of a
Saint svnto whome fisrious paflic,and harebraind peo-
ple are fent in Pilgrimage. wearipelitind f
tu lek fot Fd + ste flat;
blunt;or oink a fiat nofe.
Acalli:m.ie: a a jt cLeofeinsdants that
bath got à habit of.
Acanthe:m.The firooth thifile called Brankerfor,and
Pig er Wn ea
aré:m.ée:f. À ed, confronted ; fet before, pre-
Sented vnto,the face of. ft <P
Âcarement:m.4# affronting or confronting.
Acarer, To affront confront, fet face to face, or before
face of; bring neerevnto, or together,
luy acara fon Arquebule à l'eRomac : He pre-
féñted his Peece unto the others flobiack.
i com.Harebraind, rafb, bramleffe, baftie,
“\flrious, umreafonable, inconfiderat 5 one that is vi-
olently fivaied by bis one mad will, and franticke


Acariaftreté:fFranticke obftinacie, mad wilfidnelfe,
brad cap one ame
nye (nié well, or houfe him-
time les 74:, ‘ e Torent,or let outvpona yearelyrent.
10. An abufèr,a mifpender of; alfo, adecti- Ë e:f.Ouerthrovwne,ouerwbelmed,beaten,
impofier. Va TRES ARE or borne,downe with blowes crc; Oppreffed by much
m.eufe: £.Full of abufes;deceitfilll,guilefull. | 307 oner-heauie burthens ; confoundedyvtter-
Abufifim.iue:£Abufiue, deceitfull, guilefiull said, a- ly ruined.
ainft cuftom,cleane out of order,or fromtherfe of. | Accabler. To ouerthrow,beat, or beare,downe with
Abufion:f. 4nabufing, an ertor, fallacie,impofture, | blowes rc. Oppreffe by much wai ht yor ouerbeauie
uslesdeceit.” reset burthens ; ouerwbelne ruine,con und vtterly.
ufiuement. Abufively,moft vnorderly, cleane from | Acca ement:m,Stoath,idle fenfualitie.
the right vfeyor feace of. j Accagnarder.70 grow lazie floathfull idle, woorth-
ter. To aime,or,tofhoot,at. —_ 2.
Abyfine:m.4n Abyfinus; a bottomle Accaration: fas Acarement.
= an infinit immenfè,or unmheafiarable Accariaftreté.as Acariaftreré.
,0r (wallowing gulfe. Accafané. Louing home, euer within doores, a boufe-
3 pre frrringabroad.
omlèffe pit,or bole of |. Accafement.ss Accoifement.
am depth ; alfo beaten, or thruftfo flat un | Accelerateur. A fpeederhafiner difpatcher.
2040 far into, another, that it fèemes lofisor appeares | Mufcle accelerateur. A certaine muskle whereby
ess all, ies re prepa or A era tea ou |
hrowne,sbecome on a fuddain ric €: cceleration. Haf,or fpeedmaking; an acceleration,
and hence; ee Acceleré: fav


4 = gone as EE VO cap
sab aabyf ennemy. | Accelerer. To accelerat aft, di-~
fed.ordtterly i emy. £ mo fur patch 0  baflen, fpeed, fl,


ence. : : 2 [A 0
>y!mer. To ee 3 to fwallowvp in an | Accence: m.as Acence. |
| tefinit and vnmeafurable depth; to caf into a bat. | Accenfement, I tient cela par ac:He bolas that by
tomle(fe hole, or pit ; to:throw downe from a great leafe ; or at a certaine yearely rent ; or is to payan
heighth unto the bottome ; alfi,to beat, or thruft one


4 s yearly Cens for it; Looke Acenfement. ;
thing fo flat nto, or far into; another, that it feeme cenfdlement:m: . holding by leafe,or in farme,
or


rhe in error ; to wrong hime


Her.


Original from


+ ee
:


A CC: À
wigs yee Conf any thing
nee m.An Accent; aleve letting lef


Saccointer de, To wax acqifainted, crow
with ; or;to sete defive the xcquaintance of.
Accoisé:m.ée: f. Quieted, 4, calmed, pacified, aa,


the voice in pronunciation. quallified,affiuaged,allated,eafed.
Agcent aigu.d {harpe accent marked rus, ‘eo mich eee a fing gualiff-
ig abatement 0 Gace or peau


re circonflex, outcontourné : The bowed at- Acco fer.To rogue eafe calme, affuage, eafe,
cent oe thus’ or thus” , and is not much vfed in
Frenc
page graucus marked thus, cb fet ouer the words
90 ke.

Accentuésm.ge:f.Accentedynoted,or pronounced, with
an accent.

Accentuer.Tomarke,note;or pronioanceswithas accent

Acceptable:com, Acceprable,gracious, pleafings fit, or
worthysto be entertained.

Acceptation: fda acceptation jntertaimment,yeceipt
allowance of.

Aecepté: m.ce : f.Accepted rreéeiued,or intertained in
good part.

Agcepter. Toaccept,intertaine rectane in good part,ad-
mit yapproue,allow of.

Acceptilation: f.A paiments oran imaginary diftharge
of à debt nade from a Creditor vato a Debtor in this
forme ; Ticns cu pas pour eu,& receu ce que ie Cay
promis ? (fäies the Debtor ; ; wherto the other anfwers)
Ouy,lele tiens.

Acception: f.4a acception,accepting,receauing, takin ms
an admiffion,or intertainment of ; alf,a refpect, or
finétion of perfons,in ludgement

Accefsible : pegs familiar, courteous, gentle,
of eafeacce(fe.

Accefsif'm.iue:£ Acce/ible,acceffiue,eafie to come vnto.

Accefsion, An acceffion,or addition ; alfo, an acceffe or
comming vato.

Accefloire: com.A circumflance; an acceffion,increafe,
guess lus, vantage over and befides the

o pricier reat mig trou-
Frs ja/fo,an error,or diforders

Accefloire: com.Accidentall, or acceffarie ; bappening,
or comming in,or making one by chance.

Accefloirement.Acce/jarily accidentally.

Accez: m.Azacce(fe,an entrie, or paffage Unto, a.com
ming vnto a place,or matter.

Accez de fiebvre.4 fit of an ague.

Accident, Anaccident, a civcumftance ; alfo,a misfor-

tuneynifhapcalamitie ymifchance ; alfo,any accidentor


peeves) m. ale :£. Accidentall,Cafuall.
Accidentalement. Accidentally, cafitally,by fortune,


by meere chance.


bar ra Se antes the necke 3 in


one
Accollée : fas Accollade.
Accoller.T embrace,coll,or clip about the necke.
Accolleer. To make meet, or fit for the necke; Alfo,to
“frike inthe nec as men kill coni jes.
Accommodable.Fittable,aptable appliable.
Accommodation A fitting,apting, applying, accom-


‘Accommodé. Fitted apted applied: furnifhed,accom-
saree Cal bebe, affied 3 alfo courfèd , or cud-
ge

Accommoder.Toaccommodat, fitsapt, applie, frame
vnto,or for;to firnifh; alfo,to affift, hel be be fuccour;alfo,

- to courfè,beat,cudgell;vfe a knaue in his kind.

| Det vne femme. oufe a woman.
s'accommoder au temps. Toferue the time; to fol-
low the fivinge cor fèsor Albion, of the prefent worlds
to doe as others doe.

‘Accompagiable: com. Companable, fociable, eafie to
bee conuerfed with,

Accompagné. m. ée: f-Accompanied,affociated,con-
forted,kept with; hauing the company,or fellowfbip of.
_ Mieux vaut eftre feul que mal accompagné. Pro.
_ Itis better tobe alone thanwith idle,or ill sorted com-
panie.,

Acco ement,Ac ing,or accompanyin
a Villon foe, ea z oe

Accom Pa 7 GET etats ciat,confort, keepe,

“ orb bip with; alfo,to follw(in courtefie.)

Acompara ga compara mtg  refem-

unto.

Accom er.Tocompare,match,equall,c one
sgh étoiber. su

Accomparet.as Accompar

TT m. je: f. np, atchiened, finifhed,
perfo ed ; aff, furnifhed , fuppled, indued,


with.


Accidentellement.#s Accidentalement. Centans TE Full abundred yeares.
Acclampé. Faftened,pinned,pegged; pin AccOmplir. To accomplifh, finifh, fulfill, sage at-
Acclamper.To fa/len,to pin, or


Rent gas rer fr do ed
aie. fil prforasce fs delphi fr
Accomplice pe mer acon
À ee eget ne sir asinpdech-


Pure To graunt, upon condition.‘
Bondues tad ig tostoconduét, or guide


Acconfiure 7 = onl aaea gs toreach,


Tene feauroy i callie sat mr ne :


me Trinet ; rar 2 DE rer of a fee-
thing poi
Accoeuiller.0 benum,or befot, pith f
Accoinét,or Accoint ; Acquainted, or familiar with;
alfo, neat ompt,fine fpruce in apparell,or otberwife.
Accointable:com. Acquaintable,eafie to be acquain-
ted,or familiar with.
Accointance : £ Acquaintance, conuer{ation, or coM=
: merce, with.
. Accointement.æ Rep oc
pres To make


Er st pra erento mje EE nae


+


Dicitizéd cS gle ee


CPE EL VTT


A CC A C C
the great,érc. moone) wherewith the one fide of a vin fers.
Accopper.as Achoper. | 54 Accoter.To js 05 om bald up e fides of;
Accocning : LT er gg cate alfa,grawne | 10 féflain, fapport.fhore,buttreffe,beare vp ; to fiay from
as lazie, ts a beggar. à f°
Atcoquiner. To make tame, imward, fumiliat ;to ve- s'Accoter contre.To reare bim/elfe,or leane againf.
claim a wild * Lg À 6 Accouché: m.ée: f.Laid pee np phase eet
s’Accoquiner.Towax as lazie,become asidle;graw | Accouchée.A woman that lies in childbed.
as floathfull as a beggar. Accouchement:m. 4 bing downe in bed ; alfo, awo-
Accord:m.Accord,agreement concordance confent; al- mans being brought to bed ; or ber being in childbed,
Sosa contratt ,compofition bargaine agreed on ;alfo,the her.To lee downe in,to get himjelfe, to bed; alfo
deed whereby that contract erc,is made,or paffed;alfo to be brought to bed,as a woman of a child.


anaccordor concord inmuficke.

Ac cordable,compoundable accordable,agreeable sft,
or eafie,to be agreed.

Accordailles: The betrothing,or making fure of aman
and woman together.

Accordance: ae accord,or agreement ;a concord, ov
concordance in muficke.

Accordant.Agreeable accordant concordant ; well fit-
ting unto : compounding ot confenting with.

Accordé.vn ac: 4 man betrothed to a woman.

Accordé. Accorded agreed concurred with; confented,
graunted,yeelded unto; shared dungéenanepes-
ded for ; attoned,compoundedyeconciled together.
Figure accordée, Looke Figure.

Accordée, Vne accordée … À woman that's bandfaft

with,or betroathedvnto,a man.

Accordement: m.4n according concurring, or agree-
ing with ; a yeelding ov graunting vato ; alfd,a bargai-
ming,or compounding for ; alfo,a reconciliation,or com-
pofition of differences; an agreeing vpon.

Accorder. To accord, concur, confent, agree, with ; to
Jeelapr graunt vato ; alfo,to attone,compound,recon-
cile differences oy parties in difference; alfo,to bargain,
chaffer compound for ; alfo,to agree upon.
Accorder vne fille. To handfaftaffiance, betroath
himfelfe unto a maiden.

Deux chiens ne s'accordent point à vn os: Prov.
We fay,Two cats and a moufe, two wiues in one houfe,
tro dogs and a bone neuer agree in one.

Accor mc EH aang wearing borns: (In
Blaxon)attived.

Accort: m.te: £Difcveet,peadie,warie,aduifed circum-
Spett, forefecing aware ; of a geod fpirit quiche wit,no-
Pr poto hath an excellent forecaft ; affoilie,

cuaning.

Accortement Warily,difereetly peedfully .circumpett-
Uy,aduifedly ; wittilyfubtily cunningly

Accortefle:£ circumfpeétion, warineffe, beedfulneffe,
diféretion, aduifednelfe,a great reach, or forecaf,
tlie of piri, quicknelfe :

Accortife:f.as Accortefle,

Arooftanle com.Accoaftable; fit, ov eafie,to be accoa-


Accofté:m.¢e:f.Accosfled,approached pr dy
sso fer vb 3 alfo, affiented, braned,
UW


wit,


8
| Accofter, To accoaft,or ioine fide to fide; to approach, or


‘aw néere vito ; alfo,to wax acquainted, or grow fe
so rad ie
: : erfei 3 whofe
are beld vp; Sapper Lf ned fed fron mt,
#, 54, Tider
Accotement: m.4a etting, vnderproppà
ering ii anya pp A
. SD: . Mu FER
BEE per 2 for af feething)pot proper-
4 dns tate ere


ecomdenent: m.4 = ing on the elbow.

s'Acc €r.To leane,ref.er ftay,on bis elbow,

Accoudoir:m.4 forme,bench, rayle re, whereon one
leanes with his elbow ; a refi,a ,a leaning fiocke.

Vne chaire à accoudoirs, 4 chaire with elbowes.


Accoulpé:m.ée:£Blamed for charged with accused of,
acrime.


Accouplable:com.Yoakeable,conpleable, fitto be cou-


pled with,

F L ination a yoaki
vnitin together or unto, a oi

Accouplé .coupled yoaked,ioyned together or unto,

Acco . as Accouplage.

Accoupler, To iayne, unite, couple, yoake together, or


Accouragé:m.ée:fincowraged, hartened jmboldened:
A st bah mettle intobio. eee
courager.To hearten.incourage imbolden.
Accourber;& Accourbir, Tebow, crooke, or bend
vawards or towards,
Accourci: m. ie: f. Shortened abridged, curtalled, con-
tratted clipped ,or cut fhort. ih chia
Accourcir. To rien abridge rertal, clip,or cut fhort.
Accourciflement, Az abridging, fhortening, curtal-
Ling contvatling ; a clipping or cutiing fort.
Accourement:m.4 concourfè,commine, or running of
many men together to one place ; an affemblic, or baftie
gathering of people from many places ~ntoone.
Accourir.To rw,haf,or bie together in flocks,or troups,
vuntoa 2 :
Pr: echcanaciocse; Alfo,a chafe.
Acc Taken as acknowledged for,a kinfinan.
Accoufiner. To make , acknowledge, or take, for bis


coufin.
Accouftement:m. Ahearkening, or liflening too; a
drawing neere with his eares,or vato the eare of.
Accoufier. Tobearken, liften, gine eave to,diaw necre
unto the eare of or, with bis eares,
Accoufteur : m. 4 bearkener ; one that liftens, or giues
eare,vnto another. :
Accoutftré:m.ée:fDreffed attired, arvaied, apparelled,
trimd, decked. ;
Accouftré à la Tigrefque.cruelly handled, borribly
bethwacked,or beftratched.
Um’a mal accouftré. He hath ufedme very hardly,
be bath dealt moft badly with me ; or, he hath broughe
me to much misfortune,a pore eflate,an ill paffe.
Accoufreme ment sa A han 8 À
ec ;alfè a
jespere pri des


ouftrer.To sapparell attire array;deck,


trimme.

O commeilaccouftre les gens. Ob how vilely be

= difgyaces bow badly be reports of, bow filthily bee han-

: dles pow si be deales with,all men.

Ts'acec ien, He fluffes bimfelfe foumdly,bee
lines bis iacket throughly with liquor The like is


Digit % by Go: gle


Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


Accroitre.as Accroiftre.
pme a Gok afpe;clafpesgrapplesor buckle together.
Accroiié:m.ée:f. Drooping, as a bird that fits vith: bir
feathers loofè,or flaring, about bir.
pees es, ic:f. Crouched, cooped, flooped, or fet floo-
x bent, or bowed forward ; 3 fquat upon the tale.
Anal ir. To floope,crouch,coope,bend, leane,or bow,
ple ending forward, vpon the taile,or knees.
Accreuës.

pe ve Couches, lodgings srefling places ; Cabins to
lie,or to veft,in.

Accueilli:m.te:f. Intertained receiuedswelcommed ; al-
fo,arvined,or gathered together in a place ; alfo, taken,
rte en ; oF flricken,as with thunder,

ir. To entertaine,veceiue, or welcome (kindly ; )
ali,jo veach,ouertake ; or firike; alfo,to come, 44
flocke together ,ov(as wormes,erc,)breed,in a place,
Aceueillirfs voye vers.To trauell,journey, wend, or
g0,towards.

pp Los ill,at the heart.

r fe any altion, or thing,that plun-
a or » bin nf oceeding ; a fetting, o fitting on
the taile ; alfo, rd attome,end, or firtheft part of a
fèxes,or badgers earth where fitting on his taile,be de-
fends bisnfelfe againft the Terriers.

Acculé:m.ée:f.0uerthrowie,or fet on his taile ; brought


~ Isaccotftre pour all He takes bis
acme ii


toes or. s sabots detelle cruauté, & furie, The
king put on fuch crueltie entered into that fisvie.
pip mg Cuptome,vfage, woont ; alfo,an ac- |


cuftomin

Accouflumé:méef Accuftomed, vfèd, “ere ea
ved vitto ; ay ent ufed: and bene
Chofe accouftumée n’eft pas trop ere Pro: we
féldome prixe whats ordinarie.
ccouftumer. To accuflome,ufesenure vitto,prattife in.

Accoutré: Accoutrement; & Accoutrer : 45 Ac-
couftré; Accouftrement; & Accouftrer.

Accoutumance;Accoutumé; & Accoutumer: as
Accouftumance; Accouftumé; & Accouftumer.

Accouvé:m.ée:f.Brooded ; (et clofé on, crowded ouer |
alfo,couercd, bidden,ouerfh1dowed.

Accouver.as Accouveter.

Accouveter. To brood, fit clofe, or crowding;as ahenne
ouer her egges, or Chicke ens ; (andhence) alfo, tooner-
fhadow, couer, bide.

Accravanté.as Accrevanté.

rs ravanter. a re rs an À : p.

crazer.To breake,bur(i,craxe ;0rurxe,cru

Accrefté:m.ée:f. a Lcopped ; bs ia a great creaft,

pre


or combe,as a Cocke ; alfo,coc , faucie, flately unto a flrait, or into tearms of vnauodable danger ;
PA peter in à tt \ alf, flopped,or flayed, fiom further proceeding. :
Accrefter., To wax cockit, grow proud, become faucie, cculé en fon opinion. Setled, or obftinat,in bis opi-


linel dy. tit upon high tearms.
RS ae
te ampli e
Accrevanté.Polenih burf, fierioufly


Accrevanter. To burft, or breake rae
Pr les villes. ‘To rafé, ouer: defiroy,


Acer ea rnb oo
Accrever,t
Aro NES or ée: cape: partes ele

vat ; 3 alfsgralped s alfo, ‘eyed, or delaied, as a fies


Le ier eft accroché.Haags by the wall.

hooking clajping, Felis,
frening to,or hanging on,a hooke ; a grafpin
or catching ata drawing toby a bookes 54 layin:


nion ; not to be moued,not to be drawne, from it.
Us Pont acculé de toutes parts. They have befét him
round, they lay hard vnto bim on all fides ; ( from the
wild Bore , who brought vnto a bay {fits bio on bis
Gammons, and turning thereon, is forced to defènde
files againft both dogs, and men, on euery fide af-*
failing him

‘Acre: To throw dovonesor [et on his taile ; alfo, to be-
Set round, lay bard vato, bring into a frait, of vato
tearms of vnavoidable danger ; (in arguiig) to put to
bis plunges or diiue unto a nnortplas ; alfo,toftop, or flay
fiom further proceeding.

culer vn foulier. To tread,or weare,a fhoe downe

at the heeles,

Accullé;as Acculé.

Accumulateur:m.Az accumulator ; im or piler ;


delayinesor foreflowing,of a Suit. aboordersor gatherer.; a fauin
Accrgher a fect, a a fuit from SE AccumhéonE f. Aa PO or cm ;
proceeding ; to for a time,the profe- À sgh piling up; a boording, or gathering into
ACT Te to commit vato the keeping of in un Lest men tiod sheaped, or piled vp 5
trap ; ls lend(as monie ig hoorded,or gathered into beapes.

Sen ne harp To on va well, or be well con- Accumniles To accumulat peape, or pile ops to hoord,
ceited of bimfelfe ; to take too much,or very much, vp- or gather inte heapes; to increase mightily ; to lay on
= him ; pre one Ha me bimfelfe fiwe of, | . “load.

ouer-ruie it, difpofe of it, preuaile in st Accufantmn.4x accufant,or accufer.
robes fide,or be fone sand Accufant.(partic.) Accufant accufin
megan ‘as we fay) to vule the fpread | Accufateur:m. Anaccufir, Dante informer, fault
pao nes i pre net finder.
grow into ; Ceres AccuatiEm re ge Cafe. Ms
Accroiflance:f. Incre Se ation:f. A accufation ; a complaint made,an in-
Accroiflement:m.4» er us brought ,againft ; an imputation cafton.
ing 5 a making or growing, bigger and bigger ; Accufa tere ocean a ft,
A ACC! ache
Dntie ancl à med a Leeper a crime 5 i, "ised


Accroiftre.To increafè,augment amplifie enlarge make es
Galea eet RTE |


: Origin: om: |
GO: gle 1 THE OHIO:STATE-UNIYERSITA
Si Er =$ : + =


Accufer.To accufè,nr appeach ; to complaine” of, informe
agaiificharge with a crime; caft an an
imputation,on ; alfo, to bewvay, dift lof. ov difiouer, a


Secret,
Tel s'exeufe ui s'accufe : Pro. inaciiciate


Accum :mée: {Put intoa fat ; let fland,or let worke,in
Noses: To put into a fat ; tolet fland, or let worke, in


a fat.
Acence; or, Acenfe:m.A farme orleafe.
Acensé: m.ée : f.Leaféd,or let out to farme.
ement.m. À firming ; aletting , or i to


Acenfet.10 let,ov take,to farme.
Acenfeur :m.4 firmer ; a letter out,or taker,to ferme.
Acenfivé: m.éc: f.Let out for(an yearely)Cens,
Acenfivement: m.4 dog for Cens; the creating
wa a Cenfi ps a Tenure by Cens. :
enfiver. Togive,or let out,for (an yearely) Cens ; 3 To
create a ee 1ue,or a Tenure by Cens.
| Acerbité :f. f.Acerbutie fharpeneffe four fourenelfe.
Aceré : m.ée : f.Steeled ; frged or made of sempered,or
firengthened with Steele,
Acerer. To fleele; to forge ormake of temper or —"
. with , Steele, 2
en
certene,Ccerte, ained,aljure
Acertenement. ceitifying afiertainin
Acertener.To certifie; aféertaine, afin afirme boldly,
informe confidently,
| Acertes.(Adverb. of acertaine, in very deed ; in good
eet 3 alfo,partily, aaa fering
e. as Cotyled mf Sd
ge vos about std po things ; & two
ounces and abalfe of drie ; or jx pm bt)
ai ounce,3 quarters,2 Carats,12 grains and a hal half.
Aceteufe: £. The hearbe Sorrell,
Accteux : m.eufe: f. Sharpe, faurifh ; of the fubfiance, or
hanin hed sho Vine e.


ange la à hint Sarat


ion as, Ab ; serie
es se: cuftomeds fequented by


Achalasces, To allure chapmen, get cuflomers, bee


cuflome.
Achancri: mie: £.cankered; made,or grownt,cankred,
Achantique. Maftic achantique : 4 ing
j ataflicle ar Gum, bred on the top of the , Or
Star-
A :m.45 Achet ; Apurchafèére. $
t pe pee Seeke Louage. «<
apteur; as Acheter;and. Acheteur,


er


ter; &
Ath né: m.ce: hast ingen a
tedwith aff etted peri re


bent again ofecuting
abate de death mine ree me pen dd


t;m.A flefhi
tds 2 af fifo
Atbatheests


nt; alfoyan re waar ‘pro-


JON ; stolay fle or bait,
with flefh; io enter, or traine be d ; al) to pro-
: or egge unto all cruell and bloo loodie courfés againf.
er vn Totie vato a Lure,


Po be felly minded, o cruelly bent a-
| Free Em OYCE OT mercie, Es til


Digitizéd.by Go: } le
3


alé pébefhbfanesor sty


hip
Rp Acheter,
To fet the teeth on edge.


54 feeding or baiting with Ache té: mabe: :f.Bought,purchafed ; ceased,


oe the poke ; to buy one}


ACH
Achables Ladin ge chai semerds


Achate.The pretious lone Achates ; (makes the wearer
acious,and bim from idlene ef)
Ac er H; alfo,the bear Smallage.


:m. The
clle.Female Smallage.
Ache des lardins.Parféley.
Ache large.Great Parféley, Alexanders,

Ache de nn Maifh, or marifh, Parfèley vater-
À pres de ies either the Crow foot of Illiria or the
Crowfoot of the fale fl stp
Ache rufti eymarfh, or marifh,parfeley.
Ache de Skene ear, Usp
Ache fauvage-Wild parfèley. ¢
Grand Scher The bearbe Alexanders.

Achées: m.Grubs,ground-worms.

Achelois:m.ife:f.0for belonging to the famous Grecian
à gr reve watene ; and hence ;

ruvage Achelois. Water ; or waterie drinke.
Pere Lee + ne armee FRE
Pr eg Achemmer.
Achemerefle.as Achemmerefle.
chemes : m.as Achées ; AU, attires, deckings orna-
ments Sor women.

Acheminé:m.ée:f.Put,or fet,in the way; addreffed vn-
to,direéted in,a courfe ; begun,entered into.

Acheminement: m.4 { fétting pt direéting;in the way
an entring; a fhewing of the way vnto 5. alfo, aaa
dreffe, were entrie, ingreffion ; Way, pafjage,
means vnto a thin bing.

Acheminer.7o addveffe unto, put into, fet, or dirett in,
the way ;to enter ;10 fhew the way unto; alfo,to com-
mence,begin, fet papi breake the. ice, gine an en-

_ trieymake an onerture,vato.
Il perfuadoit, & acheminoit tant qu'il pouvoir. à.
He perfuaded, and laboured all be could,to.
_ Sacheminer.To soos; take bis me Serine bi his
tourné}, fet forward. , af


jon of

of Brides ; hence alfo,any waiting-
chambermaid , tbat ath that office about
fe spr rr ia


2 Dom ar


: m.4 kind of Smallage,or Crow ofios refem-
bling Smallage.
The name of one of the rivers faigned to be.
in He


Acheronté:m. ée:f. Plunged in Acheron,drowned in
Rell; esate” bred in Hell ; and (thence ) mot


D oon on ae Acherontides.Damned foules.
as Achemes;Tires,or ornaments, for women.

Achet : m. 46 mince pret a thing bought, or.
parcha/èd ; alfo,buying,or purc bafing.


money. 4
To pd purchafe ; te ger ame, by bar-


Gree chat en radi To bargain aine-vnaduifedly ;
ieoaiphyar fees |


maifon faiise-ProiBuy eos teadi made; ||
fs hn net boi) Ÿ ) The


0 .


Original from


THE QHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Aon


Il faut acheter maifon fairte,& femme à faire:Pro,
Buy a houfe made,and a wife unmand,
A trop acheter n'y a que revendre : Pro. Wares o-
_ Merbought ave fildome returned without loffe ; nor doe
many things (on the getting wherof we haue beflowed
much time or toile) gotten, quit the coft wee were
at about them, mi
I! faut acheter vigne deferte ; Pro.E4y ground that
hes vatilled,


-


or take pains, for good things enioies good things, —
Trop achete le miel que fut efpines ik Pro.


heterefle : £.4 woman that buies,or purchafès.
éteur:m.Abwier,a purchafer,
Achetiver; as Chetiver, Aifo,to inthrallor captiuat.
Achevé: méc:f. Atchiened ended,effected, finifbed con-
cluded ,confimmated,compaffed accompli{bed,
Son honneur eft achevé de perdre ; His honour is
wholy bis reputation fully loft.
Achevement:m. 4% atchiewement,or atchieuing ; a
perfecting,or bringing to perfection ; a full ending,ef~
Seéting,or finifbing ; a confummating, or accomplifh-
t,


ment,

Achever.Toatchieue ; to end, finifh, conclude ( fully ;)
to difpatch, effect, performe ( eh 3) to perfect,
confimmat,accomplifh,go through-ftitch, with,

Cela fervira pour l'achever de peindre; There
wants but that to fill vp the meafüre of hisill fortune;
that being once done,he is undone.

Achilles: m. (The well-knowne name of a moft valiant
Grecke ; ufed fometimes by the French,to fignifie ) a
de feader protector, fapporter, propugnator, warrant,
affrance ; buckler, fortification,

oife :f. 47 occafion,an oportunitie,
Achoifon: f.The fame ; alfo,eleétion,o? choife ; afà,an


accufation, .

ite achoifon le prend le Mouton; Pro.
Æ woolfé takes any Teak occafion to re the
Sheepe. ae


Achoifonner.70 accufe,to picke a quarrell againft,
hommer. To ref, or make Holyday ; alfè, to flay, or


kind of long Axe. € Bourbonnois.
opé: mcé :£, Stumbled atoron, =.
opement.A flumbling ; offence giuen,or taken.
Achoper.To fumble at,or on,
Acide : com.Sower eager tart fharpe.
Acidité.Eagreneffe fharpeneffe, fourene[fe,tartneffe,
Acier: m.Steele. ELA,
. Acierer.Seeke Acerer,
witleffe and grac À
Acoint; Acointer; Seeke Accoint,
Acc RUE that minifters to the Pricfl
as ite, Hee to
whyle be facrifces or fayes Maffe.
Aconduire; Seeke Acconduire. ibs
_Aconit:m,.Aconstum,a moft venemous hearbe ; of two
princtpall kindes,viz.Libbards-bane,and wolfe-bane,
uyvre ; as Acconfuyvre.
gs m.A medecine compounded of beating, &r mol-
ifying Simples, \


er, |
alamus aromaticus,the fivect Cane,
: m.ée: f.Horned sbauing hornes.

acomée; (in Blazon),


# a 3


| Acouter.as Accouter; or as Ef{couter,


Qui bon l'achete bon le boit;Pro.He that wilpay, | Acquerement: m.4 purchafing obtaining ,getting,pro-


He that lickes bonnie of thornes paies too deere for it. |


Acquerir. To acquire ; to get, obtaine, procure a thing


* the King informing himfelfe by Commiffion ov other-


PR”.


Acofter.Looke Accofter, '
Acoter.Seeke Accoter,
Acoucher.as Accoucher.
Acouhagts, To accowardize, effeminate, make faint~
eartea, . °
Acoup.Quickly, fhortly fpeedily-fiddainly, in a trice,jn
a minute,in a moment. .


A-coup-venant.The name of a faire ruddie Apple.


curing ; or,as Acqueft, à
:m.A purchafer getter gainer ; one that in-
creafès bis füubflance by buying ; alfo, a challenger, or
© claimer of,one that pretends a title unto,a ie


Sought for ; to purchafe,or gaine by purchafing ; alfo,to
ps, «pbs pretend title vnto land. ;
Acqueft:m:A purchace,a thing procured, got,or bought;
ano Setting, procuringsprrchafing alfo,profit, gain,
c ie gettings increafe of fi sa
Acquefts.Purchafès made,or things bought, by the vn-
maried À or by,ov for only one. (Therein different from
Conque, 5.) ! V af 1
Nouveaux acquefts.Purchafés of inberitances feo»
dal; allodial , or cenfuel., exc, made by Chirchmen,
Corporations Fraternities rc, after they baue proc
ved letters of Mortmaine ( for other things ;) whereof


wife,they ave fummoned to void out of the lands, ec,
So purchafed, withina yeare ; by the end whereof if
they haue not paid the fine, vohatfèeuer, impofed on
them by bis Officers, the lands ave immediatly, and
without recoueriefeized into hishands,
Droiét de nouvel acqueft. 4 Priuiledge of fining,
. at certaine times, the ignoble Tenant that poffefes,
0 purchafès,a noble’Tenement.or inheritance ; Looke
oid,
Il n’y a point dacqueft en luy. He is but a drie fel. .
FA a is nought to be got by dealing with him. %
En gtand fardeau n’eft pas l’acqueft ; Prov. The-
greateft burthens are not the gainfulleft ; or; The
goodnefie of a thing vefts not in the greatneffe of it.
Acquesté: m.ée:f.Purchafed acquired; cotten,gained;
procured obtained.
Acquefter. 0 purchaft,get,caine acqitire, procure ,ob-
: ta A. -


Acquefterefle: £.4 woman that purchafèth.
A :m.A purchafer,getter gainer ; a thriuing
low ; one that sat Je fiebftance by buying.
Acquefts.Looke Acqueft, — .
iefcement: m.Qwuietnelfe ; alfo,an agreement 5a


yeelding,or comming to agreement before iudgment ;
alfo,an approuing of or a fubmitting bimfelfe unto, a
judgement ' pale mec him, GLO
Lettres d'acquiefcement . 4 letter of Atturney,
whereby a Client gines bis Counfellor,Atturacy,or So-


licitor itie to agree with bis Aduerfarie,
iefcer.To yeeld,or agree vato; come to anagree-


ment,be at quiet.firine,or flir,no more.
i elt ane tee opel. ous.


Pope i: maie: f.
a oe


fromthe beart,or in any good will

Acquité:m.ée: ey ange set ihe ged fee cleered,
er fiom ; alfa atte d,efetted,

tche
Aqui quit acquite,free,cleere,difcharge, vid of,
eliuer from.

Acquiter marchandife. To cuflome, or pay cuflome
for,merchandife,
Acquiter vne cerre.To quit,or quiet a peece of land;
torid it from gr a pme ‘fie, byrecoue-
ving,or delinering,it from fuchas vfurped it; to cleere
the title thereof.


S'acquiter de fon deuoir, To doe his dutie,to play an
boneft mans part.
S' iter de fa e,ou ferment.To performe


his prem @,to fulfill bis oath,
aes s'enrichit: Prov. He that gets out of


de es rich; or, Hee that keepes touch enviches
Acad.
Roqmoeers as Accoifer.To pacifie.

cravanter.Looke Accravanter.

pm An aker of land ; €Norm. (I is moft commonly
larger thanthe Arpent.)

“Acte, Azur d’acre. Looke Afur.

Acre: com, Eager foarpe tart fpersaipes 3 alfo,ear-


. ne,

Acredié : :mée: £ put, or got, into credit,

Acrehte ceed copped al rocket aie proud fateh
056061 pr y

rest ep, ) C


;æs Accreu.
Acrimonic.Eagerneffe fharpenelfe tartne 5 fawernes,
Acroamatie: Me i so hop difcourfes
a plaufible attion,


Acroamatique. Muficall, harmonious, delightfome,

pleafng,plaufible tothe eave,
Sc m.A hooke,a clagpe,a flay ; any thing to bang an-
der pitch polit, herewith the


binder end. — À ra necke are ioyned together,


Acrotcres réa PTE din à Elbowes of high
ound. out into the fe. ene at fea;
as yg parts of the LE Pillafters,
or Pediflalles for oh the tara igs,
hinder parts are drawme vp, or


gathered tog
/ Fes bn Horfe to knit,or d'aw vup,or gather togi-
oul Blinder psa mia are bin


pontine £,A Horfe as firong knitting drawin
ger of bis hinder parts ; any fuc +
À tiongnotion,or poft bis.
seme ci a deu al a ne: ;am


writing ; or ed, or fet
downe asa Record pr Prefident, in pi a TeStimo-
tga


t) order of Court ; alfo, an AG, or Paufe
 Tragedie ; af quantitie , or mea-
See


aver-


“à


A CR A D A s
Droit d'acquit.Looke Droiét. Debtes aétiues. Debts that be owing,or due nto vs.
Par forme d’acquit feulement. S/ei; > carclely, Vaflelage actif. The vight of fealtie due by euery Vaf-
onely for a fafhion ; more of Sew gr “feare, fall vato bis Lard,


In Order of Friersthat weave tawnie Habits,
and feed on naught but roots,
Action:f.An aétion,deed exploit enterprife ; salfian ac-
tion im Law ; D par hes ee


Action de fain Me
hed jam leaded, fued;alfo,aéted effeéted.
onner.To fie jnditt jmplead ; alfo, to worke, atte,


A ivité.ACliitie quiche enimblenèffe sreadinefe.
Actourné:m.An Atturnie pices es à
Actournée: £.4 warrant,or letter of Atturaie; @Norm.
Actuel.Readie fpeedie,prefent difpatching.effeétual.
Cautere actuel.4a aétuall Cauter, See Cautere.
Aétuellement. Pre/ently quickly, peedily out of band,
without delay or attendance for,
nr f, Acuitie, fharpeneffe, keenenelfe ; enh,
tite,
Acuré, Oifeau acuré; That bath bad caftingg giuen bir.
A 7 sig Camocks, Ref-harrow,Pcitiewbin,
Gro
— m, Anadage,prouerbe, ould-{ryd-firw ; wittie


fay
Adagial m.ale: f.Prouerbiall.or full of adages.
Adain. Adam (the firli manthat ewer was 3) a alfo, the
Adam peare (whereof excellent Perrie is made.
Bafton d' Adam. The weapon wherewith Adam vfèd
to fight with Eue,
Morceau d'Adam. The bead of the wiadpipe , or
FH compofed of three little griftles, or peeces of


omme d'Adain. Adams apple ; a certaine “pnd
fait that refembles a finall Cowcumber ; 3 al[o, the
Jÿrian apple or Affÿrian Citron, (round, and twice as
ae asa ig Orange.)
anté, Lying on bis face , groucling ; leaning on bis
<< Looke Adenté,


Adaptation, An adapting, fitting, or fuiting of one


APE

EAne al frame that cleaues unto resds,ér other
ae Bear sin dvougth,and dric weather.

Adayé. Prouoked, urged, incenfed, egged, moued vnto
wrath : €Pic,

A ring ,incenfng prowohing eging, m0-
uing unto wrath:
ayer. To roi WAGES REE, firvp, moue
vato wr


Adayeur:m.4 Mules, a quarreller a contentious per- |


£.A Leafe,or eftate in farme.
ement.4 ep letting out to farme.
Adcenfiyement.A fee farme.
Addenté.Looke Adenté.
Additament: m.4n addition,increafe, eeking augmen-
tation aduantage,


Ace: E-
Adcenle


itaments mammillaires.The part of the braine |.


that lies toward the forebead and next unto the nofe,
as whence out finclling isderiued ; alfo the two pro-
Fr the Temple-bones.
a mr ecking,aug-
mentation aduantage,acce(fe of more
Addition beceuesTbe bone of the elbow(fo tearmed


Akon mamas. Addittaments mam-


Akdomelliqumdtomedyedeined nde eat


—


Original from


FHE OHIO®STATE UNIVERSITY


A D I


… inward, 7, boufall, acquainted with vs.
qu uer. To tame, reclaime, make gentle, in-
ward, familiar, boufill; to acquaint with vs ; to en-
tertaiae, or bring i into our

Addonné : m.ée : £ Ginen,bent affetted additted jn-

clined, applied, deuoted vato.
s'Addonner à. To giue,bend, addiét,affeét;appy, des
note, incline, render, yeeld bimfelfe vato,

‘Le lieu s'addonne ainfi; firch is the nature,or quali-
tie of the place; for (uch purpofes only it ferwes,or us fit.
Selon que les chofes s'addonnent. As our affaires
fucceed, as thofe matters come topaffe ; or, as thofe af
faires, thofe matters permit,or come to purpofe.

em :Indor ced ; or, fet backe to backe ; a tearme of
Blafon

Addofé. as Adoffé.

Addouber. To dre(fe, patch,mend;to fet fitly together ;
Pe to arme at all pots, or with all bis peeces, for the


FE: et a m. A dreffer ; patcher mender.
Addoubeur de mauvaifes caufes. À crafty Lawyer;
one that prolongs ill caufes by fhifts,cauils,and delayes.

Addouci: m.ie : f. Sweetned; affuaged,mitigated,qua-
apres 3/0 sflenied ; ‘moothed.

ddoucir. To fivecten ; fmooth; auage, temper gquali-
ee appeafé,pacifiemitigate ; foften,mollifie.

ouciflement: m. A fiveetning ; inoothing ; foft=
pis c affiaging tempering qualifying; appeafing,paci-


Addoter cosy re a apenas oly clafped, grap-
or. , À ether,
ad À EE æ Addouci, Addoucir,


Adduire.T Es forth or,

uire. To

Adebtz. 4 hind of Seignsor al date oth within the imvifdi-
tion of S. Omers.

Adelantade : m. A Lord Deputie, Prefident,or Lieute-
de for a Princein a countrey; (we commonly take it

: Pres ÉPriged valued, to fale for money; or for

| which money is made.

Adenerer. To prixesvalueyrate; tomake money of,to fet
_to fale for money


es. her of te Js Kerala the math trot end


tine of Ada tle Adam
ent: m. A mortaife,not chor indented hole
enté: m. ée: € Mortal: fafened, or iagned. by |


Mortaife.
Adenté cout plat à bas.Fallem down flat on bis faces


layed bis teeth, :

Adenter. Torr ile o ign by Mortaife; to
enchace one
Adentervne ES mn mur, To tensor fettle a
aye vato a wall,by the yron bookes which are at the
Ades. Prefently,out of band,by and by,jncontinently,jm-


| aderee Totouch bandle fl PA Sr
rcicom. riche aétine,agile; alfa,


comely, grace, iandome; ms ae fit, apt, for any
Adler nier uicke, read, nim-
_ ble each,traine, or @ fom ots ; alfo, to


Go. gle


Adherdre. Seeke,Ah


fsa connate alfo,to accompanie, or follow
ye bo om To preuent, fore-flall, ouer-run ; to got, or


Seuil. ore one.


as Adeullé.
Adeullé : m. ée: £. Heanie,dolefull, fad,yvofidll,mourne-


mournefull weeds;in mourning array, -
viedo To be fad, beanie, dolefuk ; te mone, to


mourne.


Adex. as Adeptz.
Adextre. say Sar
2 ve Sega


Adfiliation. +4» adopting,an adoption,


Ail Adopted.
nation. as Affirmation.


tinatif: m.iue:£ Glewie ; clammieyeleaning, or
fun unto = thing ; alfo, glewing.


Adglutinement. 4 clesving a nyning, elafingsor fafie-


to,or together,as with glew.
Adgfutiner. To I Mio faften unto,or to-
Ric with glew.
effion. Looke,


Aggreffion.
NE pais m. An adberent, an acceffarie, partenér, or
Adhernueat ante:£. Adbering,cleaning or flicking ff


unto; alfo, partaking, Sidingstaking partwith.

erdre

Adherer. To adhere ; cleaue, or fticke faftwnto ; alfo, to
fide,or take part with.

Adheritance. A poffeffion; a Liuerie and feifin.

Adherite. snipes put into poffeffion of.

Adheritement : m. 4 giving poffeffion, a making of Li-
uerie and feifin vata.

Adheriter. To adueft,to put into refonte giue poffef-
Joe make Liuerie and feifia of an inberitance.

Adhefon:f. An adbering,cleaning, flicking ff} unto,

Adhorer. To come at a good houre,or in due feafen.

Adj ancé: m. ée:f. er ted adapted,adiufted ; or-
dads atly placed, handfomely ioy-
ned, feteably matched coe

Adjancement:m. A fitting,apting,adapting,adinfling,
accommodating ; a comely trimming, dreffing, or dec-
~ king ; a iuft placing, bandfème i ioyning, futeable mat-

= ching of things together ; alfo,bandfomene (fe, aptneffe,

agreeablencffe.

Adjancer. To fit, apt, adapt, adinft ; accommodate ;
proportion, order, decke, trim; rs ranke feat-
by,,ioyne finely, match ays put handfomely together.

Adiante: m. Venus baire, maidens baire, our

anal ‘an bearbe.)


jection: £. £. An adieétion eat oi :


2 es An yee Affiflant, A La.
an ci
low, compan ina charge, woh
office ; alfo, a
Fe cE er bar fer arb led, fer, ads
m.
ait (afo 0) neere,vnto ; neere hand t 28 24
KT dry acd
int. as
Adjension ado qin
with an accufer, or wnt as
Tes in office or charge. DENT
m. A Commi fin of 8
EL mére
geant,or Suinmoner,


THE OHIO TE-UNIVERSKRE


commiffion, ;
t heire ; and a ioiatenant; allo, À


€. To adiopne ; fetyadde, put, applie, or knit
— afjociate, match patel a


ADI ADM


Adjourné : m.ée :£. Adiurned,cited, fummonéd, war- | er 3 4 guiding,or adi of bufines for another
néd to appeare at a certaine day. Ps Le om du name a
Adjournement: m. A citing, or miniftving unto.


ing, warning to
appeare at a day;alfo,the Summons ,ov Proceffewhere-
g a partie is fowarned ; alfoa growing towards day.
iournement Libellé. See Libellé,
Adiournement perfonnel.. À perfonall arref, or
Leifure of the bodie.

Adjourner.7o cite, fiammon,warne to appeare;to ferue
4 proces of apparance on; alfo,to make day,or turne in-
to ‘a 507,45 ;
s'Adjourncr. To wax day,or grow towards day.

Adjourneur: m.4 citer,or fummoner ; one that warns,
or ferues a proce[fe on,another to appeare,

Adjoufté: m. ée : f. Added,put,or fet unto;alfojencrea-


iniftrer. To minifter or adminift er ; to guide rule
a" manage, bandle, difpofe of ,a charge, «inf,


neffe.

Adinirable : com. Wonderfull, admirable, maruellous,
miraculous,aboue cuflome,or expectation.

Admirablement. Admirably ;wonderfilly beyond ex-
?


ee wont, maruelloufly, miraculoufly ; excel.


‘ently we

ar > :m. An Admirall ; a Princes Lieutenant on
the fea.

Admirale: f. An Admiralleffe (The late Admirall
Chaftillons wife is called fo in a Hifiorie of fome ac-


Sedyau ed,inlarged. compt among the French.)
Kijootkersens: m.An adding, putting,or fetting vate, | Admiratif: Th'admiratiue point,or Eyes of admira-
alfo,an increafing augmenting ecking. tion(and of deteflation) marked,or made,thus !


Adjoutter. To adde,adioyne, [èt or put vato ; alfo,to in-
a tecke ; alfoyss Adjufter;and hence;
Adjoufter vn horologe. To wind up aclocke. |

sar m. cute : f. Fattic, full of fat; alfo, breeding

ne(fe.
Veines adipeufes. Looke,Veine.

AG re: m. 4 difference. nif

Adiré : m.ée: f. Wanting wandered mi out
of the way; alfo,leftyabandoned,bid mth

Adirer. To cpr ie he be mil out of the
way; alfo,to leaue, on, forfake id farewell unto.

Adifiné : m. ée : £. Tythed, on which a tythe is fet, for

Adifine gant fe a tythe on, ex tythe

mer. To stofèt a on, a A

Adjudicataire :m. He to whom a ve 0 6

linered by iudgement.

Adjudication: f. 4a adiudication ; an adindging,or gi-


Miration. Admiration,wonder maruelling.
Adimirauté : f. An Admiraltie ; the fs Admi-
ral; alfo,th Admiral Court.
Admiré: m. ée:£. Admired ; wonderedat.
irer. To wonder,admire,maruell at. 6
is: m. ifc: f. Admitted, intertained , vecei
pére or let in; fuffered, permitted ; approoued, al-


ed of.

Admiffible. Admittable; admiffible; fit to be admitted,
receined ; allowed of.

Admodiateur. A Leffor; be that letteth out land to
balues,by great or for part of the crop, increafe, or pro-
fit thereof’, alfo, (and mere properly) a Leffee, or Far-
mer, one that takes lands on thofe conditions.

Admodiation.  leaffing, letting out to the halues, or
for part of the crop,increafe,or profit.

Admodier.To/eaffe.farme,or let out land by great,unto
balues,or for part of the crop,increafe,or profit thereof.

nefté: m. ée :£. Admonifhed, warned, aduifed,
aduertifed.

Renée, Awarning, ple pr
tifemcnt aduifement; a fhewing,a putting in mind of.
MER AA 1000 A tn Re

aie 10 ue to put in mind of. |

Admonefteur. 4x «dmonifher,warner,aduifer, exber
ter, aduertifer.

Admonition. 42 admonition, exhortation ; as Admo-

‘neftement. ?

Admorti. Looke,Amorti.

Admortir. To dead, fiint, quaile, abolifh, extinguifh,

make ceafe ; make difappeare ; to mortaife, or ioyne by


’ Admortir la foy,&c ; vne rente ; Looke Amortir.
sAdmortir. Aweake,aged,or fickly perfonor (by the
cuflome of Chalons)a vila gine bimfelfe,c> all bis |.
goods unto another on condition that he hall maintaine

im,and difcharge his debts.
rtiffable. as iffable, x

Admortiflement. A mortaifing; a difappearing,or loo-
Sing it [elfe within anotber;as in the parts of pillars that
are ioyn covered ape hide illars ape
fèeme to be ioyned inone; Mortmaine 5 a

i CRE
iffementdc foy,& homa €: in
of them ir acer ences en exigent en.
ia rtiflement d'heritage. 4 paffing, or giuing of

* in Mortmaine.

| Admortiflement real. A certain priuiledge wbere.
bythebifhop of Theroanne bath all kinds of iurifdi-
tion under the king. - ad


wing, or deliucrié unto, by iudgement.

Adjugé: m. ée: f. Adiudged ; giuen,or appointed,vnto,
by indgement.

Adjuger. To adiudge ; to give, paffe, or appoint unto,by

Adjurateut:m. An adiuror, or earneft fivearer;

LS ha exalt, eee _
djuration : £. An adiuration, or coniuration ; an ear-
nef fearing vnte aff, threxattion of an oath from

rs,

Adjuré: m.ée: £ Adiured; coniured ; fivorne ; or de-

pofed unto ; from whom an oath is exatted.
jurer. To adiure ; or coniure; to fweare earneftly vn-


to; alfo,to exact an oath of, to put nto bis oath.
Adjufté: m.ée:f. pect ed = ped: hea
fed.


Ci or aptly fet, orderly difpo
Adju: a eb eee PE placing,apt fetting,
euen couching, fit ioyning, handfome ordering, orderly
di of feuerall things,
ayutter. To adiuft, place iufily, fet aptly, couch evenly,
cs, match fitly, difpofe orderly, fewerall
cr.


Original from


wat corners it,or priuie wayes unto,the houfe.
Te feray là mis Cae. aux adrefles. viz. pour


A knitting, fafening joi joyning annexing to. me trouver au
Adoule r. Seeke Annui ; Les is ont eu adrclle-Thevines baue flourifhed,
as Addouber.
bleternce: :f. Youth, or young age. ; Adrefsée :m. ya Adreffeddiretied ; infiruited ; fetin
Adolefcent :m. À youth,or young man. the neerefl,and readie
sAdolorer:70 eriene,forrow,take griefi,beagerieued, | Adrefsement. An adreffing,diretting ; inflruéling, or
penfine,or full of beauineffe. Setting in the neereft,and readiefi courfe.
Adombré:m. ée:f. shadowed ouercaft,couered. AdrefSer. To.adreffe,dirett; lead ; inftrult; fet in, few
mbrement:m.4 wercaftingcouering, | theneerefor the readief way unto.
ome Painters, a g, or bare ras s AdrefSer à. To refort vnio, make towards ; meddle
with bane a fling at.


A i 8 À To adumbrate,fhadow,ouerca scafa mift, | Adroict. as,Adroir; or,as Adeftre.
or fog ouer to pour tray, or draw arefemblance groffe- Adroit: ie f. Handjone;pimble ywbeeme;readie,or
à rome rt loin their Sirft lines. quicke about; apt or fit for, any thing ; alfo. fanourable,
omeftiqué: m. ée:f. Tamed,reclaimed,made gen- propitious, profperous.
tle, i cornet miles shoufall,acquainted with; alfo,in- | Adfcrire. To afirine auc, tapes peferets alfo, to
pe yam into, made as one of the houfe. Adie Aeetatnces among other.
Adomeftiquer.Totame,reclaime;make gentle,imvard, ibed,attributed; Fear Pets among.
shoufall ; to acquaint with; to intertains bring Adfigné. as Aig.
into,ufe as one of the boufe. Adviluation: A valuing, rating or fetting of a price
Adonc, Then, or at that time.
Adonin. face Adonine. a faire fiveet face,fuch a one as Advalué: m. Éc:f. Valuedyrated,
nis had, Advaluer. To valse,rate,fet a price on.
A 72h To Adonixe it; to refemble Adonis ; to imi- | Advance. Looke,Avance.
tate,or counter fit the graces,or beautie of. Adonis. | Advancé. Forwarded, aduancedhaftened, payed before
Adopté, siesta appointed, or chofén to be another | hand.
Advancement. Looke,Avancement.
ie : To adopt; fe take, or chufe fer his child one | Advancer. Seeke Avancer.
that innature is not fo. Advantage. Seeke Avantage.


RER se Parents nie go ga A Artherise, forwarding,profiting,


Gopefenectden aloe :m. ies -f. Heauie, fad, oan penfiue, ag-
: Ad e: pose sath ; worthie,or fit to be adored. d, full of forrow. d
teur. À wor, er sam adorer onethat prayeth Adveillé: watchfull; wake full; awake
© to,or beareth bi towards another withall rene- Bienne nd ral cn
rence. ls

Adoration:f. Adorationworfhip,renerence in the bigh- denan Fad F ad. tte lawfill and contingent portion of
degree; ape strips » patrimonie wherein a daughter may
Adorer. To adore,worfhip ; reuerence,or honour in the Paced er mp 3 al[o,a fufficient part of an
higheft degree. inheritance, eferue rae aor cng pe to


re ru om vis pen ae 4 to wine from homage-doing him that hath purchafed


Adofsement. 34 roa amma againfi with the | Adyenant bien fait. A portion of inheritance giuen
backe safetting iar 3 afirengthening backe- an élder bn bis se dr thai in recompence of
sha elfevetaines.
dott To backe, to fet backe to backe ; to frrengtben Lep Padvenant.4 Long dec ie 4
ters etienne, wis
s ps a contre. To fet bis backe againff; to leane (being noble) may, before the mona oi ve their eldeft
againft with bis backe. Sonne ,peftow in frank-mariage with left, or firft
Adot: m, 4 blow ,or thumpes alfe, much adoe, ter
ea bufinefe fina kind of fifh. Advenant. Handfome, , comely, decent, neat, |
donna otssbe gene eer graceful, |, well-behawed ; commenient,


Adotben ee Ss | Addouber. well-befeeming, fitting.

Adoulcir. Sop tame à Padvenant.B papas Poe a aN
t.S Addoulciffement. VO

pe nr = 3 4,8 Adolorers …  * Lu iene ea theheire


Adp the al.
at neue | a re
:m.A
ASE as iin, dr oa chance,pr bap; arvising,or com
ergs the necref Advenit-To beppenghancebetidecome to paf flout, ”
“LA dim. Th meng of TE - befall.
Adrefle : € An adreffe, a direétion ; a c Cela n'y pourra advenir. That cannot fit-nor farnifh


cils


Porc ane rendre sale attaine Unto it; CEA en
1 adrefesdelaman naib | . éme qu ouf +


cat. |


Go: gle


A FE


Qui ueut entretenir fon ami n'ait nuls affaires
auec luy : Prov. Let bim that will hold a friend,baue


doe with him.
Afun de ce: f. Pal of bufiefegmuch emploed, 3bu-
fie,euer doing of fomcwbat.
nt. Very bn, ax one thats full of im-


eee as Affairé.
L'Art fink i ur
q m. ce: f. Shrunke, we!
« Laden, pre[[ed dovene,as low as it — goe, as
D canbe; Méled ia the bottome of. i
ement: m..4 que 5 faking, fhrinking, or
|  peelding under a pag arm = Là a weighing downe ; a
Siting ithe bottome of; hence, alfo alfo, the groupds, or
in the bottome of liquor,e>c.
Ali. 0 ae arom melt b downe.
Affaifler. To be ouerladen; to quell,finke,fbrinke,or
2 under a great burthen ; alfi,to fettle, as a beanie
thing in the bottome of.
Affaitté. as Afferé,
Affaitter. as Affaiéter.
Affaitterie. Looke Atiaicterie,
Affaitteur de cuirs. À Skinner,or Leather-dreffer.
Affamé: m. ée:£, Famifbed, flarued, very bungry,bun-


flar
gas ‘The fecond


of the Ven-
tricle ; ahwaies emptie (by reafon of the many midriffe
; veines which pal[e from it unto the Liner ) and there-
fore tearmed, the Hungrie gut,
Ventre affainé n'a point # orielles: Pro. ?
ger-flarued belly wanteth eares. * Xi
Vilain affamé demy enrage : Pros ogre
is balfe a bedlam. Le sd
Ces: :m, À famifhing, fa Mage far
oe To 0 flarue,to es
ne toylesor griefe : as née.
Affaflonner. To forme, or fafbion ; to to good


PR to make ome, fit, and readiesfor the
UN, ser ae CL RE
nos
| laure bauke.
as Affaiéter:
+. To create a tenurein fee fimplezto palesalien,
or tin fee,or, a
«48
AfsGaveur m. A7. sffedor one that (curioufly) imi-
- tates a fafhion,or takes on bim a habit,which een
comes,or befits,bim not.
Affectation: f. Affectation ; ouer-curious imitation ; a
Pol defire, or follow. of, what one bath not, or is
nature ; alfo,a publicke or legall afignement, or


- appointing of a op unto; a faftening or tying it on; a
ce for, the


maintenance, or pre of ano-


AFF


Aféion: Fa An afin ing on qu will unto;a
defire of,or longin ros fi 34l/0, a paffion, perturbation,
‘or trouble of mand and bence ae a fickneffesdifeafe,
or imperfection (of mind,or bo
Affectionné: m.€e: f. Gidimne, or affettionated ;
rw an affettion, bearing a good will, to ; given, ad.
ñ eee animated, vato ; alfo, beloned, eftee-


aap Affettionately, with great affc-


Affedtionner. To affectionate ; beget a liking, breed an
fect 3 excite,inciteor animate,vnto.
étionner à. To affetio loue ; to addiét,or de-


Be himfelfe ; to giue bis mind,vnto.
ement. Moft affectionatly,defiroufly pearti-


“ds couetou
Age : sein À f. Moft affectionate ; beartie ;


defirous of full of affeéts, or of affettion’s full of good
wt ;alfo, pre a great ade or nus wi,


Alten: m. éc: f Fed, or infeamed, with bay ; fiall-


Affener. To feed or infeame with hay ; to ftall-feed,
Afferant. (The Participle of pg ht wt Affiert)
befeeming, or becsmpeng alfo, concerning, or belon-


Al : com. Affirmable, auoucheable ; ; alfo,
meable,leafeable,Jettable.
Affenne : £4 farming ; leafing,letting out,
Affermé :m. € éc : f. Farmed let or rlaféd out; alfoyas
Affermement: m.as Affetme; alfo,an affirming.
Affermer. To ferme; leafe ; sles ns ese fare : alfo,
to affirme dr; 345 in Affirmer,
mi? m. ie:f. Strengthened, confirmed, fortified ;
* affured ; compatted, confolidated, fetled, hardened,


dc d ; made fir
Fr rire
To flrengthen, fortifie, confirme; alfieres
“Bec stl bres, io à fers
Affenniffemene: rm. A fir 5 compaéting,con-
lofing, fetling, a, enim, ardening.
PA nr :m. À fre er; comparer
ler. > fiener, fife + ssh rip
Arte Get :f, “Fertiliged ynad fertile.
e €
He.


ir. To grow wearie ; to wax lumpifh, or beauie.
We mg #7 f. ‘Set, fetled , or pearched on the


SAR. To pearch, to fit, or fettle it felfe, on the


rdi: m. ie: f Madesor become fouthfill,drowfe,
cme” fe del ;  faint-bearted ; ouglie to the


ARE m mée : f. PET ms gerd
apr in bt after ; + sd ering ke lush fulydvovoie Laxies dul, flow,
4 ig well,unto ; 10 make | , or
SRE of pi a iets ougle to the sada ae
el Affeté ; ou, tm der Craftie, fubtile, 5 pe
: nice, C 4€, >
noch À ee lie afin er cas q
soe
pi hare AT » fubtiltie, ;
qe coats daly. a (m hfs lineffe, con Met re i es es |
Las Affeterie; fé; 30s 4 GH- |. daintinelfe, curiofitie, pr €, quainene(fe.
= Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Li hs
AFF AFF
Affeublage: m. Looke Affublage. - Affiquet : m, Any prettie toy, trinket, or tri ‘mall
Affeubler: Looke Affubler, - us F value ; as “tial Po tock dt ‘oom
Affeurage : m, as Afforage; alfoja rating, or fetting of | flucke on the bat head hood.or elfewhere sand worne
4 price on things. ; . Aga by a womaa) for ornament.
Affeurer, To rate value at a certaine rate, fet a certain rmateur, An affirmer, foother, auoucheraftertai-
. price on; Looke Afforers : « ! ner,auower, :
Affeurré. Foddered,(with flraw.) Affirmation. Az affirmation,a{feweration,affertionaf-
Afteurrer. To fodder(with ) certaining. Ga 4
Affiche :£..4 Siquis ; a bill fet-up ; or pafted , or fafte- :m.eé: f. Affirmed ; auouched, footbed anow-
ned,ona po sloore attesebc. ed; affured,afcertained,ftood vnto,


Affiché : m. e¢: fFaftened upon, fixed,or affixed unto;
alfo,caught,or laid faft py alfo, paie or
wade good. fi : f ; fisi

nent : m. A faflaing ; a fixing,or affixing vn-
to; alfo,a catching,or aying fu hold FR aljo,a making
good of a promife,or word. :

Afficher. To faften vpon ; ei pe vnto ; alfè, to
feixe,catchor lay faft bold on; alfo, to make good a
Promilè, or word, :

Afficter. To annex,or gine, for a time.

Affidé: m.cé : f.Ingaged ; that hath paft his faithfull
promife ; that bath pawned bis faith,and credit.

Afñé :mcé: f.Afured,affied, confirmed,affirmed ; al-

: fosplanted, fet,ov graffed ; affixed, faftened,
Tous mes biens te font afhez par droit; Al my
goods belong, or are affigned,to thee by right ; they be
all tyed onthee. ;

Affiement. An affuring.affirming, confirming ; al, a
Setting, planting, graffing 5 affixing, faftening.

er. To affie [fine affirme on his word ; to pane his
faith,and credit on ; alfo,to flvengthen, or confirme;
alfo,to plant, fet,or graffe ; affix, faften.

Affiert.(4 Verbe 1mperfonall) it becommeth, or befe-
meth ; alfosit concerneth,or belongeth to.

Affieux :m,4 good fellow,a boone companion,

a : oe Cet ae that — in edge

onit ; alfo,decke ed, or fiffened with wire.

Affilement : m. A whetti Le fetting of an

. cdgeon ; alfo,a dre with wire.

Affiler, To whet, fharpen, fet an edge on; alfo,todecke,
dre(je,or ftiffen with wire.

leur: m, 4 whetter,or fharpener of edg’d tooles,

Affleurc: f.45 Aftilement ; Aô,he edge, or fharpe-

. neffe ofatoole, =

Affiliant : m.47 adopter.

Affiliation : f, Adoption ; or an adopting.

Affilié : m.eé : f, Adopted,

Affllicr. To adopt,

Affloire : m.4 whetfione. A,

Affin : m.4 kinfinan,or Ally ; one with whom affinitie is
had,or contraéied.

Affin. Aduerb : That,to the end oe :

Affinage : m. 4 fining; or arefining, of mettals,

‘Affiné? m,eé: f, Decca cofened, beguiled; alfo,

brongbt unto an end ; aif, fined, purified, refined,

nement donne, deenigsagling 38 «
of metas. >=; De

Affiner. To coufén,deceine ,be guile ,alfo,to bring to end,
or effect ; alfo,to refine,or fine,as mettals to purifie,
or improue them (ceft rendre haut,& fin  Or,&c,


qui eft bas,felon Je tiltre qu'il faut ; fayes a French


man.)
Affine . Adecei sbeguiler 5 >
A
RE como nr rl bindre
ter. Te ally;to make of a;
ly plow Vent


r. To affirme, footh,auouch, auow ; affure; af-
“RE cand” 4 > 5 ffi > of
‘sAfflaquir. To wax flaggie, limber,feeble ; to become
loofe toynted ; to faint,
Afflat: m. A blaft,breath wind infpiration, blowing in.
Afflater.To flatter blandifb; allure,or intice with faire
pe ches ; to cog,or glofe with,tofawne on.
rir l eau.To go clofe by the water, as the lee-fide
Amott in a firong fide-wind ; Seeke Efeurer.
\fHictif: m,iue: £. A/flittine,grieuing mole fing, tor-
Peines afflict d = LL punifhme
eines ues de co c a 1] nts,
Affliction. Affliction ynole, Maiialamieteofeare-
xation, trouble woe, perfecution.
Affligé: m.cé: £. Afhéted, vexed, tormented ; excee-
ding much grieuedymolefted,tvoubled, =


Affliger. To affliét vex torment, moleft, griene,trouble,


exceeding much,
Olli : m.ie: f. Blurred blunted ; and hence ;

Diamant affloiii. That hath loft it point.

Affloiiir. To blaze; alfo,to blunt.

Affluence: fA ffiuence plentie, flore, flowing fullneffe,
aboundance. ,

Afflux: m.dn afflux,or affluence; plentifull acceffe; or,
as Affluence. à

Affoiblement.as Affoibliflement.

Affoibli :im.ie:£ weakened, enfechled; decayed in
firength ; alfo,allayed;delayed, or abated, as the va-
lue of coïme.


: Affoiblir. To weaken,enfeeble make infirme,depriue of


firength,take away the force,or vigour of ;alfà to de-
lay,allay,ov abate the value of coine.

Affoiblifsemnent: m..A weakening, enfeebling depri-
uing of force power firength;alfo;an allaying,or aba-
ting of the value of coine.

Affoifonnemert : m, Aniacreafe , or increafing of

re.

ARE: m.cé :f. Foyled, bruifed, wounded, fore hurts
fpoiled ; vndone;ruincd ;al/o, gulled,or befotted,
Affolé d'une iambe,d’un pied, &c ; Lame,or may-
medofaleg, foot,

Affolement: m. Afoyling, bruifing, wounding (by

_ firokes;) alfo, a pore ruiningondoing ; alf, a

ulling befotting befooling. :

Afoler: ro foyleywound,bruifè,or burt fore with blows,
alfo,to fpoyle, ruine, vndoe ; alfo, to befot, gull, be-


Affolure: £. A foyle, bruife, wound, fore burt ; a
ps ne sam extreame impreffion, ae


tenance, à

Affoncer.70 thruft farresor deep into, ec. .as Enfon-
fer. À

Affondé :m.eé:f. Sunke down to the bottomeor lying


__ (as aheanie thi the bottome, of.
Py behets s. er. To finke, fall,or go downe
to the bottome ; as,a beauie thing, thats caftiato the


Afor à m4 perc iabin in. |
FL A POTERIE + à


THÉ*OHIO.STATE-UNIVERSITY


et


Dyes Oa Rae


A FF AFF
Afforage : m,Tbe fame, :m, An alluring,ov allurement.
Droit jablocage, tbe pots of wine rc ; paied vp- ioler. as Affriander. : 7
on the broaching of euerie veffell retailed ;one to the . African of Affricke.
Land-lord , bis right for the flanding thereof on bis | Vent Affriquain. The Southweft wind.
ground and for bis leaue tofellit ; another-vnto the | Aftrodille : m. Th Affodill, or Afÿhodill flower ; a1f,


Magiftvat for allowance of the liquor, and for the rate
Seton it,


é:mi.c¢ : f.pierced,or [et abroach; alfoyated,

or 3 pe alle is fèt dovone ; licenced,or allowed (as

good and wholefome wine,crc ; ) to be fould, by a Ma-
iftrat,or Land-lord,

Afforer. To picrceor fet abroach a veffell of wine,erc,
or(rather)the Magifirat to feta rate onand the Land-
lord to gine a licence for,theretaile thereof’; or, to
take arate from the Magifwat, anda licence of the
Land-lord, for the retaile thereof. 1

Affouchié : mé : £ Put intedeyed among, fearne.

anglier affouchié. Thats bufily vooting for fearne
roots ; or that in fearching for fearne roots, plowes vp
the ground with bis [nowt.

Affouler.as Affoler; And (particularly) a woman to
mifcarvie, caft ber child , or be deliuered before her
time by the violence of blowes(or a falljreceined.

Aftourrager.as Affourrer. To fodder cattell.

ourrer.To férue,or fodder, cattell with firaw,érc.
anchi: m.A freed man, free man, or one that is


€,
Alanis mie : € Franchifed, made free; difchar-
ged yeleafed,deliuered from bondage; alfo,reclaimed,


d ; feafoned tened.
Anne peer freeynake free ; giue liber-
tie unto ; deliuer pr difcharge, from feruitude; releafe,


or vid from charge,or annoyance ; alfo,to reclaime, fea-
fingr fivecten ; to make tame, in feafon, or fit for vfè


what was wild yammifhor baifh.\

La verge anoblit, & ane afrahichie: Prov.

Looke Ventre. : f
Affranchiflement : m.Aaaffianchifing,or frecng a

difiharging of, or delinering from, feruitude; alfo, a


feafaning, foectening; taming Peclaiming
quane: £4 Tyres (becaufe bred in Affica.)


3 '
Juy ay vne mauvaife affres. 1 baue
righted, fiarred, affrayed him exceedingly ; or, Ibaue


bim into bis dumpes,

Affrcté :m.cé:f. Falened, clafped ; or, clung'd unto,

Affreufement. Gafily, terribly, horribly, as one that
hath beene {carved alfo, grunly , flernely, fowerly ;

> aperdy, frowningly , under the browes.

Ake eté: f. Gaftlinelfe, terriblene[fe, horrour in the
countenance; flernneffe, gri : tach “a es ing,
lawring, fowerneffe, or churlifhneffe o ~

Affreux ape eter bee
in looke ; grim, flerne, fell, fower, frowning, lowrin
lang i of gh au Splat
countenance.

Affriandé +s m.eé: f. Lipérest « medeGrs is
Set in a longing afier ; (hence) alfo,allured, inticed,in-
ueagled, , or dravne on by plaufible or fayre
meanes, gf

Affriandement :m.A making liquorous of; alfoyan al-

3 or fiveet


 luring, inticing , ot tolling on , by plaufible


ter; alfo,to allure,inueagle jntice, draw, or
faire, fweet,or plaufible mcanes.


Affiander.re make liquorous of or, ei a |


e


oo


Digitizeerby Go: gle


the thatbeares it; alfo, the bulbed root thereof.
Tooke Aphrodilie à


Affronitre : m. as Aphronitre ; Sa/t-peeter.
nt: m.An affront, brauadoe wrong,or abufe, offe-
ved toa mans face ; an impudent, and minvious gulle-
rie ; a bold, /curwie, or cofening part, played a man o-


wy.

Affrontailles :£. Th'ends,or corners of a peece of land
abutting vpon other lands, which belong vato diners
Lords or owners.

Affronté : m. eé : f. Affronted ; encountred, fet upon;
contefted, fwaggered with ; abufed, gulled, openty,
or to bis face.

Affrontement: m. as Affront; afô, an affronting;
incountring, afjaulting of.

onter, To affront sor lye affront of ; to come before,
or face to face ; alfo, to incounter, affault, fet vpon;
conteft, quarell, fwagger with ; braue ; wrong, abufe’,
cofèn x gui, deceine, impudently , openly , or to the
‘ace of.


‘onteur : m. A brauer;affronter, abufèr of people to
their faces; a common fivaggercr, animpudent,or bold
companion ; alfo,an open, or publique deceiner, begui-
ler,cheater,cogeing mate ; coufening merchant.

age : m. A cloathing,cladding ; muffling,or en-
wrapping in a hiding,or {hrowding under, (clothes;)
faeemems raiments apparell clothes,

Affuble : m. e¢ : f. Clad,or clothed ; muffied,or emvrap-
ped in couered, or attired with ; bid, or flrowded
under (clothes)

Aftublement : m. as Affublage. :

= To Seat, uct on ; to attire,or couer with,
muffler enwrap in,hide,or {hrowd, under clothes,

Il ne faut eftre loup,ny shred la peau. Prov.
We muft neither be,noï feeme naught. ;

Affuir. To flie,or recourfe unto for helpeyand fuccour.

Affuler.as Affubler’: €Pic.

Affuft : m.The frame,or cariage of a peece of ordnance;
car Toilebaptifte,

im.cé:f, Stocked, fitted with aflocke ; or flaffe;
mounted, as avtillerie; furnifhed with a frame,or car
riage,

Affutter. To flocke ; fit with a flocke; ov flaffe; to mount
artillerie; to furnifh(it) with a frame ph

tage:m. Frames, cartiages, or flockes for artil-


lerie.
Afiliation :f. Adoption, o the conferring on fremme
children all aduantages belonging to naturall ones.


Afrodille. as Affrodille.
Afrodifiace : £.4 kind of flone,or mineral of a whitifl


Fx eam with ved, =

itre:m.4 kind of light,brittle and purple coloured
Nuter, ;

Afronitre. The fame. Te a

Afufelé :meé : f. Pointed,or made finall towards the


pointyas a fpindle ; fifbioned like a fpindle.
:m. À nl a D le x
Are a ie pat,


ag He “#3
Agayinonamy sSeeloke fiend spoken in mirth, o


Agacé Rededsorgedincenfed, pre d, Fr 3
ei Pr aie,


Original from
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


ah, Jet 0 on edge, as a ;ateoth; a, blunted, as a wen-


ceant. Ur i exd) e-
oS ee


een : m. An eg ging or ét
fem alfo,a eran a ue
a dulling,or blunting of weapons
Agacer. To sh re anger,vex, exasperate ;
€ alfo;to fet tbe ae edge; alle pes du ” dull a
wea heath
Agache. as Agale.
re = cé : £,Growne lively jocand,blite fre


s ‘Aguillarder, ‘Tobe iocond., lively, blithe, frolicke,
merrie.
SET - The Peri called, Lignum Aloes.
Agamber. Ter fir
anni : m.ic De faded, confiumed. growne
uitlefe,depriued of force.
r.To confi 8 get fruitleffe,
ofe all vigour and force.
Fret m. Agaricke; awhite, and {oft muflorome 5 or
exérefèence growing upon the Larch tree; alfo,a root in
Sarmatia,that belpes difgeftson.


Agaric noir, A heaue, ws, and blackifh kind
of Agaricke ; full Ar pa ie threads.”

j art. Looke Hagard.

A <: f, À PiesPiaanetsor Magatapie.


: mée : fas Agacé.


An Énmee: in an edged toole.

:m. da egger,urger prouoker exasperater
Agaflin, A come, or agnele in the feet, or toes ; toe
lowest buds or braunch of a vine.


saflisre. as igs 3 and, as Agacement,


nien : Sones ‘4 Wanton,Jaftiuious, bawdie,
_ Pall of ribaldrie ; (of Agatho,, the name of a certaine
wanton Minfirell.)


Agay: m.The marrow of fowle; (a Faulconerstearmé,)
Agazer. as Agacer.
eancé: m.¢e:f, Fitted, adapted, adinfled, fet


mely placed orderly.
t. Seeke |
nn PE cer.
Agelafte : com. © Sad. fullen 5 tha meur lagheth
cree. 2
gees Ma a sage
tom, ee: f. Fit
a aE 3 ordered ; dr gee
decked , baadfomely ; ed, fin D placedsfeat-
bf ein
epee: m. À fh lig sng
pa. an sd


re aliodia todispofe
ly, place finely, fate welsh, match en
Ve


bir niles nou» Push :
DUR 6 brome L,5% ge A

! ‘upon bis knees. TH TNT
re


bigitized by CO gle


ether.
É:mée sf Knecled; on ie, Le


Agefimos. A wondering voyce,or exclamation.


Ager m. A beape of fiones , earth,or.turues; and


encesa bulvarke, mount, rampier, made for the de-
fence of a fort,or campe; alfo,a fort, or blockeboufe; al-
fo,a caufèy, banke,damme, fea-wall pill of earth vay-
fe gs feruing to keepe out,waters,
CC : £ Glued ; wyned clofe unto, or toge--


Age. To glue; to ioyne as with gluesto clofe unto, or


F; a: To cleaue,or flicke faft unto.
Agglutinatif : mue: f. of} ‘power or propertie,to glue,


ur clofe together.
A


ARS m, A gluing,or clofing unto,or toge-


Kale cathe ners 3abafpe,or clafpe.
“1 A booking, claping buckling, grapling
10 ;a hafping ; ferxing,or taking hold of.
Aggrafler. To grapple,or clafpe with ; to booke unto ; to
rib to bafpe ; to feize, gripe, take baïd, or violent


Ag mg m.ie:f.Greatened,inlarged ; ed,
Se realéd: persis po ae ee
Aggrandir. To grcaten augment nlarge jncreafe make

Great, preferre,aduance.
A grandiffement: m.4 gyeatning,inlarging,jncreales
prefcrment aduancement.


Aggrandiiicursm m. one, increafer augmenter; |


proferver pduane
gravanté: mee f. Aggrauated,exafperated,
Aggravanter. To aggrauate., exasperate, make more
AINOUS,0T GTIEHOUS. -
ravation:f. da aggrawation,or aggrauating ; al-
Jb ei ca SAR” ennne denounced
, an ab
ns ve: mee : £. pp
charged , Lape se orne downe, by ouer-much
meighisal rane dpr;ias,a fhip, faft on the
Aggravé des pieds. Surbated, foundered; foot-bea-
3


ch.
Aggravé de fomime. Fafl afleepe,n a dead fleepe.


nous,or grieuous than
chart opprelfe; to fivay;pt beare downe,by weight.


‘ >
cious,deleétable y elcome wel liked.”


come,or pleafng unto


1 m.ée : foe comgregateds red


Unto. A
| To affomblepgeregae congye gate; gathér
nc RE is ;


avasité ; ali made ou,


wer. To aggrauate, exasperate, make more bai- |
Ass than it was ; ; alfo,to make beauiesfirr-


er. To be grauelledsto flicke fa ie on ground, :

v inthe grauell. . :
able com. Agretable acceptable graceful.gre 5
‘eet. 70 a an with; to be cepa


27 eee...


2 de prof


» EL: LE


A G 1.


AGR Sa


en. 2 MP AT MU Ce CT
Sete


Agen. as Aggri


ripper. To He


3 or, as Griffer.
ine hard. day fure bold on.


an :m.d bearing cloth for a child; alfo,a beere-cloth
a dead corps.
“am Ceremonies ; Looke Agios ; or the Plarall to


eet m, The fleps yvayes,or ovale to be obferned
the readie comming unto a boufe, or place,
ile : com. Nimble agile aëtie ; quicke, peer of
ple members,or parts ; of a readie
Agilement, Nimbh, attiuely, with agilitie ; "quickely,
Promptly fupplely readily
Agilite:£. Agslitic, nimbleneffe abliwitie ; pro promptnefe,
readinelfe, quickneffe, dexteritie; : appleneffe of mem-
bers,or of parts.
Agiographe. A holy writing ; holy wit.
‘e Sacred,poly ; qGrec. bakes
aire beaucoup d’ agios. Tobe verie ferupulous, or
coun 3 or yather,to vfè many ble, peerellings,


sea ot om Mens
Agiotare: D fr bleffed man

nr

great motion , much

hate grt carpe rh ah =


vcafed yeuo


«To PE nr wag, & firs moue often ; to re-
uolue Ct ink rap


os cee

07 ;

Sr
tam m. À term


reo aor party frre called, white Lambe,
ge.
Aran mantable comme vn agncau.«s mecke « a


Ter


* Brebis apprivailes de agneaux eft tet-
re
sg ge ‘oman,
De mal eft venu 0 P


+ ç get AU
peau: Prov. To


gerard
é: =the ne Lambed.


eler : :m, "Thejamen
verra on


se filling of Lambs,


és,
hh re fui font prains : Proy.
‘at ing time we Ewes were
ler: Telambe.. om


2m. 4 deta «Lanier yo


= Thi Gamat ihe shee monde hich
Er


infants called by ome Mid.
a oft cls byte he


aha


:MmA be Reuels; x È
54 thon |


»y Gougle


Agron: : £. The or dinar
nf 5 4 ch


‘die
| nr de


i eon me pe. stone


Agonifer er. oma griene erry 0 ren
of agonie, fraught with anguifh.
Agoranome: m, The Clearke, or Comptroller, fa


dE ey LE
loue m Halfi ¢ we ed (as Ome

at bath a bone,or gobb basin ere mr
ther ante downe;) alfo, cloyed, faded, ouer-glutted,
oner-


Agoure de lin, (The weed) Dodder,
Agoufter. To bane a fimacke,or taf of:
outter, To drop,as raine ata a houfe cant,
Agouttis: m. The canines ofaboufe,
Agrandir. as Aggran
A raffe. as Apte.
it. Looke Agreflir.
ement. 4 leffening ; « making ig


he: f. Aclafpe € ; booke ; brace ; gr

apher. To buckle, grappie belfe, tl

Agrap to feixe, gripe, or take bold of.
er. To ferre.gripeslay bis Dao


i will,


bles tee béese e,acceptablenelfe ;

off gracefulneffe. ra ee Beat

Agreaion: LA tomes ré , alfent, confent ;
alfo, ing.


Agen rs fed,or filled with corne.
Agrenr moulin, To SU the milk bopper (with


erer. Techy out bis part of the fruites
Agger Cee pri y part of the frui


r. To make,or Le thin,leane, finall, flender;
to leffen, to narrow
A Agreflir la voix. To Squealeor faueake ; to fingin a
NG


itch $f in fn
Agtclsé sin, "ae
efleur. as
Ro ower tart, or fharpe, as verges; alfe,


tude ; gr rufticall, vngentle, boorifh.
cole :m Abusbandman, plowman, éowntrey Fay-


, Tillage, bysbandrie.
ier : m, droit d’ | vi as Terrage,
1ere :f, Seeke Terrage
im. Sur, menfirer of land.
as Aigremoine.
ee en of tart cherries.
pen tia 3 hich


The hearbe Mabipskt.
pine, poudre Ag. Meat that pronokes luff ; tea-


cherous ft
s Agrouper. Abate oi Lan se: bimfelfe ci fora
ae,


together
wittie , ingenions eagre,


mer.


tunique a. A sbinne.j


ne rm
per soe Wenn pep groffe:


a


2
-


AGY


=


AID


i ee Sharply, keenely ; finartly ; wittily, pier-
iment. Martial order,warlike difcipline ; alfo,
a ing, or becomming warlike; a tyaimng vp in
are.
puertit. To make warlikeor fit for the wars; to traine
Up in hat difcipline,
triffant. Making warlike, on ah
t im. Az ambuph, or lying im wait for
Aller d’ hr en fes affaires. To go warilyto worke;
_ to proceed leafurely, to take bimleaficre im bis bufi-
neffe.
uetté. Dogged ; watched waited:lien for.
noces. To watch dog }ye i in wait,or ambufh for.
Aguigner.To leuellor ayme at ; to Leer, winke er looke
Aguile. ie éJb-coloured, d,pig-bellied
C. A lon: oloured, great £ ig-be hic
og-ffh, ‘hat bath two Ares pe vo on
ber back ; and thereof may be tearmed,(as fhe us by the
Germanes) a Thorne-bourd.
neuf. An old word compounded of 4 words;
-l'an-neuf. Secke Auguillanneuf.
Aguillat 4 A kind of Dog-fifh ; as ot ee
uille: £. A needle; alfo a long Jinall Sift
Hornebacke,or Horae-fi ; Looke Aigui
A point ; See ¢ Éfguilletre,
Aguilletter. To tye points.
ier: m. Aneedle cafe.
Aguillon. A pricke,a goade,a fiing ; Looke Efguillon..
a ou m. A pricking,or flinging ; an infti-
gation, g,prouokizg inciting, or fetting forward.
uillonner.1 To Evil Sei prouoke gnoue, incenfe,in-
igate incite,egge,vree forward.
:m. 4 pecker ge pronoker forward.
Aguiner. as Aguign
Aguifé: m.ée : Be whetied d,
AEtement tes. À whetting, fharpening or fetting an
ed
Aguifer.. To whet harpen erind,or fet an edge on,
ER à aguifer.as A mpeg
ifoire.pierre ag. A whet, ; 4 grindflone.
Ay on: om A gentle pleafia, or ious wind ; called
among rage on Normand Mariners.


os. Looke Agios.
ayo :m. The lavod fi bing,and paine-expreffing time,
which ps gt es cn porters, crc keépe,
with their voices, unto the blowes they gine , or ee
they make ; bence;extreame labour, great trauell, ex-


ke;

ile of bod) hb ati
pire pre LA loud. painfill ey, in reid bent
Abhané, Fos dar eda ré, vexed,per-
Ahaner. TT me ; to keepetime with lowd fiches


called a


Unto his toy ve D fe my ep os =
En Es

e peece of gro

Ahan + TM AE

Land that yeelds cy pang xt requires much la~
bor,or puts the La to much toile,in the ti 4

t. Toyling extreamly ; ere often ”
the great paine bis worke puts bim

r. as Ahaner.


A De meule: f. Toylefème, painefill, mA lé


nie PA eae


any Da plough |
So :m. A ploughing,er breaking vp of cnt


Go. gle


Ahenner. as Ahan


| Aherdre. To haéhyr plucke sth exch, PR kine


by vie
Aheurté : ine f. Sif oA si finete phat wil for
he bow deere fo euer it cofis him:
Aheurtement: m. rein wilfiulneffe, or felfewill;
Aiea [Je in opinion, fiubbornue (fe peadineffe,
eurter. To be wilfull,obfimate , beadie, felfewilly,
¢,in a bad ee
as Accrocher : ic,
Absoegist056: : f. Abafhed, ap out of countenance ;


iAboweie tt sate afhamed; toabafb ; to dafh out of
countenance,
Aburir. To affright, peu ; appall,aflonifb, amaze, dif:
es rune À meh 5 te make ones baire fland annend,
is wits ah righting pt amazing of


Abert # Abeurté, .
. Out alas (am Inteviettion of feare.)

Aj. Ob; ayme ; (an er exprefing fence of pain,
or of {mart ;) or as

Aidant : m.ante : f. ake in, being Yeni affi-
Sting, releeuing, firberiog FA roar
Dieu aidant. By the belge P of God, if Gad prosper my
proceedings,or {pare me life and health ; ; and God wil,
if God fay amen,
in SA aidant, belper, fecond, affiftant ; Looke
Aides.

Vn Aide à Mafion. 4 Mafons boy, or feruant, that
veaches bim ftone and morter as be workes.

Aide: com, Aide helpe,affi ance Soh pipe fup-
port ; furtherance, a forwarding; (alfo, a fubfidie,
lone, cuflome, taxe ; a preftation due from fubictts to
their Soueraigns,and from tenants to their land-lords;
pes Uy,any money thats leuied by either(cuer and a-

oue their ordinarie come! forthe warres, or other
extraordinarie i
Aides(as in Aide "Alt ind of Subjidies, lones, ta-
xes,tithes, pecuniarie fubuentions ; and particularly,
the ordinarie ry one of twelue pence in the wad
Tour. upon all (orts of fruites, prouifion, mar-
chandife, fold in any part of. Hors if they belong not
to fisch perfons as are primiledged by cuftome, or char-
ter from the King ;) alfo, light-armed fouldiours im-
ployed for feconds , and the forces ‘or troupes which
oa i fiend , or colleague , fends to the ayde of ano-


pe


| Aides chevels. Three pecuniarie, and cafuall aydes
or dueties, yeelded in Normandie, by euery ten in
feevato bis Land-lord (if he be noble) the firft when
bis eldeft fonne is knighted; and this is tearmed, Aide
de chevalerie ; the fecond aed the mariage of
his eldeft dayghter, called Aide de mariage; the
third, to belpe topay bis ranfome, when be is prifoner
in awarre , wherein he ferued the king by reafon of bis
owne tenure; and this they call, Aide de rançon: By
the cufiomes of Amiens, and in fome other places,one-
ly the two fr (and thofé but once during a tenants.
lifc)are yeelded : within Ponthieu(and in other
parts of Fraunce) the ed whenfoener they ac-
crue, ps tree co; once during a lords
rss boa mo mien: is, ten pounds Pari-
beldin metisdeiredene,cnd | for euery whole
ere 3 60.8'.andforatably, when they are to be


couftumiers, The fame; and called fo in the
… anatientcufiomes of Normandie, © Aide


AT D:


Aide de loft, Looke Oft.

_ Aide de reliefe, The fine paid by eucrie tenant unto
bis new mefne Land-lord, prefently after thedeath of
the old one ér towards the rebefe which bee is to pay
vnto the lord Paramount. —“ '

La Cour des Aides. as in Cour.

Droit d'aide. as Aides chevels ; called fo in the
cuflomes of $.Paul, Arthois, Amiens, uefne,
Doulens, & of fome other places: In both the Burgun-
dies the fame proportion is due,by this title unto lords
for their voyages into the Holy land.

Loyaulx aides. as Aides chevels ; tearmed fo with-
nas dominion of Tours, Lodunois, Foiétou, and

a ;


Bon droi& a bon meftier d'aide : Prov. Good right
bath (ia our daycs) great need of fauour.
Aidé : m. ée uf dided pe ed iles, releeucd.fuccou-
«red; fuppoñted'; fanoured ; ed, forwarded,
Aider. To aid; helpe, affif ; releene , fuccour ; fecond ;
Support ; fauvur forward, further.
Bon eft le dueil qui apres aide: Prov. Good is that
Sorrow which at length does good ; bappie the griefe
which in the end makes vs bappie.
Fortuneaide À celuy qui fe veut aider:Pro.Fortune
belpes him that’s willing to belpe bimfèlfe.
Ajencement, & Ajencer. Looke Agencement, & A-
gencer.
Ajetter yn oifeau.To cafl,or whiftle off a bawke ; to let
win om her flie, ee
tier: m. An Eglentine, or fweet-brier tree,
Aiglas: m. £aglets, 2 Eagles. oi
Aigle : f. 4x Eagle.
de mer. An Osprey ; water Eagle, fea Eagle.
Peute aigle noire. A Saker.
Pierre d’aigle. An Eagle-flone ; found in the Eagles
nef} ; applyed to the thigh of a woman that is in labor,
Aik ‘eneth her deliuevie,
igleron : m, 4a Eaglet, or yong Eagle.
Aivlefle :f. An Eagleffe ; a benne Eagle
Aigneau : m, a Lam oF a ar
eaux. Mannacles; fetters hands.
: méc:f. Lambed. QE


PR
A Lente s EEE tle


Ai : m.4 La

clette,& Aigneliere. as Agneliere.
Aignelin. white Budge, white Lambe.
Aigras : m. Verinyce ; (an old word.)


Aigre. 4 kind of Gr > wherewith
re de Car Ph nr | ti
Brion caf be snare eens,
; Apte Dalene. 4 FRE wee alfa Ce a
er)breath. MES iced


mot à
PRE


12


Dreed intheir gorge.
bel-heur. The ame of a certaine fower apple.
ouce: F..À cinileOr, #0


3 07,Orange


ouce:
Pepto si
7


ed Agrimonie or Egri-
becaujeit is good for


,»


.


sbitingly,fowerly;


AS 6


a difeafed liner, |
Ai ine Sauvage. Wild Tanfic Siluer-werd.
ct: m. ette :f. Semewbat tart,fharpe;or eagre.


_ Syrop aigret. Syrop of vinegar.

Aigrette. (1 foie verie like aac. but white ;) a
oe Heron, or dwarfe Heron ; alfo, the bearbe Sov-
re
Aigrettes d Heron. Heron-tops.

ie f, Sharpneffe, tartneffe, eagrenefe , fower-
neffe.

Aigri : m, ie: £. Sharpened ; exafperated, aggrauated,
£rieued, galled ; incenfed, proucked vnto anger.

tir. To fharpen,fower, exasperate ; aggrauate ; to
gene, gall, ftirre vp,or prouoke to anger.
SAigrir.To wax eagre ; fharpe, tart ; angrie.

Aigrifgant. Gauling ,incenfing, exasperating, aggraua-
ting. +

Aigrun. Any thing that increafès, or exaSperates,a dif:
€afe or fore.

Perfil aj Great water Parfley ; Looke Perfil.

Aiguade:f, 4 watering, a taking in of frefh water; al-
_ 6, place of watering, for fhippes.

Aigue: f.water;alfo,a Mare. @Lang.

Ai ine. Sea-water-greene colour.

Aigueux: mute: f. Waterifh ; or, full of water.

Aiguier : m. A finke, or wafhing tone, in a kitchin; or,
as Ayguier.

Aiguiere : f Aa Ewer, or Lauer,

Aiguillat. as Agui

Alguille : f. A needle ; alfo,a Horne-backe, Piper-fifh,

ane-ffb, or Horne-fifh ; alfo, the leffe of the twoleg-
bones ; alfo,a (pire ficeple; or Obeliske.
Aiguilles. Short worms that breed in aHawke, and
bring ber without (peedie belpe unto ber death ; fome
call them, Back-wormes.
Aiguille de berger. as Aiguille de pafteur.
Aiguille de chariot ; &c. The draught tree of a
Chariot, ec.


Aiguille mufquéc. Musked Pinkneedie, musked. |


Storks-bill,or Cranes-bill; Mufiata-
iguille de . Thi all bearbs ave cal-
ted fo ; the firft our Shepheards needle, wild Cheruill,
mocke Cheruill, Ladies combe ; the fecond,Storkes bil,
Cranes bill, Hearons bill, Pinkneedle, (whereof there
secre Geet 5) the laf, Hearbe Robert, (a flinking
arbe,


De fil enaiguille. Exery iat of it, from point to point,
from one end to the other. .
Enfiler fon aiguille. sde Enfiler.

: Fourni de fil & d'aiguille. Readie fir any imploy-
ment ; alfoneuer tofeeke for ananfwet.
On ne cache point aiguilles en fac: Prov. Looke


Sac.
Aiguillé: mée:f. Of a needle ; full of needles ; likea-


needle ; wrought, or pricked, with needles.
Aiguillette : f. À point ; Seeke Efguillette.

prpuilenes d'armes. The bearbe, or graffe,called
- Ladies laces , white Cameleon graffe , painted,or fis-
Ma: graffe. .


illetter. To truffe,or ye,poynts,,alfo,to. whip, or
illic <A needle cafe,


1 th hee Pri 2 “a
re papel nas rt foarpe


Louer ge à


Aiguifer.as Aguifer.


Original from


PHAESORIOSTATE UNIVERSITY


t 2m. A whetting fharpening, orfetting of


aigu |


Ah A
Ajgument. sharpely , piercingly ; fubtilely , wittily,


ate:
:m. Gavlicke, poore-mans Treacle; Secke Aulx.
Ail mafle, The whole-beaded Garlicke..
vo oe Ramfons,Ramfies, Bucke rammes, Beares
arlicke.
il porreau. Great mountaine Garlike.
_ Ail Sauvage.Wild Garlicke, Crow Garlicke, Hearts
Garlicke , Stags Garlicke, Snakes Garlicke.
Ailde Serpent. The fame.
Il amaffé la difime de l'ail, Hee bath beene foundly
cudgeled; (a Poitevin Prouerbe.)
Affe :f Awing; alfo, the brimme , or brevewood of a


at. À

2 ailes d'un foreft, The fides or skirtes of a For-
reft. i
Les ailes dune’. The nofe-thrils.

Les ailes de poiflons.The finnes of fifhes.

‘A tire d’aile with force of wing; asfaft as bee can


e.

Batre de l'aile. To /mell ranke, or ftrong, efpecially
from the arme-holes.

Il nebat plus que d'une aile. Hee is become lame,
bee is halfe undone, be hath but one firing left to
bis Bow ; alfo, hee is wellnigh dead , or a dying.
Chauffer les ailes. Il leur chaufla les ailes aux
pieds. Hee gant wings to their feet ; hee made them
faye as if fire bad beene at their tayles.

Kongner les ailes à. To weaken, pull downe, bring
under , hold fhort,keepe low.

Tirer de deflus l'aile. eres 4 to fleale , purloin,
conuey away a thing that was hid, couered,kept clofe,
or warily looked unto. :

Il en tirera pied,ou aile. See Pied.

Voler de haulte aile. To carrie bimfelfe proudly,lof-
tily,ambitioufly; to beare a bigh fayle, to on bigh
points , to flyea high pitch; to meddle withno meane
matters. .” ; :


Tis veulent voler fans ailes. They would compalfe
eat matters without meanes ould


s 3 alfo, they w
cheld Mafiers before they baue jee bat 4Pren-.


tifhip.
Ailé: m. ée: f. winged ; fwift, fing.
Ailées. bailler les ailées à vn pant Toginea horfé
the bead,that be may run the fafler.
Aller, To gine wings unto, or fet wings upon.
os fir ipico onde
ileton. A little wing ; or the end of a wing.
Ailerons grands. 5 Landies.
- Aileron petit. 4 Nymphe. = :
Ailerons de poifions. he finnes of fifhes.
Ailes: £ wings ; alfo, as Aiflelles ; The arme-boles ; al-
. (0,fin Anotamie) the fides of a womans priuities.
Ailerte: £ 4 little wing, ATEN
Aiileures: £, Two beames that runne along the hatches
of a Shippe, and with the Trauerfinsmake a long-
Square 5 whereat the Ship-boat is let downe inte
t ronde 5 Ship-wrights name them, Comings , or
Car mes = z eM) *
Dillade: f, Garlicke face; alfo, the finell of Garlick;
whence ;
I1fenc l'aillade, He fimells of, or like wnto, Garlicke;


he finells as if be had eaten Garlicke.
illaffe : f. À great wing.


A I M


Ail-porreau : m.Great mountaine Garlicke. -

Aimable.as Amiable ; aifi,loueable.

Aimant: m. A louer,a feruant, a fweet-heart ;alfo, the
Adamant,or Load-ftone. AK

Aimant :m-ante : f. Louing, affetting,delighting,plea- ”
fing bimfelfein. —
imantin : m. ine: f. Adamantine ; like an Adamant;
fivong as the Adamant ; Iron-drawing ; belonging to
the Adamant.

Aimé : m. ée : £, Loued, affetted, beloved, well liked ;
delighted,or pleafed with.
Us ont aimé micux. They bad leauer , they chefé
rather,
Bien a en famaifon qui de fes voifins eft aimné:
Prov. He finds all per within, whois beloned with-
out,doores.
Le dernier venu eft le mieux aimé : Prov. Hee
# beft thought of that comes laf; a new friend
pes the old forgotten ; the laft Suiter wins the
wench,

Aime-bal. Lively, attine,daunce-louing.


Aime-carnage. Crwell,butcherly,bloudie minded, well
pleafed with flaughters.
Aime-esbats . Gamefame » fportfull , ports affect-


ing.

Aime-humains. Gentle,charitable, fociable, men-af-
feltin ind-louing.

Aine-loix. luft, Iuflice-louing , Lawes-affetting...

Aime-lyre. Muficall, Harpe-louing, Lyre-affecting.

Aime-thaiftre. Obféquious, dutifill ; feruiceable.

Aime-mars. Martial, warlike, warre-affecting.

Aime-noife . LA brabler, unquiet fellow , contenti-
ous companion, wrangling marchant, brawling make-
bate ; one that loues to fee, or fet,others together by the
eares.

Aime-noveauté. Incenflant, bumorous, fantafticall,
new things louing, nonelties affecting. ae.
os aix. Peaceable, mild, quiet,peace-louing;reft-

eéting.

Aime-pleurs « Cruel, pitileffe; alfo dolefüll, teares-
louing, much gi affected,unto weeping. i

Aimer. To lowe affett,like we ll of; to delight,or be plea-
ed in.
oe aime de vous. Aad I loue it becaufe it was

| Jours. ’

Aimer &fçavoir n’ontmefine manoir: Prov.Loue
and knowledge line not together.
C’eft trop aïner quand onen meurt : Prov. 7
lowe too much who dye for loue ; We Say loue me lit
and loue me long.
Jamais grafle geline n’aima chapon:Prov. fat
wife neuer loued a faint husband,
Jamais ti n’aima le pigne : Prov. Newer did
Scabd iade lone the currycombe ; nor a corrupt heart |
correction. , ;
Les folles femmes n'aiment que pour pafture:Pro.
PCTS PEN PRES not you; or, lowe you not if
you feed them not. :
Le pareficux aime bien befongne faitte : Prov.
The fluggard loues alife things done to bis bands.
Onques n’aitna bien que pour fi peu hait: Prov.
He neuer loued well,that hated for a trifle,
Onques maftin n’aitna Levrier : Proy.4 churlene-
uer cared for gentleman. ;

“aime {


| ot lemnet, — ip Te Qui 7 aïne fon chien: Prov.Loue me
‘ ¢ eelfe,otherwhere,jnano- (fay we.)
* ther placeyor matter. = ff RTE chatie: Urov-tetbvongpbpje- |
» Align re cat ‘ Se 2 nr = ambre AE $08 co
Se à D Qui
= .


L


7


4
à 27


tha à D


Pe. TOUS lee, ee ee ee ke


pia!


heyy


AIR


Qui bien aimé tardoublie : Prov. Sound loue isnot
Joone forgotten.
Qui mieux aime autruy que foy , au moulin il
meurt defoif : Pro.He that loues another better than
bimfelfe, flarues in a Cookes fhop.
Tel cuide aimer qui mufe : Prov. Some thinke they
loue who do but dote; or,fome,though they thinke they
lone but dreame of loue.

Aime-filence. Still, bufbt, filence-louing , noyfé-ba-
ting,

Aime-tout. Mof kind ymoft louing ynoft charitabte, all-
affecting ; or none (because all) affecting.

Ain. as Haim,

Aincois. But,rather ; before,ere,pr ere.

Aines : f. The grine,or groyne of man or woman.

Ains. as Ancois. ig

Ainfi. So, as , euen fo, eubn as like as, as it were,
Ainfi comme ainfi. Howfoeuer | though it bad
not beene fo; alfo, bee it asit bee will; aswell as
2e may 3 f0 fo.
Ainfi que. The whileft , iuftwhen, at the time that ;
alfo, as much, as well as like as,euen as.
Par ainfi. Therefore, for this or for that, caufe.
On luy dit qu'ainfifuft que &c. One told bim, that
the figne or token thereof was, that, orc ; or that if it
fell out,that,erc.


Ainfin, as Ainfi. €Parifien.

Ainfné. Looke Aifné.

Ajoindre. To ioyne, adde, at applie unto, |

Ajoint: m.intef, Adi > added , put , applyed
unto, ;


Adjolié : m.ée: £. Pranked, trickt up, fet forth, made


Ajolier. To pranke,tricke up, fet out make fine.
Ajoliver. To be merie, buxome, iolly, iocond ; to make
much of bimfelfe ; alfo, to pranke, or tricke up bim-
he to put on bis bolyday face,to fet the better Leg be-
€.


Ajoumerre be ncere day,to grow towards day; (vicil
mot.
n we


Ajous: m. Furze,Gorfe. 2)
Air: m. The air i
fide Te LA


grace, good opinion of men ; alfo ebt, sfince,
> > L

i ba man 5 afi ond eaten een
or becomming of w d'un
air: ) tn borfime

manage raifed aboue ground,

L'air de l'oratoire; fair de uos lettres. The neat-
nelfe, aptneffe,delicacie, decorum, pleafantneffe there-


AIS


(hence) alfo the floore of aboufe, or barne ; alfo, the
whole Superfcies, or fuperficiall ‘compalfe,of Bp bp
e; alfo, abed,plat, or quarter,in a garden ; alfo,
ra pre ss the balfe-pace, or landing place of a
e-paceflare.  .
: ai des poils. The griftlie brimme,or edge of the eye-
owes.

Aire de vent..4x oppofition of winds as of the South
to the North, &e ; a gufh of contrariewinds, at fea.
Couppé à tire & à aire. Cut clofé by the ground, or
cleane away ; and (in the {ale of underwwoods) cut clofe

Peon: eckes or wholly away from it.

€: m.ee : f. Angrie,chollericke,in a chafe,

rrr ie nd Pla é vais

Aürée :f. A floore-full or bed-full of.

Airelles : £ whurile ir a ON

Airer. To ayrie ; to make a nefl,or ayrie.

Airer, To chafe,or be angrie.

Airefte. as Arefte,

Airin :m.ine : f. Ayrie; full of ayre; abounding with
ayre


Aleta Herne,or Heron : Savoyard.

Airure : £ The “es din Lu

Ais : m. A planke,or boord.
Compter les aix & foliucaux. To trifle out the time,
or loofé it altogether. : |

Aifance:f. Eafe, facilitie, readineffe , eafinefe ; con-
pire opportunitie, commoditie ; alfo, an eafé , or
ea ng.

+ ances, (In the Plurall number) A Prinieor boufe
of office.

Aifceau: m. A Chip-axe , 01 one-handed plane-axe,
wherewith Carpenters hew their timber finooth . °
ifcellaire. as Axillaire, <

Aifcette :f. 4 little planing axe.

Aife:m. Eafe,leafure ; facifitie; commoditie ; delight,
pleafüre, full content.

L'on endure tout fors que trop d'aife : Prov. Wee
Say all things may be fuffered fauing wealth.
ui à aife tend, aile luy faut: Prov, Hee that fiu-


dies bis contentment os henerwants it.
_Aifé seater’ eafie, 3 gentle, facile ; free;
= t ; pleafant; delight fill; alfo, rich; whence;
en fon mefnage. Of good eftate , well lined,


£ agen 3 well furnifbed with all boufhold proui-
Chofe aife croyable: Prov. Ordinarie things ave


eafily belecued. ;
ife : com. Cheerefüull, glad; contented , in ine fe of
delight with gen ea te at much cafe; whence;
Ils eftoyent à table aifes comme Peres. (C4 phrafe,
whofe Author hy Peres meant Abbey-lubbers.)


Ils repaiffent aifes comme à nopges. They feed as


demy air. A certaine curuet, or manage yoherin the freely(or cheerefilly) as if they were at a wedding.
halfe of a horfè is in the aire,the other on the ground. cun n’eft pas aife qui danfe: Prov. Euerie one
I donna air fes entreprifes, He publifhed, venea- is not merie that dances (viz. that feemes merie)
” wealed , divulged them, gave a paffage or vent unto In’eft pas aife qui eft courroucé: Prov, Anger,and
them, 5 | bearts-cafe,areviter enemies, “>
Ait im.Anger(aword of wo fillables.) In’eft vie que d’eftre bien aife: Prov. Hee onely
Airaigne :f. À Spider or Spinner ;alfü, a net of wire fet lines that lines contented ; or, a lif ’s no life, withont
before, and onthe out-fide of, the glaffe windowes of | _ flore of contentments, gaan À
Seis siancn Allene + Eafly, Uighly, expediently, with fac
Airaii. Braffe ; Looke Arain. | i The fume.
ire : m. 7 ayrie or nef Se Aifements. 4 Aifances,
De bon aire. Gentle ymld,courteous debonairewith- | Aifer. To be lazie,eafefill, fenfuall,to take eafe,to loue,
ay Be gp ice. : or line at, eafe.
Aire: f. À flat, euea, or plot of ground; | Ai ile, aid
| | wae Aifler,
oe =, {
\
Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


|


—=— sn =e.


formoft,or oa date. nes

Neage : m.Elderfhip.

Droitt d’aifneage. # Droiétd'aifnefle, ”
Aifelle: : . Elder{hup,eldefifhip,the being eldeft,or firf


Droit d'aifneffe. The right, and prerogatiue of the
eldest child ; the portion duc, by prime birth , vato
him; which: is, the principal houfé, and garden, with
the inclofure thereof; and if there be no garden, the
Arpentof ground lying next unto the boufe, ov, as
faire as & Ca sen can fiye from it ; In the reff be bath
but an equall {have with the younger: This is bis
due inmany parts , and places of Fiaunce ; in fome
others they deale otberwife, and feuerally, according
to their feucrall cuflomes.

Aiflade:£ Aa inftrument wherewith Gardeners open,
or Toate upythe ground.

Aiffeau. as Aifleul ; 4//,the verie middle,or centre of
Ailes from the top to the bottome thereof.

clicte, The veine which paffeth along the arme-


Aifféiaire. as Aiffeliere.
Aiffelle : £ An arme bole alfo,alittle planke,boord,or
dureté of wood.
Aifleul : m. Araxletree ; alfd,one of the poleswhercon
me fab world is turned,
The as Ait
AU cu: m. An axletree rc. as Aiffeul.
Aiffil: m.A fingle,or fhingle of wood, fuch as houfés are,
in fome places,couered withall,
iftres. as Agiers,
Nai, f. A yeelding, or fbewing, of a reafon, or


Lattes Looke Ad

Ajufier. To nee hg

AN bandique. pierre ique. À kind of black
tone mingled with purple.

Alachi: mic: f Slackened ; bung flagging ; fallen
fonc Ds tetes 6 out of à it right place; decayed,
Ay faded, failed. dé eble, or loofe,

1g downeward ; to


hit. To flacen; to bang fla
7 or ‘fa sar ig! weakenefle, out of it place ; to
quaile, fade , fayle, decay in firength; growe loofé,


on wea

chiflement: m.4 fackening sa a lof nels flack-
neffe ; a quailing,a gr ble; a flagging,
or fallin Flirt rie e; Lada


ding,or fayling in vigor, pr
iol I, ‘mevie inf,
Le able, life.


re: com. Cheere
+ ome, iocond ; alfo,ni
comme vn pa


eae gpl peo


Aimer as acricket


= "4
Alai y) A. Aro Aerts effe, mirth,
net, iocondnele, or toyfulneffe of heart ; , hafinefe


nimbleneffe

Alaigreté. as Alaigrefle ; «fo, nimbleneffe , wh
rcadineffe, prompineffe.

Alaine. as Haleine ; PRES ;

+ De fon alaine. Of bis faétion,or fide ; ua a
_owne humour, or applies bimfelfe toit; abird of
Gone feather.

Aliner la langue. To bold out the bg at do


—- +s


zed by Go. gle


A LB be
beaft,that in extremitie of beat breathes
Ale sde Allaire, am Bae,
Alaitté. as Allai@é.


Alambic. as Alembic; 4 Limbec Uitarie.

Alambiqué. Extraéted , es donne out ; alfey
worne yvafied,confumed.
ambiquer. To extvaét,diftill,drav ont,

al Alambi parer away.
ampers. Peach.

Alan. Seeke Allan.

Alandäal. trocifque al. A Trotiske made of Coloquin-


tida,
_ Alangouri : m.ie: Sen fre gfrcbles >WCa-


rie ; laxie, JgJlshther alfo,languifhed, fainted in-
bled ; wearted.


’ ourir. To languifh, faint, grow pip or wea-
vie,farle in gh dec) mUigour ; alfo,to grow la-
zie, flugeifh,lither,idle.

Alantir. as Allentir.

Alarme : m.47 Alarum,

Alaterne :m. Fraitle[fe,or barren Priuet.

core. À certaine fifh in the Indian fea, whicl i us
wverie good meat.

Albanois.An Albanian, an inhabitant of Albania; al,
a light horfeman wearing a bigh-crovwned bat; or(more
particularly)the Albanian light bor[e,smployed by Popes
in their ordinarte garrifons.

Albanois :m.oife : f. Albanian ; of Albania ; belong-
ing,or like, vato an Albanian ; and hence;

Chapeau fait à l Albanoife. 47 bat with a crowne
at 4 fugarlofe ; anbigh-crowned bat,

Albaflan : m, 4 kind ob and bard flone , whereof
lime may be made.

Albaftre, Aileblafter.

Mbattrin, “white as Alleblafier ; like Alleblafter ; of Al-

blafter.

Albazzan. as Albaflan,

Albe. as Able.

ereau : m. A veriebard white free-
les th Albaffan,
The ainorous apple, apple of loue, golden


Albergation. À kind of alienation à in fee farme, and for
a fine,or income.
Alberge. A kind of finall Peach.
Al m. A kind of [mall Peach tree,
Ber. To alien in fee farme ; (as before in Alber-


_gation,
Alerte. Ablette, @Rab.


renner. To hunt the yong wild Ducke,or the ‘dine
“when fhe mootes ; to go a ducking.

t: m, 4 young wild Ducke ; alfo, (a mooter, or
moulter ;) the old one when {hee mootes , or bath
vst ber feathers salfo , a Pochard ; or,as Sarcelle.

ape An Shih fine cts or vicious white.

a! bees a whith an

m.eufe: Ebi bo rfembing the


are nee Looke Sel. v


> that re-


Alcange. The bearbe Alcakengie, or Winter Cherrie.


Alcharadte. A Scorpion. €Rab.
> 4 >
re or Alchegtange. lkakengie, red


Bite Pome 0 Crimzoms are dyedsor, |


nille: pure Ladies mantle, great Sa:
FE pre, ne


: >
Original-from


THE OHHO:STATE-UNIVERSITY


se HT


Det PONS SONT


{


— A  — PT VIT ENT TT" Ce
‘ 4


= *


i nf ae


jane


*
.
a
|


ALE


buglalfe the leffe wild buglafr.
Peace pr es, great deuourer.
Alcoran: m.Mahomets Alcoran ; (The word fignifies a
true Law ; and is therefore moft unfit for that mosh


ACTES
ret :m. as Halecret.
Ale


NRA
4 Of Alleblafter ;wbite as , like or belonging
er.
4 Salamander.

Ale à omantic.Diuination by barley meale mixed with
wheat. +

Alcétoire. The cocke flone; a Chriftall coloured flone(as
big as a beane) found in the gyxerne, or maw of fome
Cockes.

Aleétorophoneme. The fong,or crowing of Cocke.

Aleétryoïnantie:f. Diuination by a Cocke ; or by the
Cocke flone. 2

Abe To lighten,or make light,

ir vn cheval à lamain. To bring, or canfe a

horse to be light borac,

Aleine. as Haleine.

Aleiner. Seeke Halener. :

Aleman: m, 42 Almaine,German, High-Dutchman;
alfo,the Almaine or German language.
Peigne d'Aleman. The hand ; or ye fingers and a
t


humbe .
Querelled’ Aleman. A quarell,or brable entred in-
to vpon a fleight,or drunken,occafion.
Theriaque des Alemans. The suyce of Ginepav ber-
vies extratted according to art; called fo both because
it is good againft poifon,e> becaufe the Germans bane
ufed to take it much.
Iln’en entend que le haut Aleman. Tis Greek v#-
to him ; he vnderflands no part of it ; bee isneuer &
whit the wifer by it.

Alembic : m.4 Limbeck, or Stillitorie.

Alembiqué : m.ée : f.Diflilled, or extratted, by Lim-
becke @rc ; Seeke Alambiqué.

iquer. To extraét,or diflill by Limbecke ; ov as


Alam ; ; }
Aleme as Alumelle.
Aenea ie Nel atlas


Kars,towne Creffes. =" agers pe:
Alenti: m.ie : tend oofened ; 3 ab


d, appeafèd ; growne ; mot ie ,07 Vi-
0 ES bar A


Alentir. To flacken, loofen fiften ; be allayed, or ap-
peafèd ; wax traétabll { grow remif[e ; or not fo ba-
ed ca 1 violent as it was; alfo,to be weakened,


or infeebled. i re.
Alentiffement: m. À flackenin pe fofte-
ning ; allaying appeafing ; awea ig enfeebling.
Aleron.A little wing;alf,a twig, fprigor [mal branch.
Alefhe :£ An awle ; or (Shoomakers ) bodkin ; alfo a
fpotted and long fnowted Ray, or ‘thornebacke, tear-
med by fome,the fharpe-fnowted Ray,
Alefhes. cockle,Corne-rofe, field Nigella, wild Nigella.
Aleu : m.Libertie, freedome, franchift,immumitie; al-
ces à holds of no Las ag for mr “i
mace jor fra is due to any ; (it commonly t
addition fans and franc-aleu is al/o,a fee Jub-
ser aos “s No ore


Digitizedeby Go. gle


cation bis being elfwhere when the fait


ALI
Aleve.The wild Pine tree ; fo called in Dauphinois.
as leu.


Alexandre. Alexander; a proper name ;alfo,the bearb

great Par , Alexanders,o7 Alifaunders.
Pied d'Alexandre. The hearbe Bartrane, Bertrain,
Pellitorie of Spaine.
andrin. À verfe of “¥ 13 fillables.
in : m.ine: f Of Alexandria, or belonging to
Alexander. : ‘
Perfil Alexandrin.The hearbe Alexanders,

Alexitere. À preféruation againft poyfin.

Alezan.A forrell bor{e ; or the forrel colour of borfes.
Alezan touftade. À darke reddifh colour, as of met-
tall burnt inthe i 34 EN forrell,

ame, Mixtion of gold. uickfiluer.
arade: f. An ms Lo serie HP braua-
e of borfemen, feamen, or other fouldiours againft
their enemies; any fwaggering and fudden fori, ra-
uage, tumult;vprore.

Algarie : f. 4 kind of infirument wherewith Chirurgi-
ans prouoke urine ; fome téarme ita Catheter,

Alge:f.Sea-weed, fea-grafft,Reets; a kind of wrinckled,
and broad leaued weed,that grows on rocks inthe fea,

ebre : £.The art of Equation ; or of figuratiue num-
bers san Art confifting both of Arithmetick and Geo- |
metrie ; alfo,a breach, fratture, dimifion, folution of
continuitie efbecially in boncs.

Aleifié. The Lote,or Nettle tree.

Algorifine : m.The Art, or ufe of Cyphers, or of num-

ving by C ers; Avithmetick,or a curious kind therof.
Fol d’ Algorifine. A foole by figure,an Affe in grain.
ee :m, À Lieutenant.
atrat (In garer; À oe “re À a Dra-
on,or Serpent whofe biting wounds but impoifons not.

Abe me Alice. :

Aliage .m.7he jtiffening,allaying,or imbacing of gold,
or filuer by mingling them with other mettals.

à « oh bearbe, called lack of the bedge; Looke Al-

1aire.

Alibi. The being in another place then was obietted,

fon alibica pripner to alledge for bis iuftifi- |


was committed.
Crafty {hifts,cunning euafions,or appeals,
fed for the auoiding of an accufation, or delaying of
an ation.
Alibis forains. (Rab. All the corners.
Aliboron.A Polypragmon,medler; bufie-bodie; one that
hath bis band in euery difh, an oare in at boat; alfo,
one that pretends skill in all things,and indeed knowes


nothing.
Alicacubut. The hearbe Alkakengie,or winter cherie.
Alican. Boflu alican. Looke Boflu.
Aliété. In bed,layed a bed ; bedved.
Aliétement. À lying ficke in bed ; a lying bedred.
sAliGter. A ficke man to get bimfelfe to bed ; 07 to lye
af in bed ; or to ye bedred.

idade d'un Aftrolabe. ThAlhidada of an en

Labe ; the rule which turneth on the backe thereof.

Alié smée 2f, Allayed,or fiffened, as goldor filets by


other . 7 >

Alienation: f. Az alienation 34 felling, putting or ma-
“hae away of;alfo,an efit sturning,or withdraro~
yu mm,  . , Cae £

Aliené : m.ée : f, Aliened ; alienated, altered ; fold, 6
_ made away ; eftranged,o awne from,

|” Aliené de fon entendement. Diftranght, franticke,


Gck-braind out of bis little wits.
serene goal
2 away;


22


Original from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


7 CT


SCD LE


A L


si Aas T+, à oD à ét = a"
Le:


ALL


away; alfo,to eftrange,turne diay 04 withdraw from.
Fr . D A Trawmellnetor doubled:
er. To


to ftiffen, or imbafe gold, ec, by ming-
ling i it allt ie, Looke ise
oné : m. ée: nes BR à Bar in aiuft,
= rene file,or line; drawne, or [quared out by line,
euell.
Homme bien aligné. well featured well fhapen,well
Afratertioned ac frag fraig bt as a line.
papers m, Acard, a draught, or thing drawne
D B lime and leuell; alfo,a peece o agrandi in a fireet, or
the fide of a high way, let + ordunto bis tenant,
A be inclofed,or built on) by line and meafure, to the
end that the publique may not be incroached on ; alfo,
a nie fraight as aline ; afetting in a iuft line; a
drawing, or fqnaring out byline , and lenell ; alfo, the
ligning of a bitch, ec.
sp sare To make firaight as à line ; place in diveël
file, (et in a inft line ; draw or fquate out by line and le-
uch; alfo, to ligne, as a dog,or the dog mol abitch;
also; “el couple one plant unto another,by graf-


Ali iment: m. Food, fis a sk pp
Alime enté. Fed, nourifhed, fiftained, fofiered, dietted,
cherifhed.


iene To feed nourifh, diet, fuflaine, fofter, che-


FA ae :m.eufe : f. Much feeding, very nouri{h-

ing, full of nourifhment,

Alimonner. To put into, or fafien unto, the thill of a
cart, et,

Apte : m. He that,in old time, annoynted wrafilers be-

af they exercifed.
iqualement. ay dot bn afort,fofo.

Alis: m.ife : £.Solide,compatted bard wrought,clofe lay-
ed gd éd maxis ts Aa ta


Ale: :f, The pes and anata vier berrie cs
Lote tree; alfo as Alix 3

Alifiet: m The Lote,or Nettle tree.
Alifier gris: The gray Lote.
Alifier rouge. The red Lote ; both (and all she kindes
thereof) nec in England.

Aliter.as Ali

. Any Gide, well compaëled, or clof wrought


Alkealt A medicinable falt made of the aes of diners |.


Sorts ee bearbes, but mojt especially of Glaffewort.
Alain: The moft eminent part of the buttockes.
Allterenge. The bearbe Night{hade,or A


Alkermes. ne cm and in-
t
Poe ice graine chermes;(a fo-
Alam mcect ed eit


Aa Renn To pre ; to giue dip pate
Allaire. little walk,or alley,in a wood; or,a tree on
Allanbr ne (ns
re. Copper. (In Spani
Allan: :m. À 14nd ind of bi icke beaded, and {hort
- fnowted dog ; the br Dh rf same firft out of Al-
_ bania, (old ‘pirus.)
bes, boucherie. Is like our Maftine, and ferues
5, 10 bring in fierce oxen, and seh their


» Go. gle


Allan gentil, 1s like a Grayhound in all tiet,
and nero thicke and for head pete : ve
vautre.A great, ougly curre of that kind(ba-
a big head, banging lips and flowching gine
to bait the Beare,and wild Boare.
Alanguir To make langui{h, pine,or wall away.
m: A goer, a gadder ; alfo, a fubtile , craftie,
gen 307, a coufening , deceitfiull ; cheating, fellow.
ant: m.ante :f. Goingwalking, wending, pacing,
ra > tranelling, iourneying ; proceeding, depar-


mg
Alfañtoïe. Membrane al, Looke Membrane.
nine: m, An alarum.
: m.éc: f, Roféd, or affrighted, by an AL


Alemner: To sii drs 3 alfo, to roufe, pre-


r Are air Fa Oo


Allayé:m, rie 7 PTS fiiffened , or imbafed , as
gaa or fur (coyne) by the mixture of other mettals.
é au blanc, ou fur le blanc, Gold allayed

ae filser.


ayé au rougesou fia le rouge, Gold allayed


pi copper.


Allsyer. To allay, or mix gold, or filuer with bafer met


Alle: :f. (The old drinke of England) Ale. Secke Alles,
Allé: ée: f. Gone, walked , went, iourneyed , de-
parte
C’eft bien allé. Matters are in good tearmes ; the
bufineffe goes well forward, goes well on.
ge:m. as Aliage.
Alleboteur : m. A grape gleaner,
i “To vake;gatber;or gleane after ; Looke Hal-
i boter.
Allebrent.zs Albrent.


chant. Bayting,alluring,tempting, inueagling, inti-


Allecher. Looke Allicher.
Alleéter.To rs a queafie flomacke doth.
Allée: f A going, walking, wending, pacing s a gate,
walke, iourneymarch, pace; alfo,an alley, gallerie:
walke, walking place,path, or paffage.
I eut l'allée pour le verur. Hee gor bis tranell for his
ss sam ht enen as well bane flayed.
tion: £ An allegation, alleadgement, allead-


ages :m, An eafe, lightning , disburdenment, eafé-
ment, helpe towards the bearing of a burthen; a re-
frefhment ; affvagement ; me KA folace ; any tig
that . or leffensa charge, care, grief, or
chiefe.

pan à £. A lyter (boat)

: M: oe 4 re lightened eafed; helped;

3; ht rer affivaged; mitigated ae


ed,extennated,


Alsgtee-onl
einent : m, 4 A bgitaing; ;disburdening, éafing; a
“” or helping to beare, a sing tbat lyes beanie


; arefrefhim sy en allaying ;fo-


Alleger ey lighten , my 5 ‘tafe , or difebarge,
i ite, to lift se ts
refrfh e, s folace ;

ai ef rte oy


em nl
Her Tram Te dia. ‘hile.


ne Se


Allegué: m.ée:f Alleadged ; produced, uttered,


ae ‘forth.

eguer, To alleadge ; we €, or produce reafons, ar-

alt euidence , or F4 ÿ for the proofe of.
se vata pan a puffe ; a breathing , or


yon: :m, A little fpread Eagle, or other bird, in
No yf feet and legs.


Loo eman.


Aller. To goe,walke,wend march pace, tread ; proceed,
* - dowrney,trauell depart.
Aller par ambages,ou en ambagoye. To ufé many
civcumflances ,to goe about the bifb.
er en appoinétant.«s Aller en pointe,
er à S.Bezet. To ref} in no place ; continually to
* trot, gad, wander vp and downe.
au change. Looke Change.
Aller de cholere contre quelqu'un. To raile upon,
inueigh againft.
er audeuantde.To preuent ; mect ; prefent bim-
felfe before.
er au deuant par derriere. To take a wrong,to go


ontrarie, courfe,
sie À l'encontre. Torefift,withfland repugne;alfd,
to meet.

Aller à l'encour du pot. To vf idle circumfances,
necdleffe ceremonies ; we Saye ge about the bufh.
Aller efchais, —_ 10 fir
Aller par efcuelles, tout y va par efcuelles, There
is sbearileleiblee s ;or,the houfe 15 throwne out at the
windowes.

Aller d'une fefle. Iin’y va que d'unc fefle. Hee
workes by balues ; be goes but flackly, or vmwillingly,
to worke.

Aller de guet à fes affaires.To go flowly,or fleepily a-
bout his bufineffe.

aos long. To haue a {quirt, to fquatter out be-


Along als tt las incortionenas ye perch


an re Ce
er . To goe t
equall , elke Si. ee -4


Aller & par vie fae if
ous, ifèreet we he e es
met cae inlay pean


fits ; if becomes, him. f
. To pace it, or goe a foot-pate.
“ AE in ment Tetread gingerly te mince it like
am
Aller de l'un sind ae l'autre, To affedi,or: mince it,
_ Aller ee pao chat maigre. To be fwift,
"or light,affoot ;alfo,to tread fo; poor ginger).
Aller en poinéte. To grow le, leffe ; to leffen
7 rine top,as a (pire, Pyramides ce. a on
| eee. quant quelqu'un, To bri
ocheeke gris


AL L


fo,to be of a round forme.
Aller au faffran. To fall ed 3 10 grow bankrupt
ineflate, to go downe the weather,

er de pl grande finglée. A Shippe to make
the * tt way , or to beare the more fayles , for


tousjours fon train. To keep alwayes one place;

to bold on the old courfé full. pa 9 "si

er à travers champs. To wander ; to oe roaming
out of the high, out of the road, out of the right,
way,
Aller ala veuë, To goe lodge a 2 or barbour a
Stagge ; (mornings worke for woodmen.)
Au fort;ou,au pis aller.4¢ worft,if the worft fall out,
and the worft come to the wort,
Au long aller. Seeke Aller long.
Au mieulx aller. Howfèeuer wbatfoeuer fall out ;or,
at the befi,although the bef Aa


Au par aller. At the len
S'enaller. To depart, fut, dot gous alfo,es


be aller au haut & au long. To vuane bis Coun-


Sen aller ila mouftarde. Tout le monde s’en va

à la mouftarde. Be oo vulgar , divulged all

the world ouer ; (of a oke) waft paper is made of it,

pena ave flopped with it, (6 much the world e.
emes il.

S'en alleede paire. Ie m'en uay de paire, Iwill be


againe.
S'en aller à àvn. Toagree, confent, accord; to come
all toone.
ns s'en peutbien aller. You may be gone, you may
ore you will; you may goe she your eares ;
rm matter is diSpatched our bufinef]e at an end,here is
: 20 more to be done.
Im’y va de. It touches, or concernes ; it depends vp-


on

*’Aller & parler peut on,boire & manger non: Pro.
One may vifit afriend fometimes, but must aot if bee
be bee welcome (another time) flay long with


‘& venir font le chemin peler: Pro. Much tra-

uelling makes bad wayes.
C'eft grand peine d’aller à cheval, & vne mort d’

à pied : Prov, Tis a great trouble to ride, and a
de to foot it. (Some laxie fellow, belike, inuented

this prouerbe.)

Va ou tu peux, meurs ou tu dois : Pro. Trawelwhi-
ther thou canft,but dye where thou o eff; fee as ma-
ny countries as thou wilt, fo thou dye in thine owne.
Ainfi ya qui mieux ne peut : Prov. He | 48 goes
that cannot richly goe; bee barely lines that cannot
brauely line ; euen{o goes he that cannot better goe.
Il neva pas du tout à honte Saale demie voyere-
tourne : Prov. He newer goes through for fhame, that
turned backe when be was balfeway.


iva il lefche,qui r feiche: Prov. He that

be ae yn gh whereas be that dyes fil
va n'y chet: Prov. te ineures no daunger

È ua not here ti among blows,your


pee tend Prov.He that goes


“They bad a reputation ; ors "a


Original frem
TAE-OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


LA
+ 2


PA LL


fed currantly.

:m. Free hold, free tenure ; as Aleu; alfa, inhe-
oe that comes freely, and bp diftent, not by pur-
pen ; and which one leaues, or may leaue, vato bis

. heire

Alleuf. as Aleu; @Poiéteuin.

Alleure: f. as Allure. -

Alleut. 4 fice hold,or free tenure ; or,as Alleud.

Alleutier. 4 free or, free tenant.

Alleyer. 4 Marchant to declare (upon bis oath) unto a
Toll-gatherer,through whofe libertie he paffes,what,c -
pos Rat aud chaffer be caries along with bim.


Alliage: : m. 45 Aliage.

Alliaire. Sauce loot Jacke of the hedge; (an hearbe.)
Alliance: f. Alliance; confederation, fé , combi-
nation; agreement, “confent ; a league of friendfhip.

Alliances. Gimmoules,or Gimmoule-rings.
Alliance Theutonique. The Companie, or Cerporati-
on of Marchants of the Hanfe.

iché: m. ée:f. Alured, inueagled,inticed,tempted,
es tolled, or brought on by flattering,and faire


db: m. An allurement,iaueaglement, intice-
ment, bait ; a temptation, or flatterie; or, an allu-
ringyinticing,inueagling temptutg, drawing on by flat
tering meanes.

Allicher. To allure,inueagle,intice,tempt, toll draw on,

bring unto,by flatterie,or faire meanes.

Allichoir. as Allichement; (in the firft fence.)

Allidade.as Ali

Allie: m. 42 allie, kinfinan ; confederate; a companion,
saris, affociate ; “alfe, an acceffarie, or fellow in an of-


fence.
Allié: m. ée :f. Allied; D ne with; ioyned, F4
| gard in fellowfbip,and friendfhip 0,
ae man in as another ; alfo, allayed,or
ened ;as %
er.To allie,royne,knit couple in fellow{hip,and friend-
Tr: 10 affociate, accord confederate together; alfo,as
Alier; 3 to ftiffen, or mingle gold, or filuer with other
mettals,
ée:f. A Vine tyed to, or coupled with. an Elme
tree, braunch, or flake.
Allignement. as a See
Alligner.as,Aligner
Allitti: m. ie:f. Bedveds or,layd ficke in bed.
Allochons d'un rouët. The teeth, or toothing, of a
ese a clocke, rc.


ec tenure; 07,as Alleud.
Free lands, for which no
mor es are due; of whofe foyle there is
is re sonar Vg (yet are
mae € no

me Drame amegusfre fon,


dri
Alloig ere eof ine tr


| nine zs Alongement.
Bionfement: &,Allonger ; Pr À


H Allotement: m. À
|, laying out,vnto éuery one


“ait


lr nals en ele Sata Liewmiaees A


ed By Go. gle


paring diidings san allotting, or.


Kk nee der

aS “het .
_ Aloësdey me
Bold" 'aloës. The


Allotr. To diide;or part; tlt Lyon ue
part. |


_ La “hé
A L M

Allouér. To allow,aduow,approue,like well of.

Allouette. Secke,Alouétte.

Allouvi: m. ie: f. As bungrie as awolfe ; alfo, fle(bed,


las a Wo
Alloyandier. qRab- 4 rofer of art rbberof bef


AE 0 Aloyau.
ye: m. e: : À Seeke Allaye.
Alluiné: m. éc : f, Lighted, kindled, fet on fire, or ona


umelle. Seeke Alumelle.

Allumement: m. 4 lighting, kindling,inflaming,afet-
ting ona flame.

Allumer. To lighten, kindle, fet on a fire,or on a flame.
Vieilles amours, & vieux tifons s’allument en
toutes faifons: Prov.O/d loue and brands are fred
in all feafons.

Allume-{ang. Bloud-inflaming.

Allumetier :m. 4 maker,or feller,of matches for tin- :
der-boxes.

Allumettes : f. Matches for tinder-boxes.

Allumeur : m. 4 kindler,inflamer,or fetter on fire.

Allure : f. Agate, pace,traine,treading,or g
D’une allure. At once; at one, or a th
motion ; alfo, with one continued gate, mation; ; breath,
or length.

Allufon:f. An allufion,or likening ; an slt or ap- |

ying of one thing vato another.

Me LA f. A fisll increafe, rifing, or fivelling of wa-
ters,which in tune,and by degrees, growes to à deluge, !
or inundation.

Alluz. Aout ; or,a caroufe filly drunke vp.

Almadie : fas Almande ; A hind of boat.

Almanach: m. 4a Almanacke,or Prognoftication,

etits Almanacs. The flowers called Pinks.

Ain ande: f. An Amande; Alfo,a little narrow,and long
boat,made of the barke of a tree ; and in vfe among the
= ages of Africke,and India.

dine: f. A certaine flone like a Rubie ; or a Rubie
+ fi the courfeft ; ( for it 15 much browner in the eye, and


in badge te be)
Alme: :com. Faire, beautifull, cleere ; calme ; gracious,
ropitious ; nourifhing.
me-beau. Goody,gracious ; moft cleere, moft beauti-


ely-propitious.
Antone as Almucantarath. b.


Almoire. 4a ambrie ; cup-boord ; box . Looke Ax-
moire.
Alinucantaraths. Are,in an Aftrolabe,certaine circles ,


denoting the heights that be aboue our Hemifpbere. .

sec An allocation, placing ; fitting with, Letting.
ina place. me

Aes ;& Alod; F3 Aleits Lang. 3

ere polJe(fion, free eats :

Alo fee et

‘Aloé: m: ere

Aloë:f. A Larke.

Aloés: m. The bearbe Aloes, fea boufèlecke, [ea de.
Gé" bitter iuice eur À congealed,and ufed im Pur-


Aloés Cicotrin. The liuer-coloured,
ee of Alves; no


a er nd pein mond


. Ofiginal-from—3
THE = HO STATE UN ERSIT:
dE i pe à


EL


ALO


| re as er

onge : m. #s Alo: wero

snes: Nadie: Lune

Ra m. ée:£. Lrngthened, extended wire-drawn,
tae A drinen off.
: m. as Alongement.

‘Alstiemene: m. A lengthning drawing out in length,
extenfion, prolonging,delaying ,driuing off.

Alonger. To leagthen,dr aw out in lengthextend.wire-
draw,prolong proroge,deferre,delay, driue off.
Alonger la courroye. To lengthen out a matter, to
prolong a fuit.

Alongerles eftriers. Looke Eftrier.

Alonger les ss. To p rd accompts; as, to fet
downe an £ (which Led a franc) imflead of an {,
which flands but for a fol.

ongiffement. as Alongement.

Alopécie. The foxes enill; a difeafe caufing the baïre of
the head,or beard to fall of:

Alors. adverb. Then ; at that time.

Alofe: f. 4 shad (ffh.)

Alofer. To colour or age a ner

Aloud. franc al. as ongle

Alouér. as Allouér ; Ai to pepe tobire; alfo, to ap-

point, or fe downea proportion for expence, or for any

other imployment.

Alouette. 4 Larke.

Alouette dela gorge. The flap that couers the top of

the wind-pipe

Alouette huppée. as Cocheuis.

Alouette de mer. The little fea foule called a Purre.

Alouette de pré. The chit,or Fag al

Petite alouétte. as Alouette de


larks beele,larks gy ee
Donner la bourde de l’alouette. To ie
traine re | from the place be would find ; (from the
larke, which euer flies fromward her neal when fhee
Sees any bodie eyes her.)
Il penfe que les alouettes luy tomberont en la
toutes 3 He vainely thinkes, that
ini come satin win APE
ourdi: m. ie : ed made blockifh.
Alourdir. To dull, befot make b
s Aloufer. Sie he commend bimfelfe ; to brag, or


| Aloy:m. "They of gol, , or filuer, ee ag ie


matter, or mettall whereof it is made ; fine be
RS adore a pr 5


Afhort rib of beefe,or the flefhie end
ir be rib,dinided vided Pom thevefland fete little piece
of (rofled) beefe hauing a bone init.


ne. as Alvine..
Alozer. as Aloufer; (An old word.)
A The crest the mountaines which are betweene
ance,and Italie
dpeftre 7 com. Mountainous, cragg
phe: m. pme
Phitomanti ri meale.
©  wortb about feuen fhil-


Digitizedéby Go gle


bé os


Pied d’alouette. The hearbe,larkej Frs ea claw, °


A LT


0


Alteration : £ 4x alteration,change,or changing; alfo,
thirfi,or drouth


Altercateur. A brabler, brawler, brangler, wrangler,
contentious,or litigious perfon.

Altercation: £. Alercation;brabling,brawline wrang-
ling, brangling ; fir rife debate, contention in wordes ;
nue proceeding litigious pleading of one againft


Altere: m. A poif of lead, which dauncers on ropes bold
A their bands uth a counterpeife; alfa picce of lead to
ni dal exercife,
Alteré: m. The potted, and finall-beaded Viper Dip-
= meta À biting caufeth an extreame,and unquencha-


Alteré: m. Ge: f. Altered, changed, varied, different
from what it was ; falfified, Sophi icated ; alfo, drie, a-
thirft,almoft dried vp; alfo,extreamely paffionat,excee-
dingly angred,or moued ; in a chafe,in a fume.
erer.To alter,change, varie turne from what it was ;


alfo,to adulterate , fophifticate; alfo,to breed, or
nnd @ thirft, or sien to make drie,or adrie ; to


s ‘aeeres. To nue ot or atbirfi ; alfo, to fall in a
chafe,or ge lo cho
Alteres : f. Vebement he of the mind; flrange, and
doubt full conceits floating in the thoughts ; alfo,diuine
Surie ; or infpir ations from aboue, raufbing, and tran-
(porting the (pirit out of ber proper feat ; extafies, tran-
tations of (pirit.
ternatif: m. iue:f. Alternative, interchangeable,


Jucceeding in courfe turnes, or immediatly one
es Sesdone by turnes, ly


Alternation : € An alternation ; a fucceffion by turne ;
an interchange ; a, variation of one immediately after
another,

Alternativement-Jnterchangeably;by cour{e,or turns,
one prefently after another; one in the necke of another;

ane for another.
terner. To interchange,to doe by courfesor turnes.

Sherques, To brabble, we Pent ai hide, bran-

in words’ to one againf another.


>:f Highneffe ; ibe hile of a Soucraigne,Duke,
ty)
Alter: m. ere: £ Proud, loftie, flately, difdainefill,
tte


baughtie.
Altitonant. Thundering from high,or fiom aboue.
eole. ‘The pit,or hollow part of the iaw,whereinto a
tooth 15 faftened.
Aluette. The Vala; a little piece of flefhin the roofé of
the mouth, like a cakes pre See Gargatte.
jou Aluex. as
Alvine :£ #ormerwood; Looke Abfynthe for the feuerall
kinds thereof.
py :m. eufe: f. Bitter as Wormewood; of Worm-
ofjor Frau with,wormeweod.
Alumeile :£. The blade of a fword,or knife.
‘Anmetic. Seeke Allumette.
nes :meufe:f. Full de


Éualumineufe Ahameie sohts


Original.from
AIME OHIOSTATE UNIVERSITY


aie


_Amadoiier. To


AMA


r


AMA


Alun All pounded of Po

uccrin. An Allum com, le water.
whites of egges, and roche Allum ; Italian women ufe
it mich. in their cleanfing, or whitening , imploy-


nts.

Aluté: m. €e:f, Be beplaiftered,bemyred,or be-
fineared all ouer with clay,durtor loame. !

Aluyne:f. wormewood.


Aluyne Poritique; & Romaine; as Abfynthe Pon-
tique, & Romaine. ,
Petite aluyne. Sea Wormapood ; efpecially the white
one; mses that which is called Sothernwood Worme-
wood, )

Alys. Smooth, flecke, polifhed ;an old word. |

Alyfion. The reac per Moonewort,healedog.
Zan. as Alezan.

Alzatin. €Rab. The fat cawle,or kell,wherein the bow-
els are lapt. :

Amadées: m. A certaine Order of Cordeliers, or gray


fiers. .
Amadis. Dee d'Amadis, A neat, fpruce,affe-
ing {peaker.
Am = :m.ée: f. Ouaint, fpruce, affected, prankt
with fine words, full of gay tearmes.
Amadoüé.Flattered, fmoothed ; woon,or inueagled by
pleafing tearmes ; pacified, or appeafed with good, or
faire, words, i
Amadoiiement: m. 4 flattering, fmoothing, inwea-
gling,tickling, or lulling afleepe the mind and affection
with pleafing tearmes ; a acifying appealing fiveet-
ning of an angrie,or barfh (pirit with good words.

à Motte, to fmooth, to gloxe with ; toal-
lure,intice, inueagle, win, with flattering fpeeches; to
tickle, delight, or lull afleepe the mind, and affection
with pleafing tearmes ; alfo, to fweeten, or appeafe a
baïfh,or angrie [pirit with faire words. +

Amadoüeur: m. 4 flatterer, fimoother, gloer, faire


ARE . Blindneffe caufed by the obturation of the
Opticke fnew. : sh
Amaigri : m. ie: f. Macerated ; made,or grovene leane,

meagre, thiane, flender ; fhrunke, fallen away.
Amaigcir. To macerate,make leane,meagre, thin.
Samaigrir. To grow leane, wax meagre, fhrinke, or
Amainer. To firike fayle;(a fea tearme)
s Amaifonner. To lodge,boufe,or harbour bimfelfe.
s Amalader. To fall ficke. wigan
Aialgame. A mixture,or incorporation of quic
with other mettals. oi :
Amalgamer. To mix, or incorporateerc ; a Chimicall
tearme.
Amanché. as Emmanché.
Amande : f. An Almond; alfo, the kernell of a plum-
fi one, cherry-fte One, oC. 3
Amandé: m. éc : £. Of Almonds; mingled,or feafoned
with Almonds, : +
Aimndier. 4a Almond tree. Fe
Amandin. Akind ofréddifh marble,
Amianite. The name of awholefome toadfoole. —
Amanoté : m. ée : f. Manacled; aff, furnifhed with a


‘| handle.
_| Amanoter. To manacle ; to handfaft, or bind the bands


- faft,with manac


Digitized. by Go. gle


valure, purple veluet flower.
areur : f. as Amaritude, . ;
Amaritude: f. Bitterneffe ; alfo, extreame barfhneffe ;


extreame anguifh.


age : m, The great cordage;or tack!e of a fhip.
Amarré.Moored; Alcon bapa tied faft with great
ropes.


Amarrer. To tye,bind,faften,or make faft with cables,or


great ropes; to moore.

‘Amarres : f. Great anchor-cables ; or,ground Tackle.

Amarri: m. The wombe,or matrix of a woman.

Aunas : m. A beape,or pile ; a great number, fort, crue,
rout; alfo,a Moone-calfe, or Tympanie in a womans
wombe; as Mole,

Amafe. 4 meffiuage,or tenement. Wallon:

Amaf€ : m.ée: f. Houfed,or bauing a tenement on it.

ement : m. A me({[uage tenement,building.

Amaflé: m. ée: f. Piled,heaped, gathered together ; al-
So,takenvp,or flooped for. | ;

Amaffement : m. À collettion;, a heapine,or gathering
together ; a piling one upon another ; alfo, a taking, or

Pee tet i 2

afle-miel. Honnie-getting, fweets-gathering.

Agate. To pile,beape spurl ae alfo,to
take vp; alfoto fou .
s'amafler. To affemble meet, or fvarme, together. in
troupes. ? ji)
par la difine de l'ail, Te be well and foundly
cudgelled ; or,to doe that for which he is fure of a cud-
gelling ; (a Poiéteuin phraft.)

On ne fçait pour qui on ainafle: Pro. Men know
not who hall pend their gettings;or,God onely knowes


who {hall enioy thofe beapes.
crefle:f. A womaz that piles, beapes, gathers ;
takes up,or jtoopes for.


Seur: m. A piler,beaper,gatherer ; a taker up of,”


or flooper for,things.
a rés se TA afpilleur : Prov, See Pere.
ieux vaut bon ur que bon ainafSeur : Pro.
A warie keeper is better than a carefull getter.
Amafñtiné: m.ce:£. Made, or become dogged, furly,
Pret currifh.
s'Amaftiner. To become dogged, furly, currifh, chur-


lifh.
Amateur. A louer,affeéter ; wooer; an amorous compa-


nion.
Amathyfte. The precious lone called an Amatifi.
Amati ps ie:f Mated,amated,quayled,abated, allay-


ed; decayed; mortified ; faded, upon withering ; alfo, |


enured,accuflomed,trained vp vato.
Arnatir. To enure,accuftome,traine vp vato ; or,as Em
matir ; to mate,amate dc.
Amatrice : f. An Amatrix,a fhe louer.
Amaurote. À Moore,or one of Mauritania.
Amazé.as Amafé.
es,or Ainbageois. Ambages ; circuits, compaf-
fes, or cireumflances in wordes ; a going about the


Ambagieux: m. eufe: £ Full of ambages,or frinolous
ee
e. Aller en ambzgoye; Seeke Aller.
‘Amballade: m: Packages Taste Fab age.
Ambarvales : m. Rogation, or Gang, weekes ; religious
feafis, or walkes, whereim the fruits of the earth are


d for.
Ad Ar Enfin En Em
ip; alfo. 07 je of soint
a = sw apa heme de


Am- |


Original from
THE -OHIO STATE UNIVERSEY


dd os Pt Utes iA dit. MG Dé ee ee


Le... d = _. =


A M B


.].


AME


Dodo: ae ladour.

mbe. #ith,together within tompanie of. @Gafc.

Ambezatz. Kae ace,or two aces at dice.

Ayant faiét Zatz. Hauing buttered the con-
a: bad that chaunce that no wife man would
nicre.

Ambi. A certaine woodden infirument of two peeces,
vfed far the putting of a fhoulder into ioynt.

Ambier. To goe ; (Barrag ; ) aifo,to compaffe,or goe a-
bout; alfo,to fice for an Office, labour for promotion,can-
uas for a place.

Ambigu: m. üc: f. Ambiguous, doubt full, uncertaine,
double ; which may be sakes in diuers fences, or diners
way


es.

Ambigüement. nee A Sain , uncertaine-
bi; of diuers fences with double vnderftanding.

Ambiguité : f. Ambiguitie ; doubtfidneffe, uncertaine-
t


ie.
Ambitieux : m.eufe : . Ambitious ; greedie of bonors;
defirous of promotion.
Ambition: f. Ambition ; exceffiue defire of honor, pre-
ferment, or promotion.
Amblant. Ambling,pacing,racking, -
Atnble: f. An amble,pace,racke ; an ambling, or racking
pace ; a fimooth,or eafiegate. ®
Aller ainbles ; as Ambler.
Mettre aux ambles. To make aman readie to doe,or
fpeake,a thing before be know,or be aware,how he was
dravone vnto it ; alfo, to bring to reafon, or perfuade
unto reafonable tearmes,one, that before was froward,
or 2x 27 ore
Er plus la mettoit en cete amble. And put her more
into that humor or, fèt her forward in that veine.
Ily perdit les ambles. ‘That madded him, or made
him loofe all patience; alfi, that was beyond his reach,
out of his proper element.
À Ambler. To amble,pace; racke;to go eafily,and finoothly


| away.
Ambligone. A blunt angle ; or, a triangle one of whofe


3 r di eof fight. . '
uchoüer. Seeke RER
Seam: mit . pares:


ET
ing fea on the fhore) which be-
to friatke, in wine, vnto a wench,wi


& a pe Raw Amber; Amber as it growes,or as
# re ÈS = rte rt and made tranfpa-
P


rent (by the fat of a fucki .)
ee gris. pu or gray Amber ; (the beft
Kind of Amber) vfed in perfumes.
re noir. Blacke Amber (the wor{t kind of Am-
ber) vfially mingled with Aloes, Labdanum, Storax,
| and fochlike aromaticall fimples,for Pomander chains,


de Patenoftres, Bead-amber ; the ordinarie


p Amber,
dific, Ambrofia ; the food of the gods.

es fb fame afb, toc beat e called Oke of
padocia ; and another, called Oke of lerufalem.


n: (Ral


> 2


from place to place ; whence ;
Parlement ambulatoire. The Iudges cireuit ; or, a |
Court,or Terme, that oft remoues.


Ame:f. The foule, ad 3 alfo, a fpirit, or ghoft ; alfo,


yor mould that is within the bore of Artillerse when tis
ca
Ameiller. To milke ; or fucke.


Amelette. A little prettie foule.
Ainelioré: m. éc :f. Bettered,improued,mended;amen-
ded,yecouered. .
Ameliorement:m. A.bettering, mending, impro-
Wing ; ee:
Améliorer. To better,mend, improue ; amend,reforme,
recouer.
Amelot. A kind of final bitter-fiveet apple.
nage : m. Carriage ; or, the bringing of.
Amendable: com, Amerceable,fineable; that deferues
® re fined,or may be amerced ; alfo, mendable, amen-
le.
Amendaye :£.A groue,or orchard, of Almond trees.
Amende:£ 4 ie, fine,mulét,amerciament ; an a-
mends made by an offendor to the law violated,or par-
i moet 3 alfo, a certaine engine, or net to catch
with.
esarbitraires. Fines impofed at the pleafüure
of the Court, and different from Amendes couftumi-
eres, which are limitted by the peculiar lawes, and cu-
flomes of enery Countrey,and Court.
Amende du cas de Nouvelleté: 60 pound Tour.
dueuntothe king vpon euery writ, or atiion,of Noucl
diffeifin, :
AmendedelaCour. is in fome places vii. s. vi. d.
Tour; imothers,but v.s.
ndes couftumieres. Looke, Amendes arbi-
traires,
Amende cariale. An amercement of an inferiour
Court ; or,as Amende de la Cour. ,
Amende enflimbée. whereby an offendor is enioy-
ned to bold a burning torch in bis hand while be asketh


iuenel]e.
LC ont LE isxx.1.Parifis, after a iudge-


Re x.1, or more,if need be, at the


the Indges,and in recompence to the party


Se Werefed bythe deter of be fur,


Amende de gage. is vi. s. vi.d. Tour. due by every
vaffale that hath not deliuered unto his Lord a fuffict-
= fu of the peeces be holds (by the cuftomes of la
erche.)
Amende groffe.is vi.s. flerling;or a greater fumme,
rated according to the qualitie of the offence, or omiffi~
on, for which it 1s in ficed. ;
Ainende honorable.4 moft ignominious —
inflifted vpon an extrcame offendor ; who mut gee |
through the ftreets bare foot , and bare headed (with a
burning linke in his hand) unto the feat of lufice, or


Some fuch publicke place; and there confelfe bis of-


fence, and aske forgiueneffe of the partie bee bath
wronged.
Amende deloy-isvii.s.vi.d. Tour. pe

> ordinaire. as A CET
rm vi. d, or at moft, ix. de :
he fn er amener fra al |


¥ ‘Amende ftatutaire, as Ahead ; fr


which looke Amendearbitraire.

Amende de toft-entrée. is affine of wi.s Parif. fer

pag or new Lord of an inheritanc Rond
ae | order


Original from


THE OHIO: STATE UNIVERSITY


AME


AMI


orderly inuefled, and put into poffeffion by fuch as haue
iuvi{diétion sn the place, or territorie, wherein it lyes
(by the we of Rheims,)
La grande amende.is vi.s. flerl.
La petiteamende. 1s in fome places ix. d, in others,
. but vid. flerl.
Dreitt d'amende. Looke Droi&.
Il eft de Lorry,ou le battu paye l'amende;(&,C'eft
Ja loy du pais de Bearn, que le battu paye l'a-
imende: Pro.) He beares away the blowes, and yet
mut iy for the bloudwipe.
Amende:m. ée:f. Mended,amended,bettered ; fatis-
fied, made amends for,
Amendement: m. 4 mending, amendment ; amends,
recompence.
Amender. To correét,amend,better ; alfo,to fatisfie,re-
compence;make amends for.
Ie le vous anende.1 crie you mercie ; Looke,Ployer.
Amendeur. A mender,amender,correétor.
Amené: m. ée : f. Brought,led, fetched in,or unto.
Amenée: f. The watke, or circuit ofa Sergeant,or Bay-
life,wherein be may arreft, fimmon, or adiourne ; alfo,
- arreft ; fiunmons, or adiournement, executed by
im.


Amenement: m. A leading,or bringing ynto.
Amenet. To bring,or lead,vnto ; to fetch in,or to.
Amener l'eau au moulin. To draw-in gaine, to
he in commoditie ; to farnifh with needfüll, and pro-
© fitable things.
ee les voiles. TP firike fayle, or to take in the


Sayles. |
Ameneur. A bringer, or fetcher vnto ; alfo, a kind of
Sergeant,or Bal in fome parts of France, belonging
to particular Lords.
pan : f Amenitie; pleafantne|fe,delettableneffe,de-
-_ lightfülneffe.
nes. Leffening ; or growing leffe and leffe; or,


making little. |
Amenuifé: m.ée: f Leffened; made little ; growne
leffe and leffe.
Amenuifement: m. 4 /effening ; a making little.
Amenuifér. To leffen ; to make little; alfo,to grow little,
» or leffe and leffe.
Ameos:m. hg William, Ameos, Ammi,Bull-worte,
s-weed.
Amer: m. The gall of abeaftye>c.
Ainer : m.ere: £. Bitter; alfo,fiul of anguifh; or barfh-
nelle; alfo,moft defpightfill. -
Amer-doux. À bitter-fiveet ae
Amerement. Bitterly ; moft harfhly ; moft defpight-


Ameret. Cyder made of bitter apples.
il: m. Corruptly for Emeril ; an Emrod.

\ : £ Agnus caftus, Abrabams balme, chaft or

bempe tree, Parke-leaues.
; quain:m, The Neapolitane, or French difeafe ;
* called fo, becaufe it firf? came from America. =
Amertume :f. Bitterne([e ; alfo,anguifh of mind ; alfo,

ee. ast


extreame defpi


- | Amertumer. To make bitter.


Le ne à . ed,gouerned, ordered, fet-

eftate.

Amefnager. To gouerne,rule,order, fettle,a boufebold
to manage bane, husband, or difpfe ofan fate. ?


negon; 4
:m.ce:f.H


booke.
! ie, like abooke. -
neflures. cas d’am. The rn eniling, aaa vot fri-


: . Dire 0 Go: gle


well handled, as an |


king,or fetching bloud,of a man ; or,the fufbition of an

offence, whofe Dattani fries poco :
s Amefurer. To keepe within bis bounds ; to line within

bis compalfes to bold an euen meafitre in bis attions ; to


ober.
Ameté:m.ée: f. Bounded,limitted; meted or meafured

out.
Amietifte. The precious lane called an Amethift.
Amette. A little foule,pirit,or ghoft.

ttre. as Admettre. '

Ameubler. as Ammeubler ; and as Emmeubler.
Atncubli: m. ie : f. Mooueable ; or, which may be re-


mooucd.
Ameuri: m.ie:f. Ripened, made ripe.
ir. To ripen,to make ripe.


Ameuté.Chafle ameutée.A clofe running,or bunting, -


of dog’,together ; Looke,Amuté.

Ameuter. To femble dogs in bunting, to bold them vp
clofe together ; alfo, to agree together , as well-forted
des bunting; alfo, to run, or bunt very clofe toge-
t


Amezeau:m. 4 Trunke, or Pipe of wood, through
which the fea-water (whereof faltis made) paffes; ey-
ther from the receptacles, tearmed Conches(or Cou-
ches)vrto another, that s called Forans ; or, from the
fixft, and greateft receptacle, tearmed lard, into the
Jaid Conches.

Ami:m. A friend; a louer,a Paramor ; a louing mate, a
deere companion.

Vne beauté faiéte à ami; &Cheveux frifotez à l
ami. Daintily,quaintly,curioufly.

len eftbien mon bel ami. He és farre in loue with-
all,he likes it paffing well ; and, be would faine baue it,
or be owner of it.

Vn ami veille pour l’autre : Prov. Ove friend ener
watches,or cares,for another.

à rich homme n’ en chautqui ami luy foit : Prov.
The rich man needs no friends ; or needs not care who
be takes to friend ; or (which is moft ordinarie, and the
moi true) respeéteth no mans friendfhip.

Bien part de fa Laie quifon amiy laiffe: Pro. He
fitly leaues bis place, that leaues his friend to keepe it ;
or (if it was good) that belpes his friend vntoit.

Ilnya lee miroir que le vieil ami: Pro.Seeke,

oir. ; i
La mort n’a point d'ami, le malade-n’a qu'un de-
mi: Pro. The dead haue no friends, the ficke but faint
ones; or, when a man is dead his friends forfake bim,
and while be is ficke they care not greatly for him; or,
~ no man loues death,or filly loues ihe difeafed.
* Longue demeure fait changer ami:Pro. Long ab-


fence alters affection, breeds forgetfiulnefJe, weakens |
ge


conflancie,brings in change. .

Mieux vaut avoir ami en voye quor ny argent en

courroye : Pro. We fay (but with fome difference) bet-

ter a friend in court then a penny in the purfe.

On ne peut avoir trop d’amuis:Pro. One cannot haue

too many (faithfill,and difcreet) friends. -

Parens fans amis,amis fans pouvoir, pouvoir fans

vouloir,vouloir fans effect, effect fans profit, profit

PR ia riche prspomerwiton mit
iends, friends wit + Power without will will

without effect effect caer ere fit, profit without ver-

tue,is not worth a fefcue.

Qui prefte à l'ami perd au double: Prov. viz. both

friend and money; To which purpofè wee haue a cers

taine (triniall, but true-meaning) Ryme ; which be-

gins with, 1 lent my money to my friend, and ends


-


“Orginal from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


à ht:


—— a 7 eee


te i 7


AMI


with, 1 loft both money,and my friend. {
Qui veut pénales; ami n'ait nuls affaires a-
vec luy: Prov. Looke, Affaire.

Tenir ne faut pour bon voifin vn ami de Table, &
de vin: Pro. (For when you haue need of bim,or when
your Table growes needie, be will be fure to gine you
2, < FE
Viande d'ami eft bien toft prefte: Pro. LA friends
meat is fone readie;(for gruing it willingly,be prouides
it quickly ; or, one thinkes it not, or muft not fèeme to
thinke st, long in comming.)

Amiable : com. Amiablesouely 3 friendly ; comely, gra-
cious,exceeding bandfome.

Amiablement. Amiably, friendly Jouingly, gently, gra-
cal ; gracefully.

Amiableté : f Friendlineffe louingne[fe,amiablene[e.

— m. An Amitt,or Amice; part of amajfing priefts

avn.

Amidon. as Amydon.

Amidonner. To farch.

Amie: f. A loue,a lemman,a fhee friend a fweet-heart ;
alfo,a certaine skaleffe fifh, like the Bonito, which ha-
uing fivallowed a booke, fheeres the line afunder with
ber teeth, and fo efcapes.

Nous verrons au Jeu qui aura belle amie: viz. bo
Shall get the vittorie; a Metaphor, from {uch as fight
for their miftreffes.

Ia couard n'aura belle amie: Pro.we fay,faint heart
neuer woon faire ladie.

Amieller. To fiveeten; intice,allure,inueagle with honi-
ed words ; to delight, win, or toll on, by honie, or any
fiveet meanes.

Arnielleure: f.4 liniment,or oyntmentof the thickneffe,
and colour of honie.

Amiette : f. A little loue ; young miftreffe, lemman, or
fiveet-beart.

Amigdale : f. 4 Almond ; Looke,Amygdales.

Amignarder. To mes 5 Jude nity

aS wanton of; much of. ler ,

ignotant. Pampering, cockering, pranking ; alfo,

Amignot td m. A same TE A

ignotement:m. -4 pampering, cackering, pran-
kit; alfoyaflroaking flattering, fowning making much

Amignoter. as Amignarder; alfa, to lroake ; flatter,


on. de
Amiot. A bttle friend; alfo aki eave where
ss yee an rr
Amiral. Seeke Admiral,
Amiffion: £.4 loffe,lecfingor loofing. |
Amnitis | Ann EEE , good will ;
concord,corre, Tee
Bonne amitié feconde ep :Pro.Sound friend-
Sip a fecond afitie.
ag 7 dom
nman: m.. À Maire, or Bourgomaifer (among the


Swingers.) ;
Ammares: f. Great,or flrong ropes ; anker-cables ; al-
Sip balbes of yron, or Seng Sader as in Au-
Aw 1 nent ller..as,Emmenteler.
ammeubler. To make moueable ; alfoyas, Emmeubler.


’ Amorceinent :m. 4


VIS OT "a


AMO


Ammoniac: m. Ammoniacum (in fhops) the inice, or
gumme of th’ African bearbe, Agafillis ; or of the Cyre- |
nian ferula,or fennell-gyant.

Sel ammoniac. Sel.

Amneftie:: f. Forgetfidneffe of things paf.

Arnie. as Agueletre.

Amobilié. Moueable,yemoueable,to be remoued.

Amobilier. To remone,to make moucable.

Amoderer. To moderate,affuage,temper ,qualifie;mea-

Sure; alfo,to flope,cut flope take downe.

ee re A ha
modiation. À farming,a letting tohire,or to halues ;
Looke, Admodiation, rcs sa :

Amodier. as Amoderer ; al/o,as Admodier.

Amoindri:m.ie:f. Diminifhed, leffened,extenuated,
impaired, appaired ; abated ; allayed.

Amoindrir. To leffen,diminifb,appaire, extenuate, im-

Agnes dates ee
noindriflant. Leffeniag abating diminifbing.

Amoindriflement. A lefjening,diminifhoing impairing,
extenuating ; abating ; allaying.

Amoitir. To moiflen.

Amolir. To remoue, or put awaybardly, with paine, or
much adoe; alfo, to depart,or goe away.

Amolli:m. ie: Softened, mollified ; pacified appea-

fed; effeminated.

Ainollir. To foften,mollifie; make tender,gentle,pliants |
mda 17 2 og ques 3 4/f0, to effeminate.

Amolliffable : com. Fitor apt to be foftenedmollified,
made tender. °


Amolliffant. Softning, mollifying ; effeminating ; quie-


ting,
Amolliffement: m. 4 /oftaing,mollifying making ten-
~ der ; or quiet.

:m. Afimall, and thicke aromaticall fhrub,
whofe bloffomes refembled white violets, and leaues
thofe of the wild Vine : This true Amomum of th’An-
cients,is not found,or not difcerned at this day : Plinie
cals thus, tree Night{bade ; others (erreonioufly) call fo
the Roft of ab, ae our Ladies Rofe; pe Poa
wifely, bearbe Robert; but the moft,Vita longa, or, E-
thyopi r, which (though it be not the right) 1
now Ene eran orm

Amomite. s Amomite. 4 whitifh kind of in-
cenfewhich,in handling, becomes foft as Mafticke.
on.asAmome, ~
Amoncelé : m. ée:f. Heaped,piled,compatted ; packed,
or truffed vp in a heape. ;
Amoncelement: m.4 heaping.piling,compalling;pac-
king ; a gathering together into a beape.
1 er.To beape,accumulate,pile,compact; gather,
acke, make up intoa beape; to lay on a heape, te lay
ape to heape.
Amoneftement. # Admoneftement.
Amont. Vpwards.
Pais d'amont, 1s, among people which dwell neere to
riers, the country that lyesneerer then theis unte the
heads or Source, thereof.
Vent d’Amont. The Eaft wind. 9
Amoraye. A coyne ufed at Ferara, and worth twelue


ins.
rce: f. À bayt;alfo,the touch-bole ofa peecesor pou-
7 for the touch-hole ; alfo,asEfmorche.
Amorcé : m. ée : f, Bayted; allured,inticed,drawn on.
Vne befte amorcée. 4 mankind beaft.


cement.
; maneagle,


Amorcer. To bayt s alfo, to allure,
+ 1.4


. intice.


21082" "18


Originakfrom


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


A MO


Amorcelire: f. 4 bait ; a baiting. AU Os
Amorcher.To put pouder into the er perce.
Amorti: m.ie:f. Deaded,quenched,quayled,extingui-
fhed,ceafed,abolifhed ; alfo,redeemed,or bought out,as
arent charge, exc ; alfo, graunted, or palfed away in
Mortmaine ; alfo,exchanged by agreement,as,ane [èr-
nice for another alfo, difappearing, dead, gone,or loft,
as the part of a piller thats clofed within awall’s or,
the mage of timber that is, by mortaife, ioyned unto a-
nother piece.
Cenfivesamorties. #hich are not held by homage,
and fealtie.
Heritages amorties. which owe neither homage, fe-
altie,rent, nor feruicesor,which are held of the church,
or by Movtmaime ; or,pafled away in Mortmaine.
Aunortir. To dead, quench,quayle; abolifh,diffolue ; al-
So,to extinguifh; redeeme,or buy out, as arent charge,
dc ; alfo,to graunt,alien,or palfe away,jn Mortmaine;
alfo, to exchange by agreement, as,one feruice for ano-
ther;alfo,zs Admortir;t0 mortaife,or ioyn by mortaife,
s'ainortir. ass’Admortir; a//o,to Vifenpocrds
Amortiflable: com. Quenchable, ftintable, diffolue-
able, abolifbable,extinguifbable; redeemeable.
Amortiflement. Mortmaine; alfo,a licence of, or paf:
fiagin Mortmaine ; alfo,a deadding, quenching, diffo-
sution,extinguifoment, utter ceafing of; alfo,a difap-
pearing, or leofing it felfe within another ; alfo,amor
taifing,or ioyning by mortaife.
AmortifSement de foy,&e; de Rente. Looke Ad-
mortiflement. nes
Lettres damortifsement. .A licence of alienation,
or of purchafe, in Mortmaine, graunted unto church-
men, corporations, guilds, fraternities, rc ; and muft
be procured by them upon euery new purchafe (gene-
rall letters not being fufficient) otherwife th’ Impofition
de nouveaux Acquetts is layd en them, once imeuery
© kings time: And this is good onely from the king, of
whomfaeuer the land be held; and for this,a third part
Petey > ve brefs bar ; god will ood
mour: com. Loue, kindneffe,charitie; i
liking, affcétion; alfo, the name of a certaine Italian
{port ; for which looke louér.
Amours. bs er veffels of beafts; called fo
} thofe that vfè to lib, or geld, them.
; x en amour. (Said of birds that bill, tread, or
reed,
Ie le feray pour l'amout de vous: viz.For your fake,
or for the refpeët 1 beare you.
Amour de garfe,& faut de chien ne dure fi Pon ne
dit, tien: Prov. whores and dogs on a man no
‘longer thenhe feeds them; ora whores loue,and a dogs
leaping continue but while they are fed. é
Amour de muge: Pro, Faithfull loue of a wife to ber
husband; (The female Mullet willrather be caught by
8 démeas feu d'A (Th'expofir
mour de putain à "expofiti-
on — Li lait fort, & ucla int a
Amour sante nié perme. de buiflon: Prov.
The loue of a great man is of {mall continuance, and
dangerous confequence. ita
Amour, & feigneurie ne fe tindrent iamais com-
— pagnie: Prov. Loue, and lordlineffe neuer beld com-
pame together ; a friend,and a lord are incompatible.


_ Amour apprend les afnes à danfer: Prov. Looke


Danfer.
Amour fait beaucoup,mais er fait tout: Prov,


bd “enr 4 :
amour, la toufle, & la galle ne fe peuvent celer:


a aj Tr


a. doi d'à mt tnt à


A M O


Pro.We fay,Loue,and the Cough cannot be hidden.

Amour vainc tout fors que coeur felon: Pro. Lowe

ouercomes any thing but a froward, or {pightfill,peart.

En amour eft folic, &fens: Prov. Jn lowe there is

both dotage;and diféretion.

Argent faict rage,& amour mariage: Pro, Money

breeds rage,loue mariage. :

Au batre faut l'amour: Pro, By beating(the beloved)

loue decayes. |

D’oifeaux,de chiens,d'armes,& d'amouts pour yn

rer mille douleurs: Prov. who follow haukes,
ounds,armes, or are in loue, for one delight athoufand

Sorrowes proue.

En cent livres de plaid n’y a pas vn maille d’a-

inour: Pro. 124 hundred pound of law there’s not a


»


balfèpenny weight of loue.
Fyd'avoir rm n'a ioye &d’amours fans monnôye:
Pro. Looke Fy. :
Iln’eft que les premieres amours : Prov. The fri
loue is the fafteft; there is no loue to the firfi. ù
nr: 4x my 4 bor are ley ny belle prifon :
ro, Neuer mifireffe nor pri e.
Veilles amours, & vieux tifons cif 4e «1 AN
tes faifons: Pro. Looke Allumer.
Amoureau : m. À little loue salfo, the little god of lowe.
Amourefcher.To woe (an old word.)
Amourettes : f.Loue-tricks; wanton loue-toyes,ticking,
ticklings,daliances ; alfo,the gra(fe tearmed, Quakers,
and Shakers, or quaking gva(fe.
Auffi bien font amourettes foubs bureau, que
foubs brunettes: Pro. Lowe bides in cottages,as well
as in Courts.


Amoureufement. Amoroufly ; lovingly, affectionately,


kindly ; gently courteoufly.

Amoureux: m. À louer,one that in loue; a woer,
Amoureux de Quarefme. À Lenten louer ; a bafh-
full, modeft,or maidenly,woer.

Amoureux de triqueniques. 4 paltry louer,a find
woer, a trifling paramour. Nar

Amoureux; m. eufe : f. Amorous, love affecting af-
feltionate, fiul of loue,

Mufcles amoureus. Tvomuféles (a great one, and a
leffe)belonging to the eye,the whichthey turne round.

Amouftillé: m. ée : f. Seafoned, fwectened fiunifhed;
intertained,or made drunkeswith new fweet wine.

Amouftiller. To fiveeten, feafon, or furnifh (alfo, to in-

. tertaine quefts,or welcome friends) with dMuft, or new
fveet wine. .

Amparlier. as Emparlier ; a Pleader.

Ampes: f. Rafpifes,

Ampefer. To larch. ;
mphibie : com, Liuing both in water,and om the land.
umphibliftroide. The ff? thin membrane of th’eye,

ing imvpard light unto the Chriftaline humours
hibole: com. Ambiguous, uncertaine, doubtfuull,
Subie& to contronerfie, of a doable fence, or meaning,
which may be taken fundry wayes. PUSHES
Amphi bolt ie; (and the better word.)


e. a Amphibol
bises f. Adoub double meaning in
Amphisbeine:€ Ti Amphibens sd
isbeine: f. 7) 7 ;afima
worme-like Serpent,that bath ahead at both ends, and
j et stapes per Mais anal Gre-
uin bold,that fhe bath but one head; onely fhe feemes to
baue two, becaufe ber tayle refembles ber head: the
- more probable opinion ; for no ferpent (faith Gefner)


n
hath,naturally,more heads then one.
Amphitrite :£ The See.
E


O igina from 3
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERS)


—_


Te ee ee ee
. .


>, , ..


AMP


Amphore. 47 auncient meafüre of about 36 pans
was commonly of earth , bad two por 7-2 a
Square euery way.
Amphytane. 4 /quare, and golden-coloured
the nature of a en
fr qron gold unto it.
Ample: com. Full,ample wide, large, {copefull,fpaciaus,
great compai]e ; a/fo,copi undant ; fumptnoxs


Fi. . A whole fief, or knights fee; for a Meriot
whereof the Landlord takes bis deceafed tenants beft
borfèsand part of bis armour,or if be bad no barfe,lx.s.
Re - (fil
Meit. , largely, widely, pacioufly ; fully ;
cea pa ae over are
greatly.


Ampliateur: m. 4n amplifier jalarger,increafer.
pep MIon, An inlarging,amplfcation,incref,ang-
mentation


pr À


crealè td.
Aunplier. as Amplifier.
Amplificateur. An amplifier inlarger ; augmenter, in-


crear.
ation : F Amplification, inlargement ; aug-
mentation,jncreafe.
fies. Ze ,inlar ge, augment, increafe,
ot wl ee tet or vifing
of the ski 0s Lok mpoule.
6 Beblfiered; füll of water-poukes,
a


Amprife. as Entreprife ; (corruptly ;) An enterprifè.
Amputation. 4namputation,a cutting eng paring
about ; a ridding,or taking away
Ampute ; m. ée: f. Car Pal about ; vid,or
ta
Amputer, Te cut away,or pare about ; to rid pr take a-
way füper fluities.
uletier: m. A counter-charmer, wifard, or good


RE : m, An amufing,or amuferhent.
To amufe ti thinke
a Dép ve ce


pee at édite ed


rette. Toftand on trifles,
eur. Anamufer of people; one that boldeth folkes


| atgaxe,or putteth them into dumps.
/ Mrs a gazing flocke;
a fubie,


or cause, = amufement.


fer fur la vinai


| Amuté. amutée Se ruaning,or bunting of
that be Pies oper
pest d crie of


dogs toge
tagelbers ava ‘


Digitized


» Go. gle


ge m. ée: £ Ampifodjalerged augmented,in- | Anacardi


ANA


format mie nN
Amye: f. Looke, Amie.
Amygdales. Kernels rifing in the necke, er under the
root of the tongue ; alfo,Almonds.
An: m. Ayeare,a tweluemonth.
Ans vieux. Old age,decrèpit yeares.
En cent ans civiere, en cent ans banniere: Prov.
Sometimes a wheelebarrow, fometimes a banner;thofè
that are poore reo be potent bereafter ; no family
holds very long at one
Le mal an entreen nageant : : Pro. Thil (or unfea-
ey Jeare comes fwimming in; viz. begins with
much raine.
Anacampferote. À certaine bearbe whofe touch renu-
eth rarer Ye loue betweene man and man (as fome baue


ined.)
Anacarde: m. Th'Eaf-Indian fruit called Anacardi-
um,or Beane ca.
n:m.ine:f Of Anacardium; whence;
Miel anacardin..4 certaine


= mére rer
th’Anacardium, 7


pes crop ee A briefe rebearfall,a recapitulati-


. The Hermit called an Ankroffe,or An-
chorite,


Anagal : rh ec PERS
Anagnelte :m. A maaan Ee 3a ne
; 4 boy that reades to bis ma
ammatifer. To make an ae, to frame a
, or fentence, of the letters of a name fet toge-


Anagrammatifne. . A making of Anagrams; or the art
making Anagrams.


nine: m. An Anagram ; a Sentence,Poefie,
or pretie conceit framed of the letters of a name.
c. The plant called Beane Trifolie , or Peftod


= reades toa


: m. An infirument whereby the courfe,and
ere aceasta ccnp, properties,
à on, fimi


Analogique : com. iall; conformable vnto'
Some other rb ranpapae in proportion unto another


thing; corre (po

Analogifer.7o "has ioyne, by affinitie
or proportion one thing with another.

Anangé. Fatall,or of deflinie.

e. An afcention of the pr from the Eaft, by
daily courfe of the firmament ; alfo,a figure called Re-
petition, when two verfes begin with one word.

ope A kind of circular dyall for the win-


Anaquil. as Anafile.

Anarche: com. without Kingdeme or commaud-ith-
out Prince ; without beginning ; licentious,unbrideled,
vrruled;unrub.

Anarchie: f. 4n Anarchie; a Commonwealth without
« bead,or Gouernour a confifed flate, wherein one is
as on elle ai ; alfo,want of gouernment, libertie,

Anarchique:com. Belonging toan Anarchie; 3 without
rule, lett beginming,or order ; ; diffolute,licen-


Ansflomol: : f. The communication of veines with ar-
tevies whereby they belpe one another. ae


Original fram


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


ANC


Anate. À ducke,or drake.

Anatematization. as,Anathematifation. *

Anathernatifation :f.4n anathematifation,extreame
curfing; vowing or de noting unto the diuell.

ay ematifé : m.ée:f. Anathematized, curfed vnto

the pit of bell.

er ie To anathematixe, denote unto the di-

curfe unto the pit of bell.

Anach eme:m. À gift beflowed, or offering made in a
church; alfo,a folemne curfe of the church.

Anatheme :com. Execrated, excommunicated, moft
accurfed.

Anatomie: & Anatomie; a fection of, and looking into,
all parts of the bodie ; alfo, an Anatomie, or carkalfe
cut up.

Anatomique : com. Anatomicall ; of, or belonging to,

- Anatomie. ,

Anatomifte: m. An Anatomift.

Anatoinizer. To a se ;t0 cut up, and looke into,
the parts of the bodie.

Ancelle:f. A band-maid,or maid-fernant.

Anceftres: m. Aunceftors,predeceffors, forefathers.

Anche: f The little pipe, tongue, or tenon, wbich is the
mouth of a Trumpet, Hoeboy,&rc; a/fo,as Enche.

Arichois; ou Anchoies; The fh Anchoveyes.

À Ancholie : £ The Columbine (bearbe,or flower.)

‘Anchoyes. as Anchoies ; The fifh Aachoveyes.

Anchraige : m. Ankorage ankoring.

-Anchre ; & Anchré. as Ancre; ad Ancré.

Anchufes : £ wild Bugloffe,Orchanet,Alkanet.

Ancien: m. enne: f. neem) 5 fiale; of long conti-
nuance,of good antiquit

es Pate à oldly, falely ; of old,jnold

| time,in

Ancienneté: f Ie duncientne(feoldnc{flalene(

. To driue,or thruft,into a corner.
Ancoi :f. A corner,or cone; any thing thats cor-


Aen? m. me long, and beauie axe, which in old time
fouldiors vfed to throw at their enemies either: before,
or inft at,their ioyning together in battell.

Ancraige:m, as Anchraige.

Ancre : f. An ankor.

Eftre l'ancre. To be idle, or at leifiere; to fland, or


be fel Dis bt to doe.

l'ancre To employ their laft, or eh
remedies ; to 5; unto prayer, or implore the divine af-
fiance, when all other meanes doc faile,


Mouiller Pancre.T
selon eee
tte se mod, Ame


Ancter. To aakor, to caf amor
mn. An inkebore.


ein mr or a tre


Ancriet: m. 4”
Ancriér:mvere:f. Of or belonging toan 3 or, to
pds alfa, inkies yeelding take, blacke as take ;


' See act anctere Oeming ete ithe bak
Or sng.
Ancrouélle. eal A Shrike; Ninmurder seriall
Andabasiine: m. / conaundiiaeadert.


rem rire fi Pr i
Tete. Ro ah binge the


ut a pace
e.as Andouille.


lers: m. Throwers fb acl


A NE


AndofSeure:: f The backe,or back-part of ; (bence)alfo,
the ridge,or coueriag of the rides aboufe,@rc ; alfo,
an indor{ement,or indor.

Anidouille: f. À locke, or chetertale ; 4 big bogges gut
fluffed with finall guts (and other tntravles) cut into
finall pieces,and feafoned with pepper and falt.

luy rend le nez auffi plat come vne andouille ;
a sae him utterly; bee dafhesbim cleane out of


Anders 45 Endouillers,or Andoillers.
Andouillois: m.ife: f. Of linkes,or chitterbnes.

Andoufseure : as Andofleure.

pre 0's ill ue = sor of a horfe.

m. ée: f. le of both fexes ; growne
port rip it LA
gyne: com. An Hermapbrodite ; one thats
both man and woman; or bath the priuities of both.
ry ae ie: ee ni ne]
void brought vato , weakened,enfeeble
made forcelefes ; ruined,undone ; and bence, Ton tied,
prin en as nougbt,or but as
a thing of nought.

‘Aneatir. To abrogate, annichilate, make void, or no-
thing of; alfo,to weaken, enfeeble make celelfe 5 ru-
ine, undoe, bring vnto nothing ; and bence , to de-
ieGt, imbafe, abafe, defpife, re(pect as nothing.

s Aneantir. To difefeeme bimfelfe ; alfo,to Langu
or pine away » 10 grow not worth the ground be
goes on.

Añeantifsant. Annichilating ; bringing to nought ;
alfo, abafing, ie dife eming, deveéting ; alfo,
weakening, enfeebling.

Aneantifsement : m. An abrogating , annichila-
, making void, or nought of; af, a weakening,
feebling ; ruining, 3 bringing tonought; and

bens. a deieéting , abafing , de(pi, Le > re(petting as
nou,

Aneau. Seeke Anneau.

Anelet.as Annelet.

Anematifer. To anathematize, or curfe.

Anemoné. The wind-flnver.

Anernoné double, The double fcarlet wind-flower.
Aneinoné fimple. The purple wind-flower.

Anemophilace. Un obferuer of beauenly rules.

Aneftie: f. The feafon.

Anet:m. The bearbe called Anet,and Dill,

_ Anet fauvage. wild Dill; alfo, yellow,or Bed bar

rm

Aneth. 2s Anct,

Anetin: m-ine:f. erent

Anette: 4 Ducke,or D

Aneurifine: m. 4/0; fe Poelbngngendred yy thevelaxa-
tion,or dilation,of an Arterie.

Aneurifsement : m. Anvlcer or vcerationsn te kn


ofa “sg
Anforge : f. 4 leatherne wallet; a double male, or
budget, to be carried bebind aman on borfebac
Ae: m. ée: £, Full of turnings,compaffes,in-


Anfraétuofité: f.
pra ere


Angar:m. 47 op
men fet their plou,


weather.
nee
fn


abtuofitie ; a manifold (and vn-
on pren ed or winding


or bouell, wherein busband-
&c. out of the Sunne, and


ced io perfrme i bas one per-


THE OFHHOSÆAT E-U Ni VSS erent
ele


i Jersice or drudgerie ; that |


—_—


ALNEI TE sr etl NT


RES com. Angelicall, Ange


AN G


Angaric: m.ée:f. Toyled, vexed, barried ; oppre fed


with continuall feruices, charges,exagtions ; forced, or
put,vnto much drudgerie,or trauell.


Angarier. To toyle, vex, barrie, burrie; to oppreffe,or


weare out, with continual im loyments , ex A
a 3to force vate any drudgerie, or exceffine tra-


Ange:m. An Angell; Gods immediate meffenger ; our


ppd the fpirit(vbether good or euil)that haunts,
ompantes Us.
oe “dec Greue. One that hangs in chaynes, or ona

gibbet,a good while after he is dead.
Ange. TA mer. The great,long,rougb,and hard-skind,
skate-
Bouque d'ange. Conferue, or Sucket, made of the
: fakes of Lettnce.
Eau d'ange. 4 kind of delicat compound water.
Ailed’ ange, & voix de Diable: Prov. Aa Angels
wing,and deuils voice (the file of a Peacocke.)
Au prefter ange,au rendre Diable. 4 prouerbe ex-
prefjing the ingratitude,and ill nature,of fome borrow-
ers, who honour a man when be ner them,and bate
bim when ‘fe to pay him.


Angee: f. A fhe Angell; a woman Ang


Angelique : f.The bearb ee ind of white,
long,and great fig.


clique fauvage . paren root
wants that feet pe mé From sp
 belonging to


&,Angellette: fA little,or pretie, Angell.


Alt :m, wig cheefe as. sAagelets ane


Pers heal gop re li; 3 and, b
Bille. 0! e
Fee a yes of told found, bons, and “Fe
thie,


Angelot de mer. as,Ange de mer.

De jeune Angelot vieüx Diable : Pro. Of a young
Angell an old deuill; many that (while they were y
ra mevierees pures: are (nue od be aged) mo,


ey geared [rc bali
ee wittie game ‘Cfidat
Pres cm cad waa + Beletaeg
the feconda giuen.
€: m. An angle, cone,or corner. ;
ler. To fhut up in a corner,bring into a firaït,inclofe
Angle: eng


"Gi aad anglet. 4 eo ins towards the


Pr anglet. Th'outward corner towards the Tem-
ples ; tearmed [à by Anot.
:m.eufe :f Full o ofangles,or corner lite an


a, smetunateiicn il and


ends
his mewer vite be


l


‘’ Uyabien de l'an


eo
A N G
5 ith fi
Aah a Par See, me fret


f. Much anguifh, choaking forrow fil
neflésgreat vexation,or pain, ef; 3 extreame affircti-
on,agonie,or perplexitie of [pirit.

ifleux : m: eufe : f. Full of anguifh, fraught with
ow, moft perplexed ; extreamely affiacting ; me


Corail: f. Botches, (pockie) bumps,or fores.
onnages : 1x flead of Angonailles.
ou : ae ce : f.as Agoué.
oulevent. À fim
wind,as the Cameleon.
ourie: f. À kind of cowcomber, fomewhat longer
the ordinarie one ; or as Anguric.


abet cele


ind ; one that deuoures


Angoutte. A locu ,or graffebopper.
A : é. Gr op Ed À Jr ŒLangucd,
Anguiliere : f. me place eee Es


illade: f. À whipping, lafh, or blow, with an Ecle,
or, with an Eeles skin.
Anguile, The> of the tyde-boat which paffe
L The name of the tyde-boat which pales
betweene Blaye,and Bourd caux
Hans as Anguille d'haye; or, the bufh
or wood
Anguille fine. ion oe fale Eele; fo called in Langue-


d'haye. The hedge,or dunghill, Adder ;blac-
kifb of. 2 not very Venomous.
Efcorcher les anguilles par la queué. To doe a thing
cleane kamme,out of order, the wr ong way.
ile fous roche. There is fome
mifierie, fome bidden matter in it ; fome pad in that


fraw; or, more then all the world can difterne.


Range l'anguille au genouil. To attempt an im-
matter; or,to labour in vaine.
AAnguilles de Melun (qui crient ayant qu’on les
cfcorche:) Pro. Cowardly a oats of a mifchiefe
bsfre hate : Lacresanig heir the danger, or
ie before their paine approch t


ot ae ns apie: Prov, Seeke
er fanguille on la perd: Prov. Wee
oa ee thing, the fooner it

Grig,or little Ecle.


É gare oy ¢ things by too much looking to them ; or, the
ain


Alone: m: RE fillow, fye mate, fubtill
Press com. Angular, ef a corner, that hath cor-


ners ; placedor fet in a corner.
eux. as Angleux.
ric: f. The great long Pompion. … :
: com. Strait,narrow,pinching, (cant.fcarce,of
a sine compaffe.
flic: £. Straitne(fe, narrownelfe ; pinching, [car-


Sie, Jcantnefe ; alfo,difirefe, perplexitie, grie
Anhelé: =


m<ée : £ ne: ali, male (as the

REA emer?

breath on; to fitch mind, or draw

nr; wtb difficuttie ; FA to be. de OF
s of; to afpire onto with alee.


Anhelit: :m. Difficult breathing.
Ani. Seeke,Anis.
Anichiler


Seeke,Annichil


Aniler. To abate; 3 alfo,to doter


Anille


Original from
>THE OHIO-SYFATE-UNIVERSITY


AN I
Anille. The mil-rind of a mill-flone; ir Blazon; an ink-


. molyne.
Anilles : m. Crutches for impotent per{ons.
Animadverfion: f. An # ‘fion ; a marking, or
heeding ; a confideration , a indgement; alfo, a war-
ning, cenfisre, chiding, reprebenfren. ita ut
Animal: m. An animall; a creature that bath life, (pi-
ritand fence ; (more particularly) a beaft ; (wee fome-
times call a blockhead,or gull,an Animall.)
Anime:f. 4 fafhion of eafie (becaufé large-plated, and
Large-iointed) armour; alfo,the name of an aromatica
Lalt-Indian gumme. :
Animé: m.ée :£. Animated ; quickened, infpived with
life,or breath ; alfo,beartened,inconraged ; incited,in-
cenfed.


Animelles: £. The flones, cods, or cullions of Lambes,
pr


7

Animer. To quicken, gine life unto; infpire breath, in-
fife a fbirit into; alfo, to animate, mcourage, bearten,
imboulden; incite,incenf?.

Animeufement. Couragioufly, floutly, refolutely,with a
great flomacke. 2

Animeux: m.eufe : f. Stout, bardie, refolute,couragi-
ous, füll of heart ymettall, (pirit ; of a bold, and great
flomacke ; that will take no wrong, that will carrie
no coales.

Animofité:f. Animofitie, floutnefe, courage mettall,
rn dpe pi Le

Anir. The name of an Indian hearbe, ufèd much by Dy-


ers.
Anis: m. The hearbe Anife ; alfo, the feed thereof, Ani-
' feed; alfo,as Engeance ; and hence; .
Petis anis. A troupe of little children.
Anis: f. Annis, or Nanne (4 proper name for a wo-


Anifé/m. ée:f. Seafaned,or fiveetned with Ani-feed ;
alfo,multiplied,in brood. ; ; Ÿ
Anifer. To feafon, or fiveeten with Anifèed ; #0, to in-


creafe,or multiplie. 1
Aniveller. To meafure, lenell,or fquare by plumbe-line,
or plumbe-rule.
Anizé. as, Anifé.
Annales: f. Annales ; annual Chronicles ; yearely re-


Annalifte: com. 4x Annalift ; «writer of yearely Chro-
nicles,a relator of annuall occurrences.


Annate. The firft fruits of a Benefice ; the profit of a
whole yeare after the remooue, er death, of th’Incum-
bent.

Anneantir. Seeke,Aneantir. .

au: m. A ring, or fignet for a finger; or (more ge-
aerally) any ring ; alfo, the ligament that incircles the
wriftia forme of a ing. |
pe dune clef. The bow(or vpmoft part) of
a key. +1 ER
à l'anneau. Vo the marriage. es
Ila mis en fon doigt anneau trop eftroiét; He hath
undertaken a matter which is moft vmworthieof bim ;


or which will turne much to bis preiudice.
Année: f. Apeare; ayeares time; the [eafon within a
yeare; alfo,a yeares crop.or increafe; whence ;
La bonne année en peu detemps s’en va, la petite
fe garde: Prov. Good haruefts makes men prodigal,
Hamel dm. Ge: € ringed, fitofringsmade ie ar
Al tm. ee:f 3 [4 0) s. e KE avin:
or de PAR Le er ei


’ Annel
fp
[A added,
Al
Ann
A


ee


ANN


round,or into round knots. :

eler. To ring ; tocurle, or twirle round like a ring;
tohooke, bang, clafpe, clofe, decke, or Suraifh, with
rings.


t:m. A gimmew, or little ring for the finger; al-
{0,4 haw ther ; alfo,a mayle,or a ring of mayle; any an-
elle finallring;ufed about apparell or armour,
Annelleé. as,Annelé.


Annexe: f. 42 annexation,or thing annexed.
Annexé va Ce: f. Krit,amnexed, linked, ioyned, coupled,
ed,vnta.
nnexer. To annex,knit linke,ioyne,couple,adde,vnto.
Annicher. To neftle,or se sé y at
Annicheur: m. A nefiler ; a neft-maker ; a putter of
Fo es nefis ; a fetter of birds on nefis ; and bence ;
annicheur de poules, 42 excellent, or lear-
ned,cotqueane,
Annichilé: m.ée:f. Annicbilated, annulled, brought


unto nothing.
Annichiler. To annul ,annichilate,bring unto nothing.
Annion. Priviledge d'annion. Anyeares parer 2
graunted by the Prince,or Pure cms a debtor.
aniverfaire :m. An yearely Obit, Trentall, or feruice
faid,at a time certaine.for the dead. :
Anniverfaires: m, The winds which ordinarily blawa-
bout the dog-dayes.
ombré: m. ée: f. Counted,reckoned numbred,told
out,or ouer.
Annombrer. To reckon,number,count,tell out,or over.
Annoncé: m. ée: f. Declared ,fhewed,aduertifed,infor-
med, fignified unto.
nnonce-iour. Day-denouncing,light-proclaiming.


Annoncement : m. 4 fhewing,declaring,fignifying,ad- |


! uertifing.

Annoncer. To announce,or denounce; to proclaime;de-
clare, fhew, fignifie, bring newes, aduertife, carrie ti-
dings unto.

Annonce-falut. Health-declaring. .

Annonceur: m. An announcer, declarer, proclaimer,


dings,vato.

Annonchali: m. ie: f. Difèfleemed, negleëted,carelefy
bandled,ill looked unto; alfo,pined, wafted, worne a-
way, growne carelelfe of bimfelfe,zot worth the ground
he goes on,by his owne carelefneffe.

s'Annonchalir. To grow careleffe of bimfelfe, or of bis
own health; (and thereby)to waft, pine,languif,weare
away.

Annonciation: £. 42 annunciation,a denouncement.

Annone. 4 kind of white, foft, fiveet, fanourie, and
kernellie- Indian fruit; alfo, meflin, er grudgins ; the
corne whereof browne bread is made for the meynie.

Annotation: £ An annotation ; a marke, note, ob-
Sirsation title, regifler ; or;a marking, noting ; inti-
t


Annotation debiens. 4 (eifure of the goods of of-
fendors that appeare not in perfon,or by Atturny,with-
. Mayeare after they bane beene funimoned.
Annoté. Marked, noted,obferued ; intitled; regifired;
alfo,whofe goods are feifed ; as in Annotation, —
Annoter. To marke,note,obferue ; intitle ; regifier.
Annuel : m. elle : f Anauall, yearely, done euerie


‘ year €. y ‘ :
Annuellement. Annually, yearely, euerie yeare, from
yeare to yeare.


‘ Annulaire: m. The Chauncellor of Fraunce ytearmed |.


oT the Kings fignet was bis great
E iÿ “ Kom A


=>


7
Ongiral frem ;


THE-ORIO=SFATE-UNIVERS Key


fignifier,aduertifer ; a bringer of newes,a carrier of ti- |


nee |e ee


1


TORRES PE FANS, Pa


th


ns
® x vd
LE


-4 "AL Nr O


AN T


Ancuisie : com, Aanular ; of aring ; like a ring ;
rouna,
Doigt annulaire. The ring finger, or wedding-ving
finger 3 the third finger, what which is next vuto the
little one.
Ligament annulaire. A certaine muskle, or flefhi
_ band, which ab cag of th'influp, and


receines, under it the tennons of the muskles belonging
tothe fore-part of the leg.
Annulle : m. ée: ££ Difannulled, annulled, annibila-


ted.
Annuller. To annull, difannull, anaibilate ; abrogate, *
cancell, make void,or of no effect. .
Anobli:m.ie:f. Ennobled, made noble, ingentilixed,
made a gentleman.
Anchiegs ennoble make noble,ingentilixe make a gen-
tleman.
Laverge anoblift, & le ventre affranchift ; Looke
Anobii sing ing
obliflement : m. An enn ingentilixing.
Anodin. Remedes anodins. Modes Hs
procuring fleepe) take from a Patient all fence of
Aine


paine,

Anoirci : mie: £ Blackned, made,or ie
ircir. Toblacken; tomake,or grow,blacke.

Anomal: m. ale: ry Inequall,rough pr not euen ; alfo, ir-


regular. .
{ Anombrer. as Annombrer. To number count reckon,


tell out,or ouer. ;

Anoncement. as Annoncement.

Anoncer. # Annoncer.

Anonces. The banes of Matrimonie.

D me ; ae :£N rap devang .
alfo,languifbing ; alfo, out of fale, out of requefi, out o
pr pe à + s will deale for.

Anonchaly. Negleéted ; or,as Annonchali.

Anonciade. as Annonciation ; whence,Ordre de l’a:
An Order of knighthood, inflituted in the yeare 1350,
by a duke of Sauoy.

Anonexie : f, Looke Anorexie.

Anorexie: f. P 3 pong of
Abpetite the of all meat ; fe of flo-

(A > |


pave eae


eatin deuouring too great a morfell. :
Pe artis A certaine bitter Gumme ; Looke Sarco-


colle,
Anfe : f. Thehandlesor eare of a pot,cup,ercawhereby we |


hold th 5 tuniti
torent ironies


, Anfes.
Les bras courbez en anfe. with armes a-kemboll.
Vn pot à deux anfes: Pro. An equiuocation;a word,


| de, of double meaning,or whereof a double conftrutti-
onm be made.


An@:'m, ée rif Eared ; or that bath an eare,or ban-


Anfée: kind of basket bauing two bandles, or eares,


Anfes: Eee arin Anfe (whereof this is the


Digitized*by Go. gle


Antartique. The circle in the Sphere called the South,
or Antarticke, Pole ; which, by reafon of th’eayths
oppofition, we cannot, in the[e parts of the world, dif
cerne.

Ante: f. as Tante; an aunt; alfo, the checke, or iaumbe
of a doore ; alfo,as Ente. ms 3

AntecefSeurs: m, Predeceffors,auncefiors.

Anteines : f. The fayle-yard ; the croffe peece whexeto
the fayle is faflened.

Anten. The me po
Des anten. À twelue-month agor.

Ie te crains aufli peu que les neiges d’anten. 1
fave thee as much as nothing ; 1 dread thee not at


Antenais: m. Shoots, or prigs of ayeares growth.
Antenne Apart. LA
itenois : m. A hog,an yearling, or yeare-old 34
lambe of the laft pm ete fetes
terieur: m.cure: f. Aaterior,fore, former,or that
is before the former; that goeth;or is (et, before.
Antericurement. Befire, formerh, in the fore-part,or


former place. 5
Anthere. The yellow tuft in the middle of a Rofe.
Anthoine. Anthonie ; 4 proper name.
Feu S. Anthoine: 4 fivelling full of heat, paine,and
redneffe; we call it al &S.Anthpnies fire.
Porcelet de S. Anthoine. The vermine called, a
Chef-lop,or Wood-lon{e.
ofat. Made of Rofémarie.
Anthracite. A precious floneyeberein there féeme to be
flames,or fparkes of fire.


| Anthromantie. Divination by the rayfing of dead


men,

Anthropopathie : f Humane,or mans,paffion.

Antiborée: f. That kind of dyall, which (contrarie to
all others) is to be turned towards the North; a North


dyall. 3
Antibuft. Cein& a l'antibuft. Girt loofely, careleffe-


by, or after the great-belly fafhion, the girdle riding
ouer the middle of the bofome ; alfo, girt buck-wards.
The chamber of Prefnce'


er of Prefence in a Prin-
ces Court ; the Chamber in a great mans boufe;
any outward which is next, or neere unto, the
bed-chamber.


Anticipant +0 A preuenter, foreflaller,anticipator.
Anticipant: m. ante : f. Anticipating, preuenting,


fore A

Annee f. Anticipation, preuention, forefall- .
ment ; alfo, the natural knowledge one bath of a thing
before he fee,or heare,it. |
Lettres d'anticipation ; The Kings letters, or Com-
million, mentioned in Appel anticipé. |

Anticipé: m. éc:f. Anticipated, prevented, fore-
fialled ; taken, or gotten before.
Appel anticipé. Th’Appealant prevented ; andvr-
à by the Kings letters ; or a fpeciall Commiffion
(procured by th’ Appealee) te fhew caufe for his ap-
pealing fooner then otherwife he would, or fhould, |
banc p Be
Partie anticipée. The fame.,

Anticiper. To anticipate, prenent , foreflall; take, or


es get before.
lurall) ends tyed [nave-wife, or made ‘Anticiper les quarorzaines des criées. A Ser-
fate fes. * sr serie = geant jt Pridabaties before the day appoin-
Anfeté. mr on jen it. 2
Anfette. bandle,or eare of a : tidate: m. An Antidate. ~
Anfouple: m. Late Entoaple’ ‘se Antidaté :m. ce: f. Antidated.
. Anfüle :f. 4 little handle. : Antidater. Toantidate. =
i Original from


TFHE-OHI@ STATE UNIVERSITY


AN
Antidore.4 requitall,a remunerationsone good turn for
another


_ Antidotaire : com.Antidotarie ; feruing far a counter-

: pa 3 treating of counterpoifons.

Antidote : m. An Antidote, or counterpoifon; a prefer-
uation againft poor, or cuill ayre.

Antidoté. Furnifhed with preferuatines , forearmed
with Antidotes, affured from peyfons with counterpoi-


fons.
{ Antidoter, To fivnifh with preferuatiues,to prefèrue by
Antidotes, to arme, ov affure again{t poy(on with coun-
terporfon.

nne : £42 Aatem,or fupplication.

ortunal : m, 4x oppofition,or croffe vato fortune ;
Somewhat againft fortune,

Antille de bois. A woodden latch of a doore; or, the
ving that ferwes both to lift vp the latch, and pull the
doore too,

Antimoine : m, Aatimonie ; a certaine white ftone, or
imperfect mettall (the beginning of filuer , and lead)
found in filuer mines ; and good for the eyes.

Antimonie :f. Contrarietie,or oppofition of two Lawes.

Antinormies. Exormous contrarieties.

tipathie : f, A” antipathie ; a contrarietie of natn-
vall bumours; anaturall, and extreame difagreement
of difpofitions ; croffing , or contrarie inclinations of
Seuerall perfons, without manifeft caufe knowne to
themfelues forit.

Autipelarpic f. The reciprocall loue of children to
their


Anti
Anti


tual kindneffe.
pm Reelin :f, A a or generall nt
_ compreffion , or repulfion of bumors,érc, whereby they
become the flronger , and the more ftrongly poffe (fe the
À _ parties they are in.
-Antiphones : £. The veciprocall voyces, aunfiveres, or
chaunting of two companies that fing by turnes,as in a


- oe Mer. : .
Antiphonnier :m. The booke of Anthems , (In a Ca-
thedval Church.) pit à
Antipodes : m. The Antipodes ; the people which goe
divegily against vs , or with the foles of their feet a-
… gainft ours.
Antipodium : m.A firplufage, ouerplus, addition, or
atage aboue meafüre.
Antiporte:f. An outward gate ; or,a gate that is inft
oppofite unto another,
Antiquaille. The Anticke; an Anticke ; alfo,an aun-
- tient monument.


delights in, the fearch, or ledge o iquities.
Antiquaire: ona men ae aes


ste} ane ient, flale.. se
Antique. Taillé à Antiques. Cut with Antickes, or
with Anticke'workes.  t


Anti en min i:
Acide untiently after the old maner.
Antifirophe:£ as i Se
on of two things, which be fomewhat alike.
Antonnoir. as Entonnoir,
Antonomafie: £. À Pronomination ; the vfing of an E-
pitbite,or propertie,in flead of the proper name whei-
unto it belongs.
4 Antonomatic : m. ique:f, Excellent,


| Antore: f. Yellow Monkes-bood,Aconits Mithridate.
Antrac : m. 4 Carbuncle(flone,or fore.)


. Looke Entra&t.
re: canerne, hole, or bollow-
neffesunder the à a :


ents ; or(more generally) any requitall,or mu- |


Antiquaire: m. An Antiquarie ; one that profeffes, or


ae


ae


APR


Anubet : m. The mame of an apple wherefexcéllent cy.
der is made.

Anui. To day; all this day.

Anuiéter. To deferre, flay,er keepe untill night ; aff,

» to benight make night,turne into night.
rc pete To wax night,te grow late, or towards
night.

Anuiter. as Anuicter,

Anulaire : m. The Keeper of the Kings Ring,or Signet,
called fo in old time: Oras in,Annulaire.

ire: com. Annular; of,or belonging to a ring;

Looke Annulaire.

Anullé: m, ée : f. Annulled, disanaulled, annibilated,
made effecileffe made voide.

Anullement :m. 4 annulling, difannulling annibila-


ting.

Adler: To annull difannull, annibilate, abolifh, bring
to nothing, make effcéileffe make voide.

pre :m.A Blind-worme.
Nxieté : f.Anxietie anguifhvexation perplexitie,care
carke, forrow of: at 7 = 2


Any : m.The bearbe Anife ; alfo, (the feed thereof)


Anny-feed.
Aorifle, 4 Tenfe: Grec.
Aornement.An orsament.attire imbellifhment,adorn-
ment ; as Ornement, |
Aorner. a Orner ; To detke, imbellifh, adorne, at-


tire.
Aorolat.#s Rolat. (Inthe cuflomes of la Bourt.)
Aorte. artere aorte. One of the three principall Arte-
ries of the bodie , iffuing fromthe left Ventricle, and
broad, end of the heart, whereunto firft it giues two 0-
thers, tearmed Coronales : Some call it the mother of


Arteries.
Aouillé: m. ée: £ nr A faded, full gorged, filled that


bis belly firouts withall. |
Aourfer. To burne at,or to,the bottome,as a pot,or fuffe
in a porwherein there wants liquor. |
Aouft:m.(The Moneth)Auguft ; alfè, Haruefi-time.
Double d'aouft. Anordinarie tax or [ubfidie payed |
encry Anguft vnto lords by their villeines, or fuch ae
bold land of them by a fèruile tenure, |
Vallet d Aouft. 4 Reaper,or Shearer; a Hind or
Hireling, for the time of Harueft onely. |
‘En Aouftles gelines font fourdes: Prov. In Au :
guft Hennes are deafe. |
Aoufté : m. ée : £ Reaped ; alfd, ripened. ss |
Aoufter. Toreape,or mow,as men doein Augufts ao,
toripenyas fruit,or corne does in Summer.
oufteron : m. A Reaper ; or as, vallet d'Aouft.
Aoufteux: m.eufe : f Ofor belonging to, Auguft; al-
So, fl ripe as moft fruit 1 in Auguft.
_ Aparier. Seeke Apparier. ;
A-part. Apart, alone, fingly, folely, prinatly, by bimfelfe;
affunder,one from another.
Apaff. Secke Appañt. @
Apafter. as Appañter.
Apedeftes, ignorant people : @Rab.
Apens. de guet apens.Wistingh, willingly; of fet pur
pofewith a full intent. LRU
ement: m.A full purpoft,determination,or intent
etre Teepe intend, or determine beforeband
To pi Jnten@; 07 Aeler mine 3
“to doe a willingly , wittingly , or of fet pur-
e.
A lx im. 4 Penthoufe ; alfo,an open gallerie (made
Ss fat fi par,
Aper To pearch ; to fet,or fit on 4 pearch,or brane
: Aperitif:


A


A PH


APO


Aperitif: m.iue: f. Of an opening power , or qualitie.

Abert. Apparant open, eni Aa smpal
Loy Dre loy apparente,

Apert. See Appert.

Apertement. Open!y,plainely ynanifeftly, ewidently;ap-
parantly, without di Lon.

Apertife. Seeke Appertife.

Apetiffant . Daintie ; whetting, or inuiting the appe-

tite, |

Aphairefe: fThe figure Apharefis;the taking of a let-
le ov fillable from the a ofa word. :

so pag m.Aa Aphorifne(or general rule in Phy-
(14


Aphorretique:com. Doubtfüll, vnfetledin opinion,
whofe mind, or iudgement is at oddes with it felfe.
Aphrodille:m. The Affodill, or Asphodill flower ; al-

fo, the plant that beares it; alfo, the budded root ther-


of. ‘
Aphrodile blanc. The white Afpbodill, Dutch Af-


; hrodille femelle. The Onion Ajphodill , round-

bulbed Afphodill, female Afphodill : Some alfo calla,

the Roques Afphodill, or little yellow ll,

Aphr ile mafle, The white Afphodill male Afpho-
p


Aphronitre. Salt-peeter.
phyer.as Afyer.

Abpiér :m. A place where Bees are kept, and tended.

Apilé. fort,& apilé. Strong; well fet, well truft , well
knit, well heaped together. i

Apiftolé : m.ée: £ Coufened,guld ; cuckolded, made a
wittall ; alfo, baited mwpped,taunted,

Apiftoler. To confen,or gull’; alfo,to bait pip,taunt af
fue with bitter girds; alfo,to hornifie,or gine the blow
that finarts not.

Apitoyer. To take pitie, to baue compaffion,of.

Aplanir. Seeke Applanir.

Aplanoyer.as Applanir ;a//o, to qualifie, tame,calme,
make asmild as a Lambe.

Aphgenens: men ip; Looke Appleiger.

AAplet: m, 4 kind of great drawnet,xfedinibe ffbing

- for Herrings,Mackerelserc. 4

Aplomb : m. 4 pense downe-right fall,feat,

OF. 34p Cents nae

s’Ap omber. Tofallor finke downe plumpe, by reafon
ca porn

A €: The. 1lipfè,or Reuelation of § tobe;
‘od (more generally) any Keuelation ; patefattion, de-

ation.

Apoctyphe : m. Th Apocrypha; Scripture thats not Ca-
nonicall ; alfo,(moft property) an obfcure place,lurking
hole,or corner, fecret thing.

Apogée : m. A fhrowd,or denne onder th'earth ; alfo,
the point of heauen wherein the Sunne, or any Planet,
ts fiertheft from the center of tl earth, }


see :m. as Appoinét sopportunitie,fitneffeerc. af


-afonapoingt. Fitly, for bis purpofe or twrne 5 after
bis mind according te bis bumour. STE
Apointé : m.ée : f. Pointed,or, fharpened at the point;
… alfo, referred, or appointed one’; as acanfesunto hea-

ving, Ly pete à >
intement.as Appoinétement. _:.
Apointer. fe finder DS
inti: m.i¢:f Pointed ; made with a point ; fhar-
pene a éd attbe ed 5 point ; fhar
itir. To ith a point ; to
TT sn
s'Apoitronner.Toplay the comard salfa,to grow laxie,

3


or flothfull.

Apo ES : f Henbane. defen af

ie: f. da Apologie, defence, purgation, excuse.

Apologue : m.4 Lars and go au rvrige tale,

wherein bruit beafls, or dumbe things, are fained 10
cake,

FAR s'Apoitronner; (and the better

word) to grow cowardly ; or,laxie.
ofe. The Sinewie Seperation of the mufiles,
thegme: m. Aa Apothegme ; a fort and pithy
e,

Apo :£ An eminent produttion , or outflandin,
pophyfe true,and infeperable part of a bone be yon d the
naturall places confining unto it ; Anotamifis call it,
a Proceffe.

A ique. One that bath an Apoplexie,

Apoplexie : £. Ax Apoplexie,or dead Palfe,

Aporetique :com, Ewer doubting, nener certaine in,
or afficred of , any thing ; (tbe c humor of a
Pyrrhonian Philofopber)

Apofeme : m. 4 Decottion of medicinable bearbes,in


water.
Apoftafie :£ An Apoftafie ; a veuolting, or falling away
pe a Religion » duetie, o purpofe, formerly profef


fed.
Apoftafier. To play th’ Apoftata, to Apoflatife it : 07, 10
rte Mae dede sente, te
Apoftat. An Apofiata.
Apoftater. as Apoftafier.
Apoftatizer. as Apoftafier.
Apofté :m. ée: £. Suborned ; fat appointed,
Apofteme. Seeke Apoftume,
Apoftemer. To fwell,or grow unto an impoflume,
Apofter, To fuborne , érc ; as Appofter.
Apoftil: m, as Appoftile,
Apoltile,& Apottiler; Seeke Appoftile, & Appofti-
er


Apoftolat:m..4 Apofilefhip; the office of an Apofile,
Aboftoles: f Letters 2 Maal ek 3 pr a i
or Letters of Appeale [ent by the Indge appealed from,
to bim that is appetite 3(A tearme (at this day)
of Ecclefiafiicall Courts.) |
Apoftolique: com. Apaftolicall, Apoflle-likebelmging
toan Apofile ; Secke Notaire.
Souliers il Apoftolique. Sandals.
Apoftolizer. To play the Apoflle.
Apoftre:m. An Apofile ; Embaffadour ; Meffenger ;
alfo, the Popes Deleguate for the receiuing of appeals
ina forrei arf} AGE
res. Apofiles ; alfo,as Apoftoles.
hé : m.¢e f. Auerted wryed,turned afide ; at-
foreuoked, recalled ;alfo,apofirephifed ; cut off by an


t €. +
Apoftropher. 70 avert wry turne afides alfo,to reucke,
‘or call backe ; alfo,to “pe ophife ; to cut off (by an A-


ophe)the laft vowell of a word.
ne :f, AnImpofiume ; an inwardfwelling fill
of corrupt matter,
flumé: m.ée: f.Impoflumed.or impofumated; mat-
tered, füppurated irwardhy, Le
Apoftumer. To impoftumate,or impoflume ; to rife in,
or pe 10,an impo 3 10 fppurate,or matter, ia-
. wardly.
Apotherapic. Pafiime, recreation; any exercife , or
ur Food ate after exercife.
Apothicaire : m. 4n Apothicavie. 7
Apothicaitaifle :com. Of am Apoibecarie, made, or
minifired by an Apothicarie; Apotbecarilike.


Original. from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY,


: M P P


Apothicirete: f. Apothecavifhip; the trade;or skill of


Mon eas f. Saded, fo fill as be can eat no more.
le To impouerifh ; df cr rire

Zeine,or Apozime. A econ mn, of water with
“aad s forts of hearbes and (pices,vfed in flead of a fÿ-


vp ppaillardcy. To fpend bis life in, or gine bimfelfe
ly to,wboorifine; to turne leacher  fmell-finocke,
gp terre boovemunger.


pee’, m, ec : €Appeafed pacified, quicted calmed,


Appaifement: m. An appeafèment,or appeafing; a pa-
cification,quictin walifying
ee To pre pacifie,calme, a AA af
wage, content,
Affez peut pleurer qui n’a nul qui l'appaife : Pro.
He may weepe bis eyes out that hath none to (ill bim.
Appaifeur :m. 47 a peafer pacifier peace-maker ; ;cal-
, mer quieter, qualifier contenter.
Appali: m.ie : f Growae,or made,pale.
Appalir. To wax pale ; alfo,to make pale.
Appanage. Secke es
Appang er. as ores
| App bane’ m.ée : f. That bath bad a portion ; that hath
veceiued achilds part ; that is alreadie beftowed, or
prouided for.
ET ag To gine a younger fonne bis portion, or childs


Appanncr: The fam ame.
KM mic: f. Beggared, impouerifhed, made
ore.
ppacrrrrit- To beggar. mer ifh make poore .
ee tm, ot Fun paired.
ille uffifamment, ou deuement. .4
. mé non unto ber equall,or, thats not difpa-
rage


Grand apparat . Great coyle, flirre, or adoc ; much


preparation for.
Apparcevoir. Seeke Apperceuoir.
| Appareil: m. Preparation, prouifion, readie-making ; a


decking,dreffing,trimming ; cooking, feafoning.
il. A Gorget ;al/o,a —

m.€e: f. Pre ve penne nade veadie,
ad: up fra dr scooked,or feafoned,(as meat)


|  alf,armedatall
siemens m, md Pepa prouiding, veadie-
1 epee deus


fase aii. fo way rente :

540.

. To pr  prouid 3
che Sake Se = sre vig ena,


2 TS . c ! ae
Appareilleufe:f. Amaïtingwoman, or chamber-maid,
Poles to dreffe ber Mifireffe ; alfo,a Bawde, »


ysplarnely, to full view ; alfo, feeming, or to the fhew.
rence : f. An 4 st or appearance; a «flew,


“nega ta euident, manifeft, open, plaine ;
Lent, notable notorious, doi mel mrarkeswuch |


Apparent me (Of ing mere kinfinan,vnto,


dy Go: gle


Apparenter aucun. To challenge, or acknowledge any
s sarees, as s'Appareflir.


‘Apphrtondis Seeke Approfondir.
Appariation : £ A matching,or parring ; alfo, a verpe-


Apparié : m. de: f. Paired, coupled, matched ; equal-


Apparier. To paire,couple, matchequall ;  ioyne; con-


Appariflant. Appearing ; 07,45 Apparent.
Appariteur : m. 42 Apparator, Sumner, Purfiyuant ;


Apparition: f. An Apparition, fon, Phantafns al-


Apparitoire : f. Pellitorie of the al.
Apparoir. To appeare, fèeme ; be feene, or few it [elfe,


Aggetacxas A preparation, decking, prouifion,finrni-


drefe, cooke,or, a 3) ale Lo armeor


pannes Apparently euidently manife re |


À <P sip


Bien apparenté. well allyed, of good houfe' that
bath peter pa ni ali ÿ


one for a kinsman.


ir. To grow idle, wax laxie, become fluggifh.


tuall affociation or correfpondencie of iurifdittion be-

tweene the king and a lord Spirituall or Temporall ; or

reese a lord Spiritual, and a Temporal ; neigh-
ours


led ;conioyned ; compared.


soyne yc together.
SA pyaer. To couple,or match ; as bide dos à in the
Spring, or a little before they would breed.

aire, as Apparitoire,


alfo,a bangmaa.


fo,an appearing,or mani


on afüdden ; alfo, to be apparant, manife(t, plaine, e-
uident.

Apparviflance : f. An appearance,or appearing; 2 fee-
mingfhewing.or fhew ; alfo, an cminencie,a paffing or
flandimg aboue others.

Apparoiltre.s Apparoir,

Appartenance : f. 4x appiertenance, an appendant ; a
proprietie; adue,or thing that belongs unto.

Ileft de noftre artenance. He is one of our
boufè | familie, or followers.

Appartenant. Pertaining, appertaining belonging vn-


artenir. To pertaine appertaine ; belung,or be due
sna alfo,to befèeme =
Apparu: m.ueé: f. Appeared nanifified fien,or fhewne
on a fudden.
Appalt: m. 4" appaf | bait ; allurement , inticement ;
alfo, a repaft, or meale
Fée Bayting ; af aluing, orinticing by baits;
0, ing.
:m, ites f. Bayted ; aff, allured,or inticed, as
a bait,or by the bait of alfo, fed.
Appaftelé : m. ée: £ Fed with the band; alfe, as Ap=


patté,
Appafteler. To feed by band, ov with the band 307, as@
bird feeds her yong ; al. as Appatter. :
r. To bait ; 40,10 allure,pr intice, by a bait, or
the bait of; alfo,to feed.


:m.An alwinginticing,or coxfening mate, |.
:m. _ : f. Full of allurements, fraught |


with inticement
À :m,as Appel, sal abird-call; the veed,or lit.
"Te peer App 4


fowlers call fille birds to their de-


peu Chymes; or,the chiming of bells ; alfo,
be Le
ne gia fer Se ds


ea: An appealing by a temporall


‘om t5'Gcclefaficall Court,or by an Ecclefia-
“Ufo ee Mir SEE on


an eriour.


A PP | À P P


Appel volage, An antient forme of Appeale vfed by
FD 0 pretended difturbance in the poffe/-
fon of their inberitance.
Fol see Anidle,or litigious Appeale 3 which is fina-
ble ; Seeke Amende de fol app
Contre la mort n'y a nulappel : Prov.Death.admits
no Appeale ; or,none canappeale from death,

t:m. An Appealant,or Appealer, one that ap-
peales; alfo,acaller.or crier unto ;(and hence do Fow-
lers name a Finch,Appelant ; ) alo, an appeacher, or


sonne his portion or childs part,
ued bis childs part ; alreadie prouided fur.


oa Calling ; appealing ; appealant ; fpelling; ac-
fing,


€

Appelé :m.ée : £.called,pamed,tearmed, cleeped ; al-

appealed from; alfo, fpealed ; alfo, accufed, appea-
ched, chargedapith.

cr. To call; name,tearme, cleape ; whoope for,cry

Unto ; alfo, to appeale from, or vnto; alfo, to fpeale, or

Set letters together ; alfo, to accufe,appeach, or charge

with.


on to do it,


ler comme d'abus. Looke Appel.
Fane omiflo medio, To pg vato a higher
Judge thanhim before whom th’ Appeale was by due
courfe to banc beene brought ; as when one appeales
from a Preuoft vato a — Iudge , baulking the
Bailli, who 1 betweene both, and who ( excepting
againjt th’ Appeale) may draw the matter to bee heard
before bimfelfe : Otherwift,it is in Appeales made vn-
to à Court of Parliament,the proceedings wherof can,
not be interrupted by an iferiour iuvifdittion ; nor is
there any great need they fhould ; for the reuerend lud-
ges of has bigh Courts remaund the moft part of thofé
caufès unto their due places,and fine th’ Appealants.
Appeler du rolle, To read,or call, ouer in court,the
roule,or catalogue of canfès which ave to be heard.
Appellant. as Appelant.
Appellation :£. 4 calling or crying vato ; anaming, or
tearming; alfo, an Appeale,or appealing; wherof Law-
pers two (general) kinds. _ ,
ion extrajudiciaire. 47


om abs
pes nh ba Court ; as, from a publicke Seyfüre,Ex-
C.


ecution. : ‘ :
ation indiciaire, Is from th’ Ads Ininnttions,
o7 Orders paffed in Court ; and mut be done by (beech,
and writing; both in thefe two words, l'appelle.
atoire: com, Appellatorie ; .
Appellé. as Appelé,


Appentis : m, The Penthoufe of a beufe.


ted beeded,efpied. :
Appercevable : com. Perceiuable, to be perceied.


of a matter ; an appear@nce er marke.


Hie.
ert: m.ce: f, rt readie,deiiter prompt actine
Aree Ret Minds Mae
ert(a Verbe Imper[onall) il Rp It appeareth,or


facilitic pimblenelfe dexteritie, featneffe. *
Appertife :f. Expertnéle, facilitie,veadinelfe, dextlri-
1e, iuitie nimbleneffe; featne[fe,band-
? ; ¢, valour, good skill, great a-
 biliti ia warlike matters. ,
i: mie: f. Made beanie, or vmveld&tby
| | weight that is layed on it)much burtbened, fore laden ;
preffed,or weighed downe, : .
antir. To make beauie, or vmveldie (by laying a
_ great load on; )toweigh,or preffe downe ; to aggra-
- vate,burthen;loadextreamely.
os arm antir, Tewax beanie, lumpifh, vmweldie,
oe meres : aoe making beanie, or vnweldy,
4 effing dovone.
rote an Ger i Louszed Joied for,longed after §
ciedaffetted, much defied, ;
Appetence :f. Appetencie; appetite ; 2 defire of, or flo-
Frise ae et Juf after: ba à
ter.To couet lo ujt after ; baue an appetite,
sie €, OF ii edt, fancies de neti


.as Appeler. 4 :
] : er ler; louer wbich
nement agree
Arps, To counterfeit, adulterate, falfifie, fo-


Phificatesalfose pole, fle, fine blem.
Polar ET TM
Ayo.


Appendre. To hang vp,or on high, as to the
les(or oto Saints in churches) alle, to de.
unto,


_ pendon, ,appertaine ifsé: m. ée: f. Leffened,diminifhed, 3 im-
Appennage’s fg Se of à Younger brother of | paired.extenuated ; alfo,in appetite pauing a good flo
__ Fraunce; the lands, ; Counties, or countries | macke; aid affected, coueted,defired, withan appe-
us gunto bis younger foanes, or bre- | tite. Bs Sigh
ren, for their sinter tsalfo,any portion of land, | Appetiffement: m. A leffening, abating, diminifhing,
or monty, delivered unto a fonne, daughter, or kinf: | impairing exte Ki

1 lieu of bis fiturerige ceffionto the whole, Appecificment de mefure, Looke Mefure,
which berenounces, vpontheïeceit thereof, or, (as Appetiffer. To leffen,diminifh,abate ; impaire, extenn=
Nicod.) thelands ba vn- | ate; alfoas Appetets > t


; ‘Appetit: ‘


Qriginal from


puatees ny GOuQle THE OHIO-STATE-UNIVERSITY


to bis younger fonne, and to bis beires for ener, a childs

crres tenues ena age. As it were to ufeon-

ly; for the propertic of them is in the crowne; and

therefore they cannot be aliened ; nor inherited bya
Woman. 5

Appennager.To afigne,or deliuer ouer vnte a younger


» That bath alreadie bis portion, that hath recei-


accufer, . as Appennager.
Vifage d'appelant.A beauie looke, forromfill vifage, ens.de guet ns. Deliberatly, of fet purpofe,
pitifull countenance, mingling Se Guet,

nsé : m.ée: f. Determined, meant, ov thought of


fore band ; wittingly,and of (et purpofe entred in-
to.


Appenfement. 4 bethinking himfelfofa matter before
do it ; alfo, a fill purpofe, meaning, or determinati-


Jour d'appenfenfeinent, & d'aduis. A time to con-
‘ult or deliberate of a matter.
s Appenfer. To deyberate,paufe,or bethink bimfelfe of a
ti n,n gd he do it alo, to determine or meaye it be-
fore hand,


rceu :m. eué : f.Perceined difeerned marked no-


Appercevance :f. 4 knapledge,perceiuing, or inkling


cevoir. To perceine,difcerne ; marke, note, be-


emeth to be fo; alfo,it is mamijeft, apparant, certai- 3


ment, Expertly,readily, promptly ; with good


APP


sean co
eee


in mangeant l'appetit {e perd:Prov.Eating better
than any thing quels appetite or abates the flomacke.
- En mangeantl it vient: Prov. Oze
ne drawes Ts .
Appetitif: m. ue : f. Appetitine ; ‘appetite ; muc
wifhing for ; alfo, bouger appetite, o7 defire un-
to it.
Appetits: m, as Efchalotes ; Ciwes;or Chiues.


icceter. Te peece, patchymend ; to fet apeece, or |


clap a patch unto,
App res. My: nets, red other implements vfèd,

Fibers foermen ; whence.
Medfieurs n'y trouverent pas grand appiges-Thg
Saw there was not much good to be got,muc fifh to be


caught.
Appiler. Toheape,or pile,togetber.


Applané :m.éc:f, Planed,lenelled, finoothed,euened, :


made plaine. ;
laneur: m. 4 plawer, leueller; layer, or maker of


things euen.
Applaneur de draps. The Cloathworker ; who with
bis thiftly cards doth fimooth,and ftroake down clothes.
Applani :m. ie :f. Planed, fmoo
lanier. ‘C0 finooth ; alfo,tofooth,or flatter.
Applanieur. m Applanifieur.
Applanir. To plaine plane euen,Jeuell, fmooth; tomake
: ee


Ul pitch,
Arles planing euening lewelling,finoo-
bing making equal.
Applanifleur : ip. 4 planer,euener leurLer, finootber;
‘and more particularly, the Cloathworker pwbo with bis
cards of taxle{moothes,and flroakes downec,lotbes.
nee an flat, flatting ; made plaine
mie: tted ; flat, flatting ; ma ine,
ov euen ; (qua D TT or fhrunke in.
Applatir. To flat,or flatten ; go make plaine,or euen 5
em ll, ike :
s atir. To fall, or fhrinke in. 4
Applatifan. Sinking, forinking in; making flaty or
plaine.


€,
En applatiffant. Flatling. :
atiffemen


pr tA flatting, amaking flat ; alfo, flat-
es

Applaudir. To applaud commend praife highly ; or, to
Fliptbe bonds or lampe ith the tn fie of ey ta-
ken in,or liking bid unto,a thing done.
laudiffement: m..4# applaufè,commendation,ap-

probation,or congratulation, expreffed by clapping of

rs iffeur. An + cer er; flatterer.


as À t.
Applege:f. .4 reall complaint, or bill of complaint for
legé: m. ée:f, Pledged,j obliged bound ,j
Appr Éric 4 ; HA 7 D


to be good. se
Applegement. as Appleigement.
ay lek 3
e : f.« Applege. |
Appleig’ m.¢e:f.lmpledged, obliged, in bonds for ét;
a Applege.
H m. À d. i i i: vUn-
or bill of complaint far: Rien
become pledge, gine a gage , deliner 4


d, euencdslenclled. |


A PP
pawne, be fuertie, enter into bond for ; alfo,as s'Ap-


ciger.

Appleiger fon marche. Toaffsre, warrant, or be-
come bound for the goodneffe of,or the goodnelfe of bis
right ae thing be fels.

4.8 iger.To complaine; to prefent vnto, or put
LUE aa abill of complaint Find, Ry
Application. 4n application appofition applying or lay-
| WZ ato; an inclination, bending, or bowing to ; alf>,

arelation,c ing,comparing with.
App uc. Applied,put, fet, or laied vnto ; inclined,
f a bent, or bowed to; alfo,conformed,or compa-
‘ Pid A
Appliquer.To applie,incline,bend,bow vnto; to difpofe,
put Je or layto ; alfo,to conforme compare ,affociate,
with.
s Appliquer à.To apply,exc,himfelfe to; al/o,to leane;
or adhere unte; al(o,to bumor or follow the bumor of.
yploininé de fommeil. In 4 found beauie, or dead,
epe; faflafleepe.
Applommer de fommeil, To Lay, or lull, faft afleepe ;
to bringsor caft into a beauie, or dead fleepe; alfo, to
make beanie , lumpi{h,drow/fie, flecpie.
Appoinét : m, Fitneffe, opportunitie ; a thing for ones
‘purpofe , after bis mind,according to bis bumour ; fuch
an occafion,or time,as were it in his choyce, hee would
appoint no other.
Appoinété. # Appointé,
Appoinétement : m, A compofition,agreement,recon-
ciliation, league, peace, made betweene friends fallen
out; alfo,afentence,decree,order, or Intunftion,for the
poffeffion of a thing in controuerfic; alfo,an appointing,
affigning ov graunting ouer Unto ; or,an affignement,or
graat,of a thing ; alfo,a pointing, or fharpening at the
point; alfè,a rule ginen by a Indge vpon conteflation ;


ence ;
inétement de fai&,ou,en droiét. Is(when a
fiat cannot be indged prefintly, or vpon the firft bea-
ring they of ; by reafon that the rie allegations,or
croffe ‘wan of the parties require further prooucs
fromlhem,or deliberation of the Court) the referment
of a caufe unto a further deliberation,or bearing.
Appoincter.To determine,order decree decide; finifh,
end,a controuerfie ;to accord, attonc, agree,reconcile,
make a league or compofition betweene,parties in con-
trouer fie; alfo,to appoint,affigne, or grant ouer unto ;
alfo,to point,or {harpen at the point ; alf, tu referre a
= caufe ouer vnto a deliberation, or bearing ; to
gine arulein acaufe.
Appoint: m. as Appoing. |
Appointant: m.ante : f. Determining,deciding,finifh-
ing, ending controuerfies ;agrecing,reconciling parties
in controucrfie; Ps Liat Al affigning oxer unto;
alfo,porating,or fharpening at the port.
inté: m.ée : fDetexmined,ordered;compounded;
pir" poe as acontrouerfie ; agreed, accorded.
veconciled,at a point, or peace wilh; alfo, appointed,
affigned,or granted vnto;alfo,pointed,or fharpened at
pointsalfo,yeferred ouer unto a further deliberation.
intez. Gentlemen of Companies ; fuch as ve-
cesse better pay than th’ordinary Sentinels, or foldiors.
Appointé du Roy de 500 efcus par an.Hauing 500
Crovones a yeare or entertainment ef the king.
inremient,& À ppointer. as Appoinétement;
Appoinéter.
Dir. To point to fharpen, or make fmall, at the
: end,or point.


Appointufant, Growing narrow , Joarye finaliste


Or heli nr
THE OHIO ZE ÜNIVERSIFY


vi | Sie


Pe,


APP


wards the end,point,or top.
s’Appointufer. To grow narrow, fharpe, or fimall, to-
wards th'end,point,or top. ‘
Appoifloanéanée: f.Stored,fürnifhedor fraught with
ij


Appoiflonnement: m,4 floring,firnifbing or fraugh-
ting with fifh.
Appoiflonner, To fiore, farnifh,or fraught, with fifi.
ort:m.4 carriage,or bringing vnto;alfo;an arrmal,

or approach; alfè,a landing place ; alji,avefort,a trou-
ping,or comming to in troups; alfo,the renencw,gaine,
or profit which a thing brings in to it owner.
l'Apport d'une fiancée. The portion in mouables, or
immouables brought by a woman contratted, vnto ber
füture husband ouer and befides ber dowrie ; alfo, the
goods come unto ber by fucceffion from the time of the
contraët ; alfo, the mariage gifts beftowed on her by
bimor others before the mariage be filly folemnized,

Apporté :m.ée : f.Caried ; or brought vaio ; alfo, arri-
ued ator,come ncere to,the bauen,or fhore.

Apportement: m.4 carrying ; or bringing to ; alfo,an
arriving at,or drawing ncere unto, the bauen,or fhore.

Apporter.Tocarie, bring,or beare unto ;alfo,to arriue,
or approach neere to the bauen,or fhore.
Chafque demain ap, fon pain: Prov. God fo
piouides for all bis créatures, that theyneed not care
much for the morrow.
Qui vient eft beau;qui apporte encores oe
Prov.Faire is he that comes, but fairer be that brings;
no emptie hand lookes fo wellas a full one.
Trop toit vient ala porte qui mauvaife nouvelle
apporte : Prov. Looke Nouvelle,

Apportionner.To apportion; to gine aportion,or childs


part.
Appol£ : m.ée: f. Layed,put, fet on, or neere to,added
unto; affigned,or exprefly appointed for.
Appofer. To lay,to fet of,or neere to;to putor adde un-
10 ; to deftinate,appoint,ov make to ferue for.
Appofition. An appofition ; an adding,or putting to; a
al ttin 07,07 wee to. - 4 pee
ppofté: m.ée : f.Appofled, fiborned sprocur er-
te precy ag unto, a bufine(fe,offet pur:
®, orto a place e purpofe, ot
Appofter. Toappolle, fuborne, procure underband ; to
pist iato,or appoint unto, a placesor pur-
Phe gone me ‘
An anfiver unto a petition, fet downe in the
margent therof’; pr ec api fmall addition vn-
to a great diféourfe in writing, F
Appoftiler. To , enlarger addeunton wri-
ting ; 10 anfiver a petition in the margent thereof.
Appovri: mic: f. Beggared,impouer:fhed made poore ;
undone. À 7
vrir. To impouerifh beggar make poore ; vndo.
Abbovailiement, m. An impouerifhment, beggaring,


“Undoing. ;
Appreci. 4 price,rate value fet on things ; or, as Ap~


ee


Apprehenfion : £. x apprebenfion, or comprebenfion ;

or gs cg ob csc ap
conerse of matters,

Apprenant : m.ante : f. Learning conning,compreben-


Apprendre.To leame,comprebend,conne, alfo,to teach,
"or (as we fay alfo) to learne one a thing; whence;
aux poiflons à nager, To teach fifhes to

fivumme ; (anidle,vaine, or necdle [fe labour) we fay,
to teach his grandame to grope ducks.

Apprenti :m1, À Prentife; learner , new beginner ;
Pholer
Vn apprenti deS. Crifpin. À Shooreker,
Nouveau apprenti n’eft pas Maiftre: Prov. À new
Prentife no Mafter; (and therfore a great difference
& tobe put betweene them, whether it be for vf, or in
eflimation.)
Fprentifage : m. A Prentifhip.

Ge» oo © : + reparation, dreffingprouifion making in
a readimeffe for. |
Apprefté: m.ce : f. Dreffed prepared , provided, made

readie for. ;
En bonne maifon!'ona toft apprefté: Prov, Al
things are foone prepared in a well ordered boufe.
Apprefter. To prepare dveffe,prouide make readic fir,
Apprimer. To initiate or giue the firft direttion unto;to
eater,imbolden,or flefh a yong one vpon ating which
before it durftnot meddle with.
Apprins. 2s Appris.
Appris : m.ife : £ Taughtzinfiratted ; nurtured,trained
up; alfolearned ; conned ; comprebended,
‘A peine endure mal qui ne l'a appris : Prov. Hee
hardly beares affiétion thatneuer iricd any, .
Envis meurt qui appris ne l'a : Prov.Uawillingly he
dies,that hath not thought of death; or,that hath not
learnt to die.
Apprivoifé: m.ce: £.Tamed, reclaimed made imward,
familiar, gentle.traétable ; boufall.
rebis trop apprivoifée de trop d'agneaux eft tet
tée : Prov. Looke Agneau. — fr ai
rivoifement : m.d taming, reclaiming making in-
- ward;traftable,gentle; boufall,


Apprivoifer i To tame, reclaime, make inward, gentle
attable, fmiliar; boufall. tts Mle


F : m.iuc* f. Approbatine approning.
Approbation :f. 4a approbation, allowance ; confir-
matio


a of.
Aperocban Approaching,drawing neere vate ; arvi-
ving almoftat.
Approche : f. An prete drawing neere unto,
Approché: m.ée: f, Approched, drawne neere to ; al-
moft arrived at ; (alfo,adiourned,cited,or ferued with
proces to appeare: ŒNorm.) 2 7
rochement. Az approaching, drawing nigh , arvi-
* king toward or almostat,
rocher. To approach; to come,or draw neere unto;
 toarrine towards,or Hr at; Gide adiourne, cite,
or fummon to appeare,by proces: €Norm.) 3
Approfité: mé: À Benefited,profited by; turned,or
imployed unto the profit of; alfo,receiuedyor gathered,
as the reuencw or fruits of aninheritance,
fitement: m.An a uantaging, profiting ringing
profit unto ; a turning,or imploying unto the profit
of ; alfo, a veceining taking,or gathering of the rewe-—


7 new,profits or fruites of anmheritance.


Approfiter. To profit,or thrine by ; to make profit, or
gaine of ; to bring profit vate ; to tine ,or imploy vaso
profit ; alfo,to receime ,take,or gather the ge :


Original-from


THE-OHIO.STATE UNIVERSITY


APP


A Q V


fits, or fruits of an mberitance ; (In which fence the
M ra Piccard,Lawyers vfe it much.)
ir. To deepen; or, to make more deepe, and
3 todig firther into.
propriancé : :£ Am appropropriation , or appropri-
3 à takiag , or connerting a thing vato bis owne


uf,

Approprié : m, 6e : f, Appropriated,conuerted unto bis
owne ufé ; alfo, fcpt applied, matched, confor-
med,accommodated,

Appropriement : m. À fitting, conforming accommo-
dating; alfo,as Appropriance,

Apptoprier. To fit match,conforme,approper,accommo-
ous 3416, to appropriate, or conuert vnto his owne


Approffe. de grofle approfle. Violently, vebemently,
Apr ges  frength. agPr
s'Approvifionner. > farnifh bimfelfe with,to pronide
emt of pecefjaries,
Approuve : m.ée:f, Approued, allowed, anowed ;
soothed confirmed, found good confented vnto.
Approuveinent : m. An approuing, allowing, auow
ing; 4 foothing ; a confirming, a confenting vato,
prouver. To approue, allow, anow, find good, like
well of, confirme, footh,conféent vato.
App pe: :m. Any thing that flayes, or fisflaines, a pot
on bi
Appuré: m.ée: f, Cleered, cleanfed, purged, clarified,
purified ; alfo, difébarged, as a debt; paffed,or fully
eas an account,
ep 7 :m, À dan nur clarifies pori-
ing ; alfo, the difcharging of a debt; the pafing, or
full-cleering of an account.
nee. To vchaiipurye.sloafe. pike.


urer vn compte. Tocleere an account , to pale | Aq


aietening, to procure a Quictus
Appurer at he bmg A bee ab.
r vnemende. Tovrate,alfeffe,or tax, an A~
merciament .
Appuy: m. flay ,buttreffe,prop,reft,or thingto leane on;
alfo,as Appuye.
Appuy d'amis. Support , flore , or fivength of


ends.
f de la bouche, ou dela bride. ( In borfeman-
the reft upon the hand ; and hence ;
Cheval de bon a ia A horfe ofa temperate , and
Moan reft vpon the
uyal:m. A leaning foci
APP f, Ano, seme et Wags gallery,
ton th wufide with railes to leane <a
uyé : m.éc:f. Stayed propped.fupported, fuflained,


six 2 alfo,vefled, or leaned, | on ; De dede


A ppuyer ra oe prop, Support, Suftaine, “vaderprop,


= Appuye Ta re, or leancons cs sea


Aprelle.s
rn os flowing set


En apres. pe. qe rfi a
more ; confequently ; fo then


xl eftoit RÉ apres leR , de. Hee.


: eg ‘King ; Dinde D and, or earne Ds


:£ The


L AND à ac
to Prefidentsor 1 Va “and their 4 oe
of afternoone Orders ; or the afternoone

re 5 one)


Go: gle


Apres-germain. vn coufin apres-germain. A coufin
germaime remoued,

Aprefté. as Apprefté.

Aprique: com. Sunnie,pr that lyeth open tothe Sunne,

Aprisonner . | eave ole prfoner.

Ree Secke Aff
Apte: com.Apt, À cb agytecble wel fitlimgymeet,
comuenient

mA «à £ Hot abilitie ; alfo, aptneffe , meet-

fes conneniencie, fitablenefe.

April m. nes Seeke Avril.

: £, Aquatile, waterie, lying in the
pus
atique: com, Waterifh; of, or belonging to, the
water ; lining in water.
Aqueduct: m. An Aqueduét,or conduit of water,
Aqueux: m.cufe : f. Wateriewaterifb, full of water.
rgent aqueux. Quick-filuer.
Humeur aqueux. A humour in the forepart of the
a of conjiftence almofi like the white of an egge,
andfe et there,to bridle the impetuofitie of colours def:
ing upon the eye,and fimewhat to flay the fir(t vio-
lent j incounters of obieéts.

Aquiefcer. as Acquiefcer.

Aquilin: m.ine: f. Ofan Eagle, like an Eagle ; as,
oy Aquilin ; a Hawke nofe ; a nofe like an Ea-
gle
Pierre aquiline. The Eagle flone ; a certaine flone,
(found in an Eagles neft)which applied vato the thigh
v4 a woman that isin labour, is beld to gine ber much


Aquilon: m. The Northerne wind.

a male: £, Cold, Northerly, fubieé vnto
the North.

uilonien: m, enne:f. Ofthe North ; belonging to

the North,

A Ton This ; or ( altogether as rudely ) thilke:


ofité:f. Aquofitie waterifhaelfe,
. Deux & ar. yi ace : Rab.
Arabe :m, 4 Arabian,
Arabefque :f. Rebeske worke ; a finalt , and curious


ue! com. Arabian-li
Arabic :m.ique: £. Arabian of Arabia,
Gomme Arabic. Gimme Arabicke ; iffves from the
ante Acacia,th’E prier thorne.
: com. Eara aus k
Aint. 7 greene mf venimous, and bloud-ficking


ago, Pal, thinne, and (plendant membrane


eye (not much unlike a Spinners web) which |


fèruesto vnite,and retaine(as the leaden foyle of aloo-
king glaffe)the formes receined. A


Oh. An oyntment made of Brionie roots wild Cow- |


cumber roots and other things ; good againft Crampes
Pee eat er
A Spider ; a Spinner,

rer de mer.as Maie ; The greateft kind of crab;
alfo, as tne AA

Le pertui araigne.A certaine hole in an Afro
labe, re ps ents Fents be: Pole of the world,and with a
Bb le thereof, à _ together all the ta-

belonging to the Afrolabe.
ile de l'araighe. A cobweb.


ont fait leurs toiles fur nos dents,
Le alge long fafting, are grovne full of cob- |


; ree


ae ae +


Et ) .


ENIP ET"


CON en: at) i TERRE


A) #


A R B


A RB


Araignée : f. À cobweb ; or as Araigne.

Araigneux : m.cufef. Full of fpiders, fpinners ; or of
cobwebs , alfo, bunting , or feeding on , [piders ;
whence,

Souris araigneufe. A Shrew moufe.

ignier :m. ere : £ Spiderie ; of, or like, a fpider,or
cobweb,
Tunique araigniere. as Aragnoide.

Arain : ln. Bal :

Oeil d'arain. A red, fierce, fierie, or fparkling eye,
fitch as a Lion bath.

Pierre d’arain. Red Vitrioll ; the flone wherewith
Braffe is tried,

Il penfe que nuës font pailles d'arain. (wee fay of
Sich an Idiot; ) hee thinkes the Moone is pa 4 of
greene cheefe,

Araire. A plough. qLionnois.

ifonner. Seeke Arraifonner,
Araifonner la marchandife, To fet arate, or price
on it,

Aramme. A fine, ov amerciament fèt on a plaintifes, or
defendants bead.fornot appeari pes

Aranfor ; as Harenc-for ; Ared herring. ‘

Araroye. A round, and skreene-like ornament of fea-
thers, worne by the Weft-Jndian Sauages at their
backes.

ore a mo

:f AC ont ; alfo,a Bow-net ; alfo,the
finewie Croffe-bow , wherewith a man fhoots , not
deere, but bis decre)

Arbalefte à boulet. 4 Stone-bow.

Arbalefte à gelais. The fame.

Arbalefte de paffe. The greateft, or longeft kind of
Croffe-bow ; or as in Palle, ;

Arbaleftier : m. A Croffe-bow-man, one that fhoots in,
or [crues with, a Croffe-bow ;alfo , a Croffe-bow ma-


“Atbalefte e:m. The fhooting in a Croffe-bow,

Arbaleftrie. as. pee ce ra

Arban: m._ A dayes worke in euerie weeke | due by
Some Vaffalls , that bold by Villenage , vato their


Arbaufier : m. ‘Th’ Arbute,or Strawberrie tree. ~
(poate Ss et ts ‘bie
rbenne: f. A kind of white Partridge (of a Pige-
, amr digne) thats rough legd , and footed like a Hare;
Some bold, that fheis Summer, and onely in
Winter, white ; others, that one kind (which lines in
plaines,and vallies)is euer browne; and another(which
lurkes on the ie fides of faowie mountaines) al-
wayes,and all-oner white.
Arbi : m. Anaward , or arbitrement ; the [en-
tence , determination , authoritie, or Office, of an
Abi ca co Arbre jerk Yo,at the
itraire : com. Arbitrable; arbitrating ; alo.
re seeder lens oo
Amende arbitraire. Looke Amende.
Arbitrateur: m. 4x Arbitrator , vmpier, fiickler ;
a friendly compounder of differences (according to


Asbiere:-m. An Arbitrator (who is to iudge by the
F5 aren a af, will, pleafure , fancie;
ho


of mind ; libertie of indgement » fieedome of


gree ;iudge,or adindge by award,
Arborateur. A planter, primer , dreffer, breeder of
trees,
Arboré : m. ée : f. Stucke downe d, or plante
an enfigne into the mes 3 fet ge vise 2 hs;
Arborer. To fix,plant,or fiicke downe into the earth ; to
Set,as a tree,upright.
Arborife. À kind of white free fone.
Arborifer. To fludie the nature, to obférue the proper-
ties, of trees.
fier: m, An Arbute,or Strawbervie tree.


Arbouce; ou,Arboufe :£ The harf red berriecalled
an Arbute,or tree-Stravberiie.
Arbouficr. as Arbofier,


Arboutan. as Arc boutant. @Rab,
€: m.A tree,
L'arbre fourchu. A flanding on the bead, or on the
bands, with out-fpread legs.
Arbre marin,ou de mer. There of Starre-f-


foes pre foshecanfe She fpreadsherfelfe abroad like À.


Y Arbre d'un moulin . Th’ Axletree ; the beame that
—_ the wheele of a water-mil,and failes of a wind.


l'Arbre d'un navire. The Mafie.
Arbre de que The pra of Paradife ; growes in
t,and beares loffomes ak at the t

re all but ls te tak debs Kj bie

apple,and tafis moft delicately,

l'Arbre d'un prefloir. The beame,tree, or timber of

fl preffe; the thickeft, and longeft peece of wood be-
ig tout, ‘
redevermilion , The Scarlet Oke, or Scarlet

Holme Oke.

Arbre de vie. 47 Aromaticall tree, fo called.

Arbre trop fouvent tranfplanté ne porte pas fruiét

à planté. Looke Planté.

L'arbre ne tombe pas du premer coup : Prov.

Thougha little man can fell a great Oke, yet falls

it not at the fir{t blows Rome was not built on a

day; nor are great matters atchiened as foone as at-


De l'arbre d'un prefloir le manche d'un Cernoir:
Prov, (we fay of one that hath fquandered away great
wealth) bee hath thwitten a mill-poft to a pudding


pricke.
De doux arbre douces pommes. 4 fiveet tree yeel-
deth fauourie fruit.
reau :m.A fhrub,or finall tree.
Arbret. 4 little tree.
Arbrier: m.The Tillar ofa Croffe-bow.
Arbrifleau : m. 4 fhrub.
Arbrifselet. 4 little fhrub.
Arbriffelet d'aigreur. The red Goofeberrie flarub.
Arbufte : m. 4 fhrub; alf,a groue of trees that are


lopt,and cut. :
Atbufter. To plant a ground with thicke rankes of


ubs.
Atbuttt :m.jue: £. Shrubbie ; alfo,ruaning,or grafving
up by the fide of a fhrub ; as lue, Vines;drc.
Arc :m.A bow ; a hand-bow, or long-bow ; alfo,avault,
or arch in building ; alfo, the circle that enuirons the
ball,or apple of the ye 5 the bow,or Iris of the eye.


thought. Arc boutant. A» arch, bowing pillar, buttreffe, or
Arbitré: m.ée: f. Arbitrated, flickled; awarded; poft, that fèrues to , fipport, or underfet a buile
~ compounded , agreed ; indged, or admdged', by a- ding; alfo,the arke,or arcbofa vault; the couer of a
ward. TS cradle; the tilt of a boat,erc.
Arbitrer, To arbitrate, flickle ; award ; compound , a- Larc au ciel. The Rainebow. &.
c
Original from


Digitized GO gle


THE: OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY
*


ARC


Arc à geler ; ou, jaller. 4 flone-bow.

Larc du jour. The wole day, from Sunne vifing to
the fetting thereof.

Arc Turquois. The Turkifh long bow.

Maplufieurs cordes à fon arc. He bath many firings
to bis bow (viz, many trades, meanes, helpes, depen-
dancies, or affurances, to rely on.)

Pafler par l'arc S.Bernard. To be befhitten ; to beray
bimfelfe.

Desbander l'arc ne guerift pas la playe: Prov.The
bows unbending healeth not the wound(it hath made;)
the withdrawing of forces ts no amends for the wrongs
or barmes pobich they haue done,

Arcade : , An arch,or half circle.

Mere les mains en arcade fur les coftes. To fet his
bands a kenbow. S

Arc-agelet. Looke arc.

Arcanne :f. Rudle,red chaulke red oaker.

Arcafle : £:The Counter(in the Poope) of a Ship,

Arc-boutant, Looke in Arc. :

Arceau:m. A little bow; bought; arch; alfo, a Sa-
dle-bow ; alfo, a Carpenters yard , or workehoufe,

Arceler. Seeke Harcelet.

Arcenal : m. An Arcenall ; an Armorie ; a floreboufe
of Armour ; Artillerie ; Shipping,or Ships.

Archade. as Arcade,

Archail. as Archal. :

Archal & ; fil d'archal. Yellow laten wire ; or copper
wire,

Archant: & ; Archat; a Archal.

Arche: f. A cofer,cheft; butch, binne ; alfo,an Arke;
cae l'arche ie ; af, RTE a bridge,
Sc; alfa, the well of the Pumpe of a Ship.

Arehecapelein de toute Flanders, The Arch-chap-
lene (or as fome thinke ) the Chauncellour of Flan-


Se
Archediaconé : m. An Archdeaconrie.
Archediacre : m, An Archdeacon,
Crotré en Archediacre. Dagd vp to the bard
beeles ; (for fo were the Archdeacons in old time ener
woont 10 be,by reafèn of their frequent, and toylefome,
V ifitations.) ;
Archeé :f. 4 bow-fhoot ; or, the reach of a bow ; as
far as a bow will carrie,
Archelette: £ Alittle arch, or avke ; afo, a womans
eare-wire. .
Archenocher:m.4 chiefe Mariner ; the Pilot,or Ma-
fe of al. are
Archepreftre:m. 42 Archaprieft,Higheprieft, bead-
priefi,chiefe-pricft, Bay
cher : m. An Archer or Bowman ; alfo, a Yeoman of
the (Kings) Gard ; alfo , one of the Prouoft Mar-
attendants , or gard ; allo, a Warder ina
Towne, or fortrelfe ; (whofe ordinarie weapon , at
this day a Halberd, was in old time a bow , and ar-
rowes ;) alfo,ahorfeman, who in feruice euer accem-
panies the Gendarme des Ordonnances ; to whom
though he be fomewhat inferiour , and though behaue
but Bale as much pay (about twentie pounds fterl.a
yeare) yet is be to be a Gentleman of birth and bree-
ding ; or fuch a one as bath beene Captaine , Lieute-
want, Enfigne , or Sergeant Maior,of a foot compa-
nie fix yeares together : and whofieuer will be a Gen-
* darme muft formerly awe beenean Archer of at the
Ateaft a yeares continuance (if the ordinances be duely


d
Arches ue The ordinarie watchmen of the
ti ‘aris; (who are not Burguers, but a kind


ARC


A re gt 3 both appointed , and payed by the

ing. |

Franc archer. Looke Franc.

Archerie:m.4 match of {hooting;al/o,a field,or ground,
to fhoot in.

Archerot : m. A little Archer ,a young Bow-man.

Archet: m. The bow ofa Violyerc.

Archetype :m. 4 principall type , figure, forme ; the
chief patterne , mould ; modell , example, or fam-
ple, whereby a thing is framed ; an authenticke, or ori-
ginall draught.
chiatre : m. À principall Phyfitian,

Archidiacre. An Archdeacon.

Archiduc. An Archduke.

Archier : m. as Archer.

Archifs :m, The Rolls ( for the Crowne) or , a place
wherein all the Records,Charters,and Euidences that
concerne the King,or belong vnto the (rovne, ave kept
in chefts,and boxes.

Archimandrite: m. 4x Abbot; a Generall, or Gouer-


nour of Hermits; a Superintendent,or Ouerfeer of uch -


as refide in defart caues,and dennes,


Archimarmitoneraftique: m. Aa Abbey-lubber, -


07 Arch-fiequenter of the Cloyfter beefe-pot, or beefe-


boyler.

Ve : 2 00e A proper name for a man.

C’eft la famille d'Archimbaud , plus y en a &
pis vaut: Prov. (Said of a flate,or famt'y, thats pefte-
ved with rakebels,)

Architeéte: m. An Architett; a Gouernowr , Ouer-
Seer, diveétor ; a chiefe deuifèr | contriner, or framer,
of buildings ; a worke-mafler, or mafter workman, in
points of Architeéture.

Architecté : m. ée : f. Built,contrined, fiamed, fifhio-
tied ; fet,or made vp,as a boufe, ec.

Architeéter. To gouerne,ouerfèe,dielt,a building;alf,
to contriue,deurfè, frame, fafhion ; make,or [et vp, ar-
tificially,a building, crc.

Architeéta i
an Architeét,ov Architetiure.

Architeéture: fr Architedture ; the Art, er Science of
building ; the framing, or building of a houfe , &c;
peda En frame of a boufe, ov building; an edifice,or

wilding.

Acchitrert :m. The Architraue (of pillars or flone-
worke ; ) the reafon peece, or mafier beame (in buil-
dings 4 timber.)

Archives. as Archifs.

Archool.Duf ; (of Alchool,an Arabian word.)

Archure: f.4 mill-boope,or mill-cafe; the open cheft that
bolds the mill-ftones.

Arcoir . as hier au foir. Yeflermight ; (a ruflicall

ord.)


w
Arcon: m. The arfon,or bow of a fadle.
ae De: lesargons. To caft off borfebacke or out
the fadle.
Arçon:f. A burning,or fetting on fire.
Arconné : m.ée :£Set on horfebacke, ov betweene the
‘fadle bowes; feted or fet fafl,in a fadle.
onner. To faflen, fetle,ov fet fure; asthe breech be-
tweene the bowes of afadle. s
Arpanet ne Dae To underprop a vine both be:
ve and bebind.
Acoma :m, eufe:f. Of, or belonging to, a fadle
bow ; alfa, fit to bang, or to be carried at,a fadle bow;
whence ;
Malerte arçonneule. A capcafe ; male,bndget,érc.
Arçonnier : m. re : f.as Argonneux. s


Original fror


THE OHIO-STATESUNIVERSITY


onique: com. Architelliue; belonging to |


Fy Arco=


à ab oti les


yay TP


A RD


Arcotic : m.ique:f, Benummingflupifying.

Sebi : M.4 lend of laten,or copper, whereof kettles are
made.

Arétique : com. Northerne or Northerly,
Cercle Arétique. À Circle in our Hemifpbeare, cal-
ledthe Pole Articke.

Arctute : m. The flarre Boëtes (which followeth charls
waine.)

Arcuer. To arch ; bow,bend;, grow compalfe,or crooked,
like an arch.

Arcure:£. An arching, bought, or bow ; compalfe , or


bowing.
Ardamment. Ardently , hotly , féruentiy; earnefily,
cagrely, vehemently ; with great beat ; paffion, or de-
€


Ardans: m. $. Hermes fires ; the flittering, or going fi-
ers, flafbes or flames,which be feen by as tp neere
unto waters,

Ardant: m,ante : f. Ardent, boat, burning ; feruent;
cagre, earneft, greedie, vebement, moft affectio
nate,

Chambre ardante. Looke Chambre.
Eau ardant. Aqua,or Aquauite,
Feu ardant. white Vine, white Bryonie, wild Nep,
Tetterberrie ; The wallons, fayes Gerard,call Garden
Nightfhade, feu ardant.
Vin ardant. Aquauite.

Ardent. as Ardant.

entement. as Ardamment.

Ardeur : £, Ardour ; beat,burning ; féruencie; eagre-
neffe, earnefineffe, vebemencie ; greedineffe ; excee-
ang affection,extreame paffon.

Ardid. # Ardit.

Ardille: £, Clay,loame,tougb mold,

Ardillé : m.ée : f. Dawbed,or done ouer with clay,
iller, Toclay; to dawbe,oi doe ouer, with clay.
illier : m. ere: £. Clay,clay-like ; of clay.

Terre ardilliere.Tough earth , ov clay,whereof brick,

and tyle may be made, ;


Ardillon : m. The toung of a buckle.


Ardixim, as Liard ; A coyne thats worth iij.d.Tourn,
oir. To burne,or be on fire; tobe inflamed, or kin-
dled ; (hence) alfo,to be fos earne(t; or hol,in a mat-
ter; to loue en. he 46 fernently, couet ve-
hemently, long for verie much x al, toinflame, or [et
on fireg as in the Prouerbe,
L'argent ard gent.


ARE


Arencux: m, eufe :£, Sandie,grauelly ; fill of andor
of grauell,

- Seeke Arranger.

Areniere : f. A fand-pit,or granell-pit ; a plot whereout
Sandor grauell is digged.

Arentelies: £. Goffjmere ; the long, white, and cobweb-
like exhal ction, that flyes on the ayre in Sunnie, and
Summer, dayes, Pe ñ

:m.eule:f. Full of fmall grauell, or
er of finalt grauell


Arer. To plough,till eare the ground.
Arere ed plough. r
MTS Prefently,euen now , by and by : €Gafc.


Arefte : €. The finall bone of a ffh ; alfoythe eyle, ane,
or beard of an eare of corne ; alfo, ibe edge, or out-
flanding ridge of a flone or ftone-wall.
ee du dos. The backe-bone ; or,the ridge of the

acke.
Arefte d'unefpee &c. The Crefl,ofa fword, crc; a
Sharpe rifing in the middle thereof. ;
A zm. eufe : f Full of final bones, as à
og rf, 24 = hr $
Z. Now, prefently, by: qGafe. €Rab.
Arfie LA mies fiflLtornebeake Snacetfih, Ganeffb,


Piperfifh.

Arai f, A Raddifh root.

Argalie:f. 4 (Chirurgions) fquirt , or firinge ; or the
inflrument wherewith he fearcheth the paffages of the
vrine,or bladder,
rganete. AWire-drawers bench,

Argatile. A kind of eres op titmoufe.

Arge. A lightning, which blafleth, and maketh black,

enocher. as Arche-nocher; O7,one of the Ar
eee > who fayled with Fafon for the Golden
Fleece. j


Argent: m. Siluer ; alfo,money,coyne, chinkes, gilt ; al-


50, Argent,in Blafon.


Argent aqueux, Quick-filuer. - | '
’ dndrée Fine,or purified filuer, of xj.d.
eighteene grains fineneffe ; this the finors make at firft
= into wedges, and marke them with their puncheons, :
thereby undertaking for the goodneffe , and value
of. :
ent comptant. Readie money; whence;
Agent Saale porte medicine: Prov. Readie
money isa readie medicine; or, procures any mediv


LIP RR ee ee ee


a 1: ft ee ee 8 al


cine. 3
ent de Cour. Siluer of xj d. allay (twelue grains
nes than Argent le Roy) heretofore the proportion
for all kind of Goldfinithes worke.
ent mignon. as Argent comprant.


Ardoife :f. 4 flate. : |
Ardoifé :m. éc :f. Slated, couered with flates ; alfo,
Pr M “atte €. fill ofor, filled with, (lates
im, oe, ( d ine) .
Ardoifiere: £ A flate-pit, late quarrey, ground full of
: ©


fates. . 2 nt le Roy. The Kings filuer ; the filuer thats v-
ifin :m, ine: f. Slatie,or,of flate. Sed, nove adayes, for coyne, and Golcfinithes worke ;

ie: £. A little brooke ,or reyne, that gently runnes fix graines in the penme weight bafér than Argent dé
; a field. PE . Cendrée; (it comes to 47. s. 6. d. Tournois the


te, as Atdoir, Stes
Lim: f, Hard ; painefiull, 3 greatyam-
ple s bigh, feepe, daungerous ; bard to get on, or come


ounce.)


Faire del’ t avec les dents. To grow rich by
faring bard ; by flaruing the bellie 10 af she pur.
‘A beauieu bel argent. Rowrdly, ingood earaeft,


 Ardy.as Aad Me > without faining da liance,er delay; alfo,as good as is
Arechal. fild'aréchal. 2s Archal. brought one for another.
Areille, 2s Oreille: ¢Norm. Dutemps qu'on fe cacha. pour prefter de l'ar-
Arene: f. Sand; grauell gent. In good old times when men were loath to
Aréne. A Theatre for Fencers; a place toivft ia,flrowed | —publifh tbeir owne goodneffe , or the neceffties of o-
with grauell; and bence was th thers. Lau 4
tre Nifines called des Arènes.


ee a l'en puis parler pour mon argent , 7 4rcweit to
7


Original from


THE OHIO: STATE-UNIVERSITY


A RG
coff; 1 can fpeake of what I haue paid for.


veut avoir & argent enfemble. He wil bane
both my cloath and bis owne coine; (applyable to an
unreajonable chapman,pard bargainer,fore dealer.)
Leterme vaut l'argent. The Terme is worth the mo-
ney; (a phrafe moft vfed by thofe whom the benefit of a


little time makes to negleét the paiments, or punifh- |.


ments whereto they be fubieët.) 2
Argent ard gent: Prov. Mony burnes many; (viz.
the loue thereof enflames their hearts.)
Argent contant porte medicine: Prov. Ready mo-
ney 35 a readie medicine.
Argent fai& guerre: Prov. viz. It mowes men Lo be-
| + enables them to follow, it,
rgent fait perdre, & pendre gent: Prov. Looke
Perdre, or Pendre, :
Argent fai& rage, & amour mariage: Prov.Coyne
moues men unto rage,loue vato mariage.
Argent fai& tout : Prov:All(earthly)things are com-
mañded,and compaffed, by it.
Argent frais,& nouveau ruinele Iouvenceau:Pro.
Th aboundant,or free ufe of money ruines youth,
l'Argent quand l'orge: Prov.One für another: when
we baue thew ware let them baue their money.
Argent receu Ie bras rompu : Prov. Looke Bras,
C’sit argent qu'argent vaut: Prov. Nothing but
money 1s money-Wor th.
En argent {oit le capital de celuy là qui le veut
mal: Prov. (Belike,becaufe the keeping of it is both
finfull, and cafuall,)
Quand argent faut rout faut : Prov. He that wants
money wants all things.
Qui a argent a des chapeaux : Prov. Mof men fa-
D the monyed man; or, be that bath money hath moft
ings.
Qui n'a argent en bourfe ait du moins du melen
bouche : Prov. He that cannot pay let him pray.
Amour faiét beaucoup,mais argent faié tout:Pro.
Loue is potent, but money omnipotent.
Bon marché tire l'argenthors de la bourfe : Prov.
Good cheape commodities are notable picke-purfès.
Defolation paroift toft en argent avancé, &c:
Looke Defolation.

e, argent, & vin, ont leur bien, & leur ve-
nin: Prov. Money, winc,and women, baue good and
bad things ia them.

Mieux vaut avoir ami en voye qu’or n’ en
courroye : Prov. Afriend on the way is better than a
rase en D El ne DE
n'atro argent, de foy :
Prov. Loo ms ri 3 8 >
Quelque fçavoir que foit on l'hommes , s'il n’a
r » on s'en mocque : Prov, The skilfülleft,
ing money are but fcorned.
Qui combat avec les armes d'argent cft afleure de
vaincre : Prov, He that doth fight with filuer armcs is
- fiere to ouercome. etapa
Argentangine : f. The filuer Squinzie; a difeafé wher-
with many befides Demofihenes (towbom it was. firft
obicéted) haue beene troubled,
Argenté :mée: f, Siluered oner;couered with, ov en:
chaced in, filuer.
Aftre Argenté. Te "
 Argenter. To filuer oner ; to or couer with filuer,
Le a lead ; alfo,to enchace or inclofeyn filuer.
: À, The Maflerfhip of the wardrobe ; alfo,a
+ banke of exchaunge ; allo, à filuer myne ; allo, a-
ny fnffesplate or 1ewcls of filuer ; as (in churches)cups,


= tized by Go: gle


ARG


chalices, croffes ec; filuer fluffe ; alfoaveftriepréff[e,
or chef}, whercin filuer fluffe,ov plate is pr ; bh
cupboord of filuer plate:
Argenteux : m.cufe: f, Siluerie ; of filer ; fill of mo-
ncy,or filuer ; that bath flore of filuer, if
Argentier : m. 4 Steward , Purfè-béarer, or other
ifficer , that layeth out money for bis Mafier, or hath
the charge of bis Maflers money; alfo, a Banker, one
- thatlendeth, or exchangeth, money fit gaine ; alfo a
Cup-bearer.
Po, oni du Roy. The Mafler of the wardrobe;
Or Gentleman of the Robes ; an Officer that keepes,
and giues an account of all the Robes, garments, and
clothes made for the kings owne wearing, for bis ward-
vobe,or chamber,or to be ginen away.
Agentiere : f. The place wherein mettals are tried, be-
€ coyne be made of them.
— :m.ine: f. Argentine, filuerie, of filuer, fil-
uerlike. '


Chardonargentin , Argentine, Siluer-Thiftle,Oat-
Thifile , Gumme-Thiple > Cotton-Thifile, the wilde
white Thifile.
Argentine: f. wild Tanfie, Siluer weed.
Argerite. 7be (Siluer-coloured ) foame of tried lead.
ier: m. The Ponticke Acatia ; (a Thornie


ub,

Argiliere: £. 4 clay-pit ; ora plot wherein Potters clay
à gotten.

Argille: f. Potters clay; fat mould ; a fattie,or clammie
Sth, whereof, eg 3 gts be Adi a

Argillette: f, Fine clay,or mould.

Argilleux:m.cufe: f. Clayifh:fiull of a fat mould,ov clay;
made if a clammie, or fat clay; clammie,or fat as Pot.
ters clay.

Arglantier :m. 4n Eglantine tree,or plant.

Argolet :m. 4/ight borfeman.

Argot :m.The Spurre of a Cocke ; the deaw-clawe of a
dog , cc; the beele, or talon of a bog.

oté :m.ée : f. Hauing fburres ; armed,or fürni


2.4
a a Cocke,with Se ; | Ha Pass ie


tefled wrangled.
PRE To js ; to fight with pures alfè, to bra-
, contef,wrangle,contend with.

Argoteur: m. 4 wrangler, brabler, cauiller contenti-
ous perfon.

Argoteure. as Ergoture. ;

oe : £4 féould; a wrangling,or cauilling boufe-
wife. °

Argoüil :m. A ring ofyron.

Arg The Lieutenant of a Gallie.
?


Argu. la tefte pleine d'argu. Full of anger ; per-
xitie , difpleafure ; fraught with fie spl procla-


Tune me parles que d'argu. Thy words are nought
but cauils, thou doeft nothing but brable withme.
Argué : m.ée :f. Arguedipleaded;reafoned; reproued,


re 3

Arguer. To argue, plead, reafon ; difpute ; difcuffe,
pape a pai alfo, to chide, a
prebend, rebuke ; alfo,toincenfe,vrge, or prouoke vn-


to anger.


Argue : M. #2 or pleader.
Avgullognevx iret Litigious, contentious ;
Ar be <p ES or proofe;
Piel to vorite, reajie , or ake, of ‘the
mme ef a written matter; the fummarie, or fub-


> or Chapter ; alfo, a coniebture,
fares Dee Ct alos pe


Originak trom


THE OHIO-STATEUNIVERSITY


à


ie


ARI


A R M


prefiunption ; iuft occafion, fire token.

Arguties : f, Sharpequirkes,or /icbtilities, fubtill words,
wittie fayings. :

Argyrite. Looke Argerite.

Ari : me: f. Dryed up, fill foaked wholly drained ; wi-
thered; without fap,or bumor whofe naturall moy-
[tures fpent,or confimed,

Aride: com, 4s Ari. Dry, withered without ap.

Ames f.A leane,or carrian tit; an ill fauoured flefh-

[fe tade ; alfo,an Anotamie, or bodie whereon there
is nought left but skin,and bone,

Aridité : f. Drineffe ; witheredneffe ; want of bumour,
lacke of moiflure.

Arictant. Ramming,jurring,leacherous ; euer fighting,
or leaping; as a Ramme,at rut.

Arignée. Seeke Araignée.

Arigot.as Argot ;al/o,4(muficall)Recorder.
Aristocratie : f. 47 Aniflocratie; the gouernment of No-
bles ; ov of ome few of the greateft menin a State.
Ariftocratique. Aviftocraticall, ruled by Nobles, go-

uerned by fome few great men,

Ariftocratiquement. Lordly,Ariftocratically.

Ariftolochie : f. Hartwort, Birthwort,
Ariftolochie clematite. Climing Birthwort.
Ariftolochie longue,Long Birthwort,or male Birth-
wort.

Ariftolochie ronde. Round,or female Birthwort,
Arithmeticien : m, Aa Arithmetician.
Arithmetique: f. Arithmeticke 3 the art of numbers,

ov of number wg. Rae

Armaire : com. 4 Cupboord, Ambrie, little preffe; a-
y hole , or box contrived in, or againft, a wall;
any {mall bollow roome,or place, wherein things may
be fet laid Ds and kept ; Looke Armoire.

Armaifon : f. cecy eft plus d’armaifon que cela.
This is more flrong, better armed, fitter for fat, orto
endure a fight,than-that,

Armateur :m. 42 Armer,a prouider of armes, or wea-
pons for ; whence ;

Armateurs de navires, Such as undertake to fur-

nifh {hipping with powder bullets payles, chaine-fhot,

wild- fire ot. Cee eee eee

Arme:f. sue 3 Looke Armes ; al/o, as Ame ; (in


Langue ,
Pes ae 2 Ame 3 with arms,
ouided of weapons; fortified, fenced, =

Poition armé. 4 fe *, SIC


Armée : £. An armie,or


M +.
Armelin :m. ‘The (bate-(pot) Ermelin,or Ermin, : ‘
Armement : m. 4n arming; alfo, warlike prouifion, as
F wees bullets, pr er ef Jor


_ Cheval qui s’artne. That armes. himfelfe,


ing. bis bit vnto his bneafts whereby the curbe
es. ons: Proy.viz.


AS 1
ee
on .
“eh SS


Te, ‘rmour 3 weapons ; armes offen-
fuse and a Armes ; Cognifances, or Scut-

rer one two great tuskes, or tufhes of

: 14 - ER ee. 4

4 d'aft. Any weapons that are vfually burled,or

caf atanenemieseryaey nn DU


3


Armes @hante, ou d'hafte;(moft ich wea-

pons as haue long heads and a al , iave-

Lins ; pikes,or peares,crc.

Cote d'armes. À Coat-aymour ; alfo, a Heraulds

coat,

Efpée d'armes. Looke Efpée.

Faiés d'armes. «465, or feats of Chiualrie ; deeds

of prowel[e ; warlike, or valourous atchiewements,

Homme d'armes. 4 man of armes ; one that ferucs

in compleat armour,on a great horfe,

Faire armes. To fight ; alfo, to fight moft valiantly,

Hen parla comme vn efcolier d'armes. Hee fake

pons pr improperly, impertinently or be knew
what.


D'oifeaux, de chiens, d'armes, & d'amours, pour
vn plaifir mille douleurs : Prov. #ho fall in loue or
Hawkes, bounds, aimes, for one aeligbt fuftain

a thoufand barmes.

Armet: m, An Helmet, or (borfemans) bead-peece.

Armeurerie : f, Armorie ; armor ; armes.

cures, 2s Armures,

Anmilles : £. Thyron rings;or braces, wherein the gud-

_ geons of a (wheeles) fpindle turne ; alfo, certaine lit-
tle round members in pillars,erc,

Anminette :f. 2s Erminette.

Arinoire: com. as Armaire; An ambrie ; cupboord ;
box ; little booke-preffe; ec ; (and hence) alfo, the Pix
wherein the Sacrament is kept. :


iretournant. The round , and turning box

(contriued in a Nunnerie wall) whereby the filers re-
ceiue(unfeene) either giftsor neceflaries. £

oires : f. The flowers called Swcet-lobns , or


Sweet-Williams, Tolmeyners, and London tufts,
Anmoirie :f, 42 armorie, or flove-houfe for armes.
Armoiries. Armes, Cognifances, Scutcheons, coats of

armes ;alfo,as Armoires,

Armoirié :m.ée : f. Grauen,or charged with armes ;

fétithicke with Scutcheons of Armes ; bearing armes.

Anmoife: f Thebearbe called Mugwort, or. Motbe-
"W


mot, scarebts
Armoifé mince-fucilles,ou d petites fucilles; thin-
Petite armnoile. The fame, and a third, or ef kind


ES *
ifin: m. Taffata. f
Armoifin: m.ine :£. Of Taffata; filken.
Armoifine: f#5 Armoifin : m.
Armoniac. Armoniacum ; a Gumme iffuing fromthe
Cyrenian Ferula, or nes pp
Arinoniac. Ofor féafoned with, Armoniacum.
Sel Annoniac. Looke Sel.


Arnonie : f. Seeke Harmonie.
morial: m.ale: f. Belonging unte armor ; or expref=
fingor fetting out ones armes. —
Annorier: m. 44 Avmorer, ov Harne[fe-maker,
Armories. as Armoires,
Armottes: f. 4 broth,ov pap, made of meale fleeped in
liquovand fodden vatillit be thicke. a
Armoux.choux armoux. A kind of greene Coleworts
whofé leaues are of an om me. DE
Armoyer, To tip,or decke the baft ofa fe, or bandle
of a’ fvord,with any worke :(vieilmot.) +
Armoyfe. Mugwort; Looke Armoife, © +
ee. nie hee Mise
Armure : f..Harneffe,or Armour
L’armure d’un poiflon, The fhell,or ftalesof a fifh.
Armures.(4s v/iall as in the Singular number )arms,


Original from
THEOHIO- STATE UNIVERSITY


ARO


Arné: m.ée: € weake-backed, feeble-rained , loofè-
joyated; unfit,or unable to pleafe a woman.
pe sch frs rauenous bird,codled a Shrike,Nynmurder,


amener :m. A weakening, firayning,or breaking the

reine

Arner. ous enfeeble, firaine, crufh, breake the

or backe, of.

Amoglo fle. Plantaine, Waybred. 5

Arollé: m.ée: f. At itt worke,whofe band is in.

Aromat. #5, Aromatique.

Aromates. Spices, fragrant Simples.

Aromatic rozat. À certaine fiveet pouder, good for the
flomacke and heart.

reer f. Sweet fauour, pleafunt finell, pleafing
taf}; as,of]

grec qe per m. An aromaticall Simple , or com-
po
Aromatique gariofilé. A certaine compofition
pee there are clones ; good for the paffions of the

art.

Aromatique: com. Aromaticall, [picie , odoriférous,
frazant, frveet- -finelling.

Aromatizé:m.ée: f. Perfamed, aromatixed, fpiced ;
Seafoned,or fweetened with fpices.

Aromatizer. To aromatixe ; to per {iume, [eafonsor fivee-
ten with {pices,or fragrant Simples.

Aron. The hearbe Aron, Calues foot,Ramp,Starchwoort,
Cuckoe-pint, Priefts pintle.

Aronde: f. A tronke to {hoot in; alfosas Arondelle.

Arondeau: m. 4 young Swa

! Arondelet. #s,Arondeau.

Arondelle : f. 4 Swallow.
Arondelle de mer. The flying fifh called the fa Bat,
or fea Swallow alfo,a kind of mullet,called otherwife,
Faulcon de mer.


vores de riuage. ma ms ondell


pr gs
L'herbe rende Celandine, great celanding
Swallowort,Tetterwort.
Queuë d'arondelle. See Queué.
La venuë des arondelles.ss about the two and twen-
teith of March.
Aroy:m. A plough.
ailleur: m. Seller of old trinkets, or of old yron ;
alfo,a finer of mettals,or Sateen theme
:m. An acre,or fur long e or-
ie one called ent as 3 iy t de France,
is 100 perches fquare (realy ny) 6 after 18 feet to
La <% obae #80 tainès in moft pla roods
Larpent con it oh ces two
and à bal ;the rood 40 ches 5 24 feet;
a the # 24 paches. je me


arpent de’ beis de Bourgogne. pubs 440
pod


à Seeker iri afc Verges,

bs ers but 70; after 26 feet prota ey
er Er roo perches, after 30 fee

ripe

_  L'arpent de France. as before,in Arpent, ‘ks
: L'arpent de Nevers. is fowre quarters (quare; the

que ton fone, the fadome fix ordinarie feet.
| ape de Paris. #5 100 perches (quare after 22
"feet to the perche ; (yet is not this proportion of the


e he generall ; for in fome places about Paris it
a 25 feet, pro Lourd be coer
rate, 18) Th anh


pt blacke, and fori.


ARR


Arpent de la Perche.contains 100 perches,the perch
24 feet, the foot 13 ynches. |
Arpent de Poitou. 4 80 paces fyuare. |
L' Si pue Romain. w4s 240 feet long, and 120 feet |


FA se e:m. Afiruëy taken of land.
Atbenté Pons de éerf Surueyed,or meafitred,as land;a!(o;
ruane.


ment. A fierneying, or meafuring of land.
Arpenter. To meaflre,or furuey land ; alfo,torun.
terie: f. Afürueying,or meafuring of land.
Arpenteur:m. A firueyor,or mea[ürer of land,
Ass m. seen a
oe


Drame Arquebufade.
eboufe,& Arqueboufier. as Arquebufe, and
Arquebufier.
bufade:f. The hot of a caleeuer or barquebufe.
Abul f. An barguebufe, calecuier , band.


Arucbur dechaffe. À fowling peece.
eàcroc. An fat @ a-crocke (fome-
oat bigger then a muske
Arquebut à à fufil. 4 SD Mu 4
Arquebufe à grand reflort. A French harqnebuje.
Arquebufe à rouét. À fire-locke,or Péece that goes
with a fire-locke.
Arquebufier:m. An barquebufier, or finall{hot ; one
that fèrues with an barquebufe,or caleeuer.
Arquemie. Secke, Alquemie.
ap se To arche ; pas oy crooke,or bow like anarch,


Abe Torape,and rend; to rauine, rob, (poile; toget
by hooke or by crooke; (an old word. )

Arraché: m. ée: f. Rooted up; drawne, torne, plucked
out, or up by the root; pulled away by violence.

Arrachetnent : m. A rooting up; a drawing, tea-
rings ph plucking , up by the root ; a pulling away by


Arenien d'une voulte. The root, bottome, or
pane ofa vault ; as Tas de char
D'Arrache > Continually, witha intermiffion,
without di ontinuance,togetber.

Arracher: Toroot vp; to draw, teare, plucke up by the
root ; to pull itr Ad violence ; to plucke out.
Il arrache les bonnes herbes, & plante les mau-
vaifes. He reniles the good,and flatters the bad ; or, he
Supplants vertue,to fupport vice.

Arracheur: m. A puller,tearer,rooter up.

Arrachis : m, as Arrachement.


pie en ere Reafned, talked, diam,
Abos in fpeech with.
Arraifonnement: m. Areafoning talkingsdife Cour fing


with.

Arraifonner. To resfononfirre take diem fallin
fpeech,enter into tearmes

Arramit. Te fiveare.

Arrangé: m.éc:f Ranked, ranged, sip, rdered
eile gn oie init place.

Ba ist fi or dering; forting, regie! Yan-


Hk RM To rankeyange, pri forts ‘array;
Er talent puekéng or fetching
Arraper. pres ss to gripe,


arian Oe a


Original trara


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


tnd


ARR


ARR


Arré:m. ée: f. Befpoken, or, for which earneft bath
beene giuen.

Arre: com. Tart; or,choaking,as a wild peare.

Arrecer. as Arrefler ; aff, as Frayer.

Arreche.as Arcfte.

Arréeinent : m. Good array,order equipage.

Aces gining of moncy in earneft, or before-


Atremens. Ce fontles dernieres expeditions, &
Aétes de luftice faiéts entre parties ligantes.qRa-
gueau. :

Arrené : m. ée : f. Reined ; borne up (as a borft) by bis
reines.

Arrengé : m. ée:f. Ranged, ranked, ordered,difpofed.

Avent ement. Looke Arrangement,

Arrents :m. €e:f. Rented; let,or taken,vpon rent.

Arrentement: m. A renting, or letting out vpon an
Jearely rent.

Arrenter. Torent,to let out for rent ; alfo, to take at a
rent.

Arrer.To give in earnefl,in band,or beforehand ; alfo, to
gine earnef for ; to buy, or conclude a bargaine, by gi-
uing of earnef.

Arrerage: m. Aaarrerage; remainder gore ; as Arrie-

e


rage.

Arretager. To fall grow,come,into arrerages.

pr :f. Lateward eed; corne thats fowed late
in the yeare,or in the Spring.

Atres. Earnef} ; mony ginen fie the conclufion,or fiviking
up,of a bargaine.
Reprenons nos arres. Looke Erres.

Amef nue The rifingsor fliffeneffe of the yard; prick-

e; a flanding.

Pr The yard to rife,and grow, fiffe,or to fland.

Arreft: m. An Arrefi,Sentence,Decree,Order,or final
indgement of a Court; alfo, an arreft; a feifure of, or

+ execution ferucd vpon,a mans per{on,or goods; alfo,the
Ref} whereon a man of armes fetleth bis lance; and ge-
nerally,any reft,ftop,or flay for a thing.
Arreftde pont. An Engine that goes with avice,and
hinders a draw-bridge,once donc, from being pulled


‘up againe. fe
Tun’as non plus d'arreft qu'un ieune veau. Thou
art as giddieas a Pan call.


Arrefte: f as Ar
Arrefté: m.ée:f. Stayed, flopped, arrefied; fetled, al-
ale ee , decreed determined,
refolued.
Arrefte-boeuf. The bearbe Reft-barrow,pettie-Wbinne,
graund-furze,Cammocke. fa
Arreftement: m. 4 flopping arrefling playing; fetling;
determining. | bid oie re |
‘Arn . » Ship i ef f de .
1. To flay, fop,arreft; fettle ; alfo, to determine,
decree,refolne of; alfoyto detaine,or with-bold from.
Catrelter. Toftey yet op atyabideina place alfa
on; alfo,to refalue. Ber 14


Arrheinens.#s,Erres,or Erremens.
Arrierage: m. An arrer the remainder


at gst Pha soe Gh 3 bebind-


b
Arricre. Bebind, backwar 3 ds à, ( ] $
afl (omperainl) Peck, go es aly
eer ne? (fle What, fo often? or, Will you neuer
: A a op me are ic
8 >
Eplvecainie


Pour vn petitn’avant n’arriere. LA little breakes
eens It makes no matter though wee miffe a


Atriereban: m. .4 Proclamation, whereby thofé that
bold of the king by a mefne tenwre, are fimmoned to
‘cmble, and ferue bim in his warres; different from
an, whereby fuch are called as bold immediately of
him ; (alfo,the whole troupe of thofe mefne tenants, or
under-vafjals fo rev dl @Ragueau ; The Author
of Guidon general des financiers holds, the contra-
rie,that Ban is for mefne,and Arriereban for imme-
diat,tenants ; Others imagine,that Ban fummons Ro-
turiers,or yeomen ; Arriereban,gentlemen,or fuch as
hold noble fiefs ; Some fay, that Ban is the firft fin-
mons, Atriereban, afecond, vnder penaltie ; Others
by Ban vnderfiand ordinarie feruice,by Arriereban
extraordinarie ; and, in old tune, fuchras were called
ite Ban, férued at their owne charges fortie daies;
ing which,or afterwards,c-pon vreent occafions,th?
Arriereban,or a fecond Proclamation was made, en-
toyning them to ferue in that manner fortie daies more;
Howfoeuer,at this day, thefe two words are moft com-
monly ioyned together, and comprebend both the gen-
tleman,and yeoman; thi iate,and the mefne,te-
nant. Looke Ban.
Arriere-boutique. 4 back-fhop ; or back-roome,ufed
for priuat wares,or working in.
Sans arriere-boutique. Plainely, openly ; wholly ;
persed flinching, dodging ; diffembling , or double-
ealing.
Ilavne arriere-boutique ; &, Il fe referue vne ar-
riere-boutique. He diffembles,or fuppreffes as yet
bis courage,or cunning ; be referues, or {pares them for
a lafic a 4 his laft effort.
Arriere-cenfive: f.A mefne tenure in an eflate,or land,
that is Roturier, or held by a Roturier ; or, held by
Cens ; a mefne Cenfive.
Atriere-chanbre : f. 4 backe-chamber ; an inner, or
withdrawing chamber.
Arriere-coin: m. A backe corner 3 a fimall,prinat,hid-
den, or inner roome ; or, a hidden roome in a backe


corner.
Arriere-court : f. A backe-yard.or bafe-Court.
Arriere-demandé. Sleight!y demaunded,flowly asked,
or long before be were asked for.
re-fais: m.The fecondine,or after birth; the three
skins wherein an infant lyes wrapped while it 1s in the
wombe, or when it comes into the world.
Arriere-feudal. Seigneur ar. 4 mefne Lord.
Arriere-fief:m. A mefne fief ; a fief that x held of, or
depends on another or bigher fief. Looke Fief. ;
Arriere-foin: m. 4 latter mathe; or,lateward bay.
Arriere-foncier. as Surfoncier.
Arrierc-foflé : m. 4 backe ditch, or dike ; an oxtreard
- dike; alfoyas Reffron. ;
Arriere-garde. The reregard of an armie ; alfo, the
mr of one that holds by Knights fernice of a
ward,


Arrieregarend. C'eft le garend du garend; qRa-
U, >


guea :
Arriere-tnain : m. À blow giuen backward,or with the
backe of the band ; alfo PE made of an Of-
fice (befides fees) by fecret bribes, and exattions;
privat vayles. .
Asriere-nepveu: m. A great graund-child, the fonne
of a graund-child. ;
Ârriere-ouvert : m.ertes f.#ide open.
Atriere-poinét : m. A backe-fiitch. ;


Original from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


ARR


ART


Arriere-po
with back-flitch.
seer prmicter, Te worke back-flitch ; to feta back-
ci. ;


Arrierer. To goe backward; alfo,to fet backe..
iete-{aifon. Later math; a late harueft, a late-
ward yeare.
Arriere-taille : £ A fecond,or later tax ; a fürther im-
tio


position.
ager case An vnder-vaffall ; a vaffall vato a
vaffall.
Atricre-uafleur. An wnder-vaffall ; or, an vnder-
pu 34 vaffall, or villaine unto a vaffall, or vil-
ine


pe re m. À waggoner,or pt

er.s’ar. To rife,or iffe,as the yar:

Arrive: m. ée: f. rame unto.

Arrivée: f. An arriuall, acceffe, abboord, or comming
te.

Atrivement : m. An arriuing,or comming to.

Arriver. To arriue, abboord, or come vaio.

Arrobe: f. Aiarre ; a veffell, or meafiere, which, in the
weight of ordinarie marchandife, comes to twentic
fine pound.

" Arroches. Orache,Orage,golden bearbe.

Arroches de mer. A certaine boarie,gray,or meabe-
coloured plant,called fea Orage.
Arroches fauvages. wild Orage,All-feed.

Atroganment. phener:"3 Las :

ance: f. Arrogancie ; prefumption ; vaunting,
pride ouer-weening.

Arrogant: m. ante: f Arrogant LE fr 3 0-
uer-weening ; proud, or, that proudly attributes too
much vato himfelfe.

s Arroger. To arrogate, or aftribe too much unto bim-
fie ue prefiume, or boaft, more of bimfelfe then bee


Arrollé : m.ée: £, At worke,or whofe band is in.

s Arroller. To fall, or fet himfelfe, to worke ; to be at
worke,or be willing to worke.

Atrondir.To roundymake round,turne round.

* Arrondir les efperons.To fpurre a borfe in turning,
moft on the fide whereon he turnes.

iflement: m. LA rounding, making round, or

turning round.
Les Arrondifsemens d'un habillement. The pie-
ces, or fhreds that are cut off in the rounding of a

ARS EE D
rrofé:m.ée:f. Bedeawed; inkled ; gently wet.
or moiflened ; a little watered. itr Pian ts

Arrofernent: m. as Arroufement.

Arrc{er. as Arroufer,

Arrofeur : m. À bedeawer ; a bejprinkler ; a gentle wa-


terer of.
Arroué.as Arrobe. .
Arrouler. To rowle, or tumble towards; to bring with
Arroulhiewaak: Fit to be watered, befprinkled, be-
deawed. ; tah


Arroufage : m.asArroufement. _ ’
Arroufé: m. éc:f. Bedeawed, fbrinkled, moiftened,
gently wet,or watered.


dl.
Arroufement: m.A bedeawing. fprinkling ymojftening;


gentle gay Ariane :
Arroufer. To bedeaw, befprinkle ; wet, moiflen, water
Arroufoir: m. A watering pot. “
Arrouter. Tofet in the way, put into the way. .


inété : m. éc: f. Back-flitched, wrought |


. s’Ârrouter, To affemble in troupes, to gather together

in routs,to make a riot.

Arroy: m. Order,array ; equipage,firniture,

Arroyé: m. ée:f. Arrayed ; firnifhed, in full equi-
page.

Arroyer. To array; furni[h ; put in order, equipage.

Aile To make rude, 1A ptet pe

Arrumé: m. ée: £Carte arrumée.4 fea-card,where-
inall the quarter winds, or trauers boords, are deli-
neated,

Arrumer. To delineate, or fet out,in a fea-card, all the
Rums of winds.

Arruner. To ranke,fort,range,difpofe, put inorder, fet
in array.

Arty avant. On afore,away there hoe; (from the Carters
ery,Arry,& hori ho.)

Ars. les ars: m. The breaft,or brisket of a horfe.

Ars: m.arf:f. Burat ; {corched, parched ; confumed
with beat, or fire.

acide: m. as Aflaffin.

ACeoe f. . little, Hs: fower, pe peare-like finit,
that comes of a Hawthorne grafted ona Quince.

Arfel. as Arzel. pos 28 D

Arfenic : m. Arfenicke,Orpiment,Orpine (the naturall
one is of tivo forts ; th’one red,th’other yellow ; where-


as;)

Arfenic cryftallin ; is compounded of falt, and little
pieces of Orpiment, and thus tearmed, becaufe it is, as
Chriftall,tran{parent.

Arfon : m. as Arceau; or,as Argon.

Art: m, Az art, ftience; trade,craft, miflerie, occupati-
on ; alfo,skill,cunning,workman|bip ; alfo,craft, fubtil-
tie, deceit, guile.

Arts de vents. a Rumbs.

L'homme qui a de l’art poflede fa part: Prov. He
that hath wit,will bane shoe in euery thing.

Qui fgait l'art ferre la boutique : Prov. Th’enuious
workeman often bides bis cunning.

Qui ne fçait l’art ferre la boutique : Pro. The bun-
gler,to feeme cunning,makes it daintie.

Artail: m. as Orreil. ;

Artemon: m. The mixen Mafle,or fayleofa fhip.

Artere : f..4n Arterie,pulfe, panting veine; a skinnie,
round, and hollow veffell, whereby the vitall fpirit,
mixed with bloud,is conueyed from the heart vato all

"parts of the bodie.
Artere aorte. The great Arterie, mother Arterie, or
mother of Arteries. Looke Aorte.
axillaire. Th’arme-bole-Arterie ; or, a left

branch of th’ Aorte, from which it afcends obliquely
towards th’arme-hole; where after it bath [ent Pr aad
ches to the higher He other adiacent parts,it def-
cendeth downe to the bought of the cubit.
Artere carotide.lffues from th’ Axillaire,and is diui-
ded into tvvo branches ; th’invpard,and greater, which
goes unto the braine ; the outward, which pafleth wnto
sel arin, tang, nofe, eyes, and mufcles of the tem-
ples. LES
ÊTRE sig An rs in the nape, or Le

tof the necke ; iffices the Sousclaviere,
nh (Senter the neck-bone unto the braine.


Artere ceeliaque. (fies from the bodie of the great |
Arterie, ed did ie three poor ; Locke


Caœliaque.

Ares els ee Se treaties das eat
arterieand left by it unto the left ventri
SCP nt ee
Artere crotaphique. See,Crotaphique.


Ar-


Original from


THEOHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


2e 1. be


Dsl Bi


AR T
Art v
pi Pos = nee of the thigh, among whofe


Artere cubitale. The cubitall artericya branch of th?
Axillaire,

Artere cyftepatique. 4 branch of the Cœliaque;
Secs unto the liuer,and the gall.

Artere diaphragmarique. I/fives fromthe trunke of
ns dl arterie,and thence goes unto the Diaphrag-


Artére Epigaftrique. À branch of the Ibacke arte-
rie; diftributes it felfe among the mufcles of th Epi-


aftr
Ke Gaftrepiploique.A branch of the Cœliaque,
whence it Pa the ventricle, and bE piploon-
Arteres gemelieres. ‘The twin arteries ; two finall
ones, which defcend unto the toint of the knee betweene
the proceffes of the thigh bones.
| ande, #,Aorte.

Artere honteufe. 1ffues from the great arteries def
cendent branch, and befioves i it fifa among, the priui~
ties,
Artere hypogaftrique. 4 branch of wee he 3
tres it felfe amon, ig the parts of th’ Hy

Artere Iliaque. Th ’ Iliacke arterie, or, Sarat
branch of the great one.
Pons peser mire. =: ead pro

sit the mufcles that be between t

foure bigheft vibe; aed an under one, which goes vato
euery mufcle that is betweene the reft of the ribs.
Arteres Lumbaires. The loyne-arteries ; iffue from
th’Aorte unto all the = of the loynes, giuing life un-
to the marrow of the backe bone , and fending as ma-
ws branches unto the ioints thereof as there be holes


Arte Mamillaire. The pap-arterie ; iffues from the
trunke of th’ Aorte.
Arteres Mefenteriques. Looke,Mefenterique.
Arteres Planteres. T0 branches of the thigh ar a
(the which they duude in the middle of the leg) an
ward one, which defcends to the joint, or fetting on of
the foot, and oy along the fole, ends in fiue bran-
ches, whereof two ferue for the great toe, two for the
Second toe,and one for the middle toe; Th outward (as
th'imer)ends alfo in fine branches ; two whereof it be-
flowes on the little toe too on the next unto it, and one
on the middle one.
Arterede poulmon. The wind- Pipe. i
Artere radiale. 4 fecond rye th’ arme-hole-
arterie whence it s it felfe on Radius,er the
upper and greater the arme.

ere renale. The kidney arterie; ifflues out of the
kidney, bringing vato it the


LE pa a arteries defcen.
det banc er vi which 15 in the


facré.
Rete occ sedate the great


e. The Spermaticke arterie ; goes
of "Aorte vato the tefticles,and there
veine that 3 dr thofé parts.
. The fpleene arterie, or greateft
re > whence it goes unto the


te à ie of the temple
| RS
amd goes onto the


ART


Artere veineufe. The veinie arterie ; one of the three
principal ones of the bodie  iffues from the left ventii-
cle of the beart, and carries thence to the lungs bloud
for their nourifbment.

Afpre artere, The wind-pi

Trachée artere; or, Tra iartere ; the fame ; called
alfo,the pipe of the lungs ; is one of the three principall
arteries i the bodie ; and th’infirument of breath,and
pee it begins at the Larinx, and ends at the lungs,

ts.
Arterial : m. ale : f. Ofor belonging toarteries,
Artericux: m.eufe : f. Full of arteries.
Veine artericufe. Looke,Veine,
Arteriotomie : f. An incifion of arteries.
Re f, Cowflips or Oxflips.
. Ive oS ms Hearbe lue, ground
Pine, faa Cypres, Forget-me-not.

c:f. An halfe coniunttion of two bones ; the
head “ the one being but balfe lodged wubin the caui~
+ ofth'other. if

+ To make artificial; or;to make an art

Artichau.& ud.ias,Artichault. À

Artichauliere: f. 4 Der Plot fet with Artichockes.

Artichault: m.47 Artichocke.

Artichault fauvage. The wild Artichocke,or prickly
ae 3alfo,the white thifile, milke thifile, our La~
ies t

Artichaut. as Artichault.

Article: m, An article ; a head,principall claufe,titleor
point of a matter ; ;afè,a Summe,or Item of a Summe,
in accounts ; salfo,a ioint or knuck!e.

Articulaire : com. Of, or in, the ioints ; belonging to a

joint.
Douleur articulaire. Paine,or ache in the ioints; and
{more particularly) the Gout.
iculation. 4 growing, fpringing,or fhooting vp fram
knot to knot, from ivint to ioint ; alfo, the hurting, or
burfling of young joints ; the faring of trees , whofe
yong fhoots are beaten of D tempeftor burt,and brus-
fed by rude and piss de
m.ée: ris: 3 fet downe in,
fe por ont dre di d, fummerily hand-
Lip mdr ee Dress aff, ème,


Voixa articulée A diftinét voiceya voice thats eafie to
evade

iculer. To ré article, reduce into articles,
dinide, or diftinguifh by fiuerall beads, titles, or
fines; precifely,and particularly to defcribe,or point
out.


de = m. An Artif; or one that fiudies, er profeffes,


air: f. The Sharpline,Stickling, or Sticklebacke ; (a
‘mall fifh.)
Artifice: m.skill,cunning yworkmanfbip; alfo,craft, fub-
tiltie,quile deceit.
Artificiel: m.elle: f. Artificiall, skilfull ,cunning,work-
manly yoorkema
Artificiellement. Artificially cami: ,workmanly.
Artificieux : m.eufe : f. Artificial, fill of art.
Arti pier abet! to forge; tomake by + À bé a
fier nifh with Ordnance,or Artillerie
ileric: Æ Artillerie,Ordnance.
PArrillerie cardinale, is (ome fea-men) a peece of
Ordnance of a very wid
Artillier: m. 4 Bowyer,or Row make sal Fletcher;
or one that makes both bowes,and arr
Attillier du Roy: NE Boyer Fletcher, aan


Original from
THE_OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


\


AS C


vA SN,


officer in ordinarie ; wo makes not onely theft infhru-
ar of voting, but alfoyall manner of artificial fre-


workes.
Artimon. A little ayers otherwife,Trinquet. .
Artiron: m, A little, round, and greenifh worme, not
much valike alowfe, and ra cleauing, in great
numbers, tothe leaues of Coleworts, and other plants,
the which in time they deuour.
: M. An ps a workman, bandicrafis mans
alfoan. artift,or artifan,
Artifon. as Artiron; al/i,a kind of moth ; alfo, a wood-
worme; alfo,as Teigne,the shur fe of a feald head ; fo
- tearmed, becaufe the part infected with it Ve to be
moth-eaten,or worme-eaten.
Artifonné. Moth-eaten,worme-eaten.
Attifte : m. as Artifan ; alfo,an ar rite Mafler of art.
Artiftement. as Artificiellem:
Attoir: m. The great toe.
Artre: f. 4 moth ; alfo,a kings-fifher.
Artres des boulengiers. A kind of butterflies, er
pen pee mothes,which line altogether in bake-bou-


fèsor
Me pars des bois. The vermine called, a Wood-
lowfe.

Ascxotes f. A natural , and moucable connexion of
ones

Artufon. 4 corne-deuouring weeuill ; or yas Attifon. -

Arzel: m. 4 horfe with a white foot on the right, or fier-
ther fide.

As. An Ace at dice, or cards.

Demeurer entre deux & as. To ref? on vncertaine
tearmes, to bee cor of bis fuccelfe; not te kw
what will betide bim.
Refpondre entre me & as. Looke Deux; or, Az.
wrt m. The bearbe Folefoot Haflewort , Afara-
acca.

Altos: Au a ited ire
arole: f. À of fina: x tree,bea-
ving a leffe, and harder fruit sien the ordinarie one ; 3
Seeke Azarole.

Asbetin. of Asbeftinum; a kind of line, or pa that
wil not be burned, and yeelds a cloth which fire fcoures
better then water.

Afcalabe. The venomous beaft called Stellio, or the flar-
rie Lizard.

Afcalaue,& Afcalavette. as Afcalabe.

Alcan :f, d en Es “Rs brecds
in the


UËE throughly, to let
Ke geal in, or ily ccovuinted
Meso: To wit,that is to fay.

AtCendant: m . A kinfinan in afcent ; as the unkle is to


the Sephemyerc.
Afche: f. The bearbe Si
ee


Chardon afinin. The white thifle, mille ee our

Ladies thiflle.

Concombre afinin. The wild,or pir

aie ue: com. Puri Sd,
ie.


Aine: :m,Difficultie of breathin a u,
, orbard sa of the breath, cei pa


wheexing, puffing, or pur fiaelfe.
Afne:m: PE PU wy Te fe ith eat bead,
called, a Bull bead, or Millers or a, adunce,


bhctbeed |, fot, legearheads dull-pated fe
Afned’Inde, The beafi Rhinoceros ; aloe wit
baue it) th'Vnicorne. Y
à l'afnc. A Libell,Pafquine,Satire,
Cul d'afne. The name of a tie fifb.
Dos d’afne. à dosou.en dos d’afñe. Ridgill-backed;


nee gl bowing ; higheft in the middle.
Ms d'afn D. 4 pres of tender, and tran[parent
white


rise A saine. ‘ewe Comfrey, knit-backe, knit-
wort,blac
Oreille Gules Pro. The partor dutie of a feruant ;
tobeare all bis angrie mafter fayes without seine;
from the nature,and cuflome of an Affe, that (what, ifve-
uer noife is made about bin) only claps dovene his eaves,
and followes on his way.
Pasd'afne. The bearbe Folefoot, Coltsfoot,Horfefoot,
and Hallfbot ; alfo, a certaine ring, or boope, of yron in
the forecafile of a fhip ; alfo,a fafhron of aPort,or Vpfet
in the mouth of fome bits.
Perfil d'afhe. wild Cheruill , mocke Cheruill, great
Cheruil,Alje parfely, Myrrhis C es, Caxes,or Kexes.
Pont aux afnes. Any fhift,euafion,helpe at a piach for
th'ignorant ; any eafe or direction vato dull,or-vnlear-
ned people,for the refolution of difficulties which other-
wife they cannot conceiue; as, a Ditlionarie ; and, in
Logicke,the conuer fion of Propo ftions. :
Avoir de l'afne. lly aura icy de l'afhe. Here will be
fome foolifh coyle, fome idle fiurre,or other.
Braireaveclesafhes. To follow the fafhion, or doe
what others doe,how abfierd, or fottifh foeuer it be.
Brider l’afne par la queué. To do things out of order ;
to goe the wrong way to the wood,or to worke.
Cholere comme yn afne à quil on attache vne fu-
rie : ¢ aux fefles. As angrie as an Affe with a fui in bis

eech,
Demander de la laine à yn afne. To aske for athing
where tis not to be bad.

Desferrer l'afne. To vnfhoe the Affe; wee Saystoride
the wild mare.
Faire de l'afhne avoir du bran. Looke,Bran.
Laiflons aux afñes les chardons. Let Affes feed on
thiftles,dunces on dull fluffe,dull wits on drie matters.
Menerl’afne. Tobe d at,or little accounted of
by all men that [ee,or meet him. :
Monter fur l’'afne. To breake, become bankrupt, re-
nounce his owne goods:(A Phrafe deriued froman aun-
cient cuflome whereby fy a phere compelled to


Atchet. as,Afchée. ride backward on an Affe through the towne soe die
Alcite. A kind of Dropfie, which Le the belly found insbolding bis tayle in their bands,in flead of a bridle te)
fife bottle,when one firikes on On y va comme afnes desbaftez : (Of thofe that
Afeles: €. Shiners,or flinters af weed, breaking, qLan- meet at flollen lecherie) they goe to it beset firioufy,
ed, with aterrible appetite ; (for Affes difthargéd of thew
ates: ~ pa ; ras Efcouter. - aff burthens; mf and fet at sri are ie Srikeft
tc op, wormegralfe. creatures aliue.)

reiner. To re: cheere; up. Sue dco le . To digreffe fromthe matter,

Af nt. as, t. ne rene fi hand diforderh, from one matter
Afinin:m.ine:£f. 30for belonging to an Affe. | — +: ae A

Original from


Digitized. by Go: gle


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY.


A SN


Tirer pets d'un afne mort. To make a dead afft fart;
to wrk impoffibilities.
Afhe d’Arcadie broute chardons,& ortie,&c. Pro.


Letekne

Laine qui brait le plus, eft celuy qui mange le
moins : Ptov. Th'affe that brayeth moft eateth leaf.
Vn afite n'entend rien en Mufique : Pro. An affe
is but a bad Mufician ; or,cannot indge of Muficke.

à lauér la cefte d'un afhe on ne perd que le temps,
& la lexive : Pro. In vaine one firiues to make learned
a fottifh,or make boneft a graceleffe, perfon.


à la preuve l'on efcorche I’ afne: Prov. Looke Ef
corcher.

a gi cf l'afne file garde: Prov. Let him that owes
a thing looke toit.


à qui eft l’afne file tienne par laqueue: Prov. See


cue.

à rude afhe rude afnier : Pro. A flubborne feruant
needs a froward mafler ; a curft wife a curbing bus-
band ; a rebellious fubicët a rigorous Soueraigne.
a vilain charbonnée d’afne: Prov. A churle would
baue churles fare, profe meats courfe entertainment.
= apprend Jes afhes à danfer: Prov. Looke

anfer,
Affez va au moulin qui fon afne y envoye : Prov.
He may be [aid to doe a thing that fèts his man about
it. :


Chantez à l’afñe il vous fera des pets: Prov. The

- ignorant blockhead [cornes both Mujicke,and the Mu-

3 or,as wee [ay, Claw a churle by the breech, and be
will beray your fift.

Deux orgucilleux ne peuvent eftre portez fur vn

afhe: Prov. One poore affe cannot carrie two proud


ones.
Il ne faut pas lier les afnes auec les cheuaux: Pro.
Churles are not to be matcht, or forted, with gentle-


men.
On n'aura ia bon afne vieil : Pro. flugg,or dullard
growne old is worfè then naught.
On FA fait jets à l’afhe quandil ne veut : Prov.
Men force not th'affe (but alles men ner, à À

ad on à md Marin 2 4° we
‘ay (with a {mall refemblance ) more
maids then Malkin, or, deep ae be called


Malkin.
Pour vn poil Martin perdit fon afne : Pro. The pu-
nifhment, or taxation of thofe that upon a finall occafi-
. On enter into a great contention ; as this poore man
did,robo laying a wager that bis affe was all white,was
Shewed a blacke baire oz bi {o,like an affe,loft bis
affe,which was the wager.
‘Pour vn poinét Martin perdit fon afne: Prov. 4
: restore ae oe
€; int, — \
j à afne tend à afhe vient: Prov. He that will,
fone ynough, proue an alje.
femme croit, & afhe mene, fon corps ne fera
s peine: Prov. He that beleeues awoman, and


er ee te
: d'afñe entre le chien au Moulin: Pro.
Kriaue into good places in companie,


1C= ind of © ich Affes lone excee-
i a7, VOA ST
Atherie : f Sottifonefe, dlnege, ignrance, doi


5


2


A S P


a blockifhnefe; any impertinent , or Affe-bke,
anke.
rr ue : com. Affe-like ; fottifh, dull, ignorant,


Afneffe : f. 4 flee Affe.
De petit efguillon poinét on bien grande afneffe:
Proy. Great beafs are pricked forward with fmall


oads.
Afhichon: m. young af.
Afhichons. Two D nerves the figne Cancer.
Afñier : m. One that drineth,or dreffeth,Affes.
Gros afhier. 4 iolthead, blockbead, loggarbead ;
a fellow of a beauie mettall, groffe capacitie, dull pi-
rit.


À rude afne rude afnier: Pro. A rude knaue is to be
awed by a rough controller. À 5,4,
A l'hofpital le#bons ouvriers, en dignité les gros
iniers: Pro. Looke Ouvrier.
Afnier. Toridevponan Affe. |
Afnon.as Afnichon. A young Affe; alfosthe little water-
vermine called ,a Bull-be,
Afnonner. To fole,or bring forth,an Affe.
ar m.éc:£. Sotted, befotted, doting on. Looke,Af-


f
Aforer To fot, befot,make dote on,bring'too farre in loue
Afpalathe : m. 4 kind of prickly flrub, whale maf


sYhddie, and aromaticall wood is vfèd by Perfu-
mers: fome, erronioufly,baue thought it 10 bered Saun-


ders ; others the Rhodian wild Olive tree ; and Gerard
cals Englifh Galingale,Afpalathum.
Afpalier. as Efpallier.


arge. as Afperge. e
Abc m, An ee y grd, fight ; the vifage pr coun-


enance.
Aspere r.To fharpen,exafperate,aggranatemake rough,
churlifh,angyrie.
Asperge : m. The bearbe Sparage,or Sparagus; alfo,the
young,and tender {prig,or fhoot of any plant.
Asperge de marais. Marfh Sparage.
tes montagnars. Mountaine Sparagus ; a
one.
uftre. as Afperge de marais. :
er Fe . Stone Sparage! wild Spara=
sperge fauvage. The fame.
As Sectnent A befprinkling; a pondering, or
epoudering. ;
er. To befprinkle; pouder, bepouder ; to fprinkle,
or firew if "À brs sam
Asperget: in. A boly-water 2
Aspergiere : f. A bedof Sparagus.
Aspergoutte: f. The bearbe Feather few, Feuerfew,
iLewort.
Aspergoutte menué,ou mineur. Starrewort, Cuds
pperigule:  clauer, Cofègrafé
ergule: f. Clauer, Goofegralfe.
Ag ee on ée: f. Befprinkled,or bedeawed with.
Asperfion: f. A befprinkling, or bedeawing ; anafper-


serfoie : f. A boly-mater-fprinkle made of bri-


Se ; : L
Aspertule : f, Clauer, Goofegraffe.
Asphalthe. as Birume. ott F
Asphodile. The Daffadill, Afodil, or Afphodill flowers

alfo,the root,or bulbes thereof.
Asphrodille. as Afphodile; or,#s Aphrodille.
Aspic: m. The Serpent called,an Aspe. _


Aspie


Digitized: by Go: gle


Original from
THELOFHO:STATEUNIVERSITY


+


A SP


cornu. A fand-coloured Serpent, full of blacke
Api bis head a muzzle vpturnedy oe then
“aviperss we all other parts he is very like ber.
» Aspic fourd, (Th Ajpe, fayes Gefner, by veafin of her
- exceeding drought, 1s alfo accounted deafe ; although
Re te of bearing.)


bearb “pit 22 or Lawander Spike |


ecially the common,or blew-floured one.
oe Celtique. French Spikenard,mountaine "i


. mé outre mer. Indian § pikenard'; or, the true
d'; for th'others (epecially the French one)are
¢ baflards.
| seen” É An affiration ; a blowing, breathing,
| rawing of breath.
| Aspiré: m. ée: & Breathed, blownes alfo,defired,a(pi-
= unto ; alfo, noted, or pronounced with an ajpira-


Aires. To breath, blow, fetch wind,draw breath; al-
ie defire,conetayme at,afbire unto.

A Turkifh coyne of filuer, in value little more

ie our penny, or iuft as the French Sous ; for 60 of


them goe to a Seraph, which is worth about a French À


Crowne.
re:com. Sharpe, tart; barfh, unpleafant in tal};
rude, rugged, rough, in handling ; biting, pricking, or
 grienous to.be felt; churlifh, aufiere, Jurly, feuere,
+ vitrattable , rigorous, in proceeding ; fierce , eager,
earnef vebement, very bot, or forward, in any mat-
ter.
L'afpre artere. The wind-pipe.
Lieu afpre. 4 craggie, ill-fauoured, uneuen nés ;
| vaplaceull to begoncin,traueld on, paffed ouer.
pone f. Horfè-tayle,Shaue-graffe (an bearbe. }
rement. Sharpely, eagerly, tartly ; barfbly, v


fais rows ugg Tae co rs ee |
lifhly 5 bement > <u


ze oor erce
nt lc: £ as Au

Aspreté : f. Sharpenelle, eagernelfe, Abies bar
neffe, vupleafantne|fe ; roughne(fé, rug. edneffe sa
ritie, rigor,feueritie; fit ine(fe;vatrattablene[fe,chur-
lifbaeffe; fercenelfè;vebemencie;earnefineffe;extreame

efire to doe a thing.

Asprir. To fharpen; PH api ec incenfe; to
make rough,barfb; ¢

Aspriffement. 4


spr
A little, nd Gudge
Ei, foundio = aely ie hein ne
tweene es mes yons
— mcée:f. Pre filled with fand ; alfo,
Un 0,
AD eek het flick in the fand;so fill with fand;


pu Ce trié ee


spe
:m.ie: f Become wife
Aes: .To orage rc te eth age.
Affa : m.
ns Pillules Yafisleree "Ps Pills min of Hera
«Mañicke, Mirablons, Aloës, and the fyrrup oan
chas ; (tearmed (0 by the Arabian Pbifitions, and from


— by all otbers.)
; te :m.A Challenger at Tilting,@rc; alfè;an Af
D ; whence;


re ibe to af, if firength, or savin.


fe SS


Affaillane. Affayling, fetting on.


ailli: m.ie : f. Afaulted,affayled, fet vpon ; alfo,chal~
lenged at Tilt, rc.
Homme affailli à demi vaincu: Pro. He thats af
Sayled is bal fe ouercome (tis good therfore to be before-
band with an enemie.)


Affaillir. To affayle, “ut or fet pon; alfi, to fat


lenge at Tut Barriers,oc.
ani m. ée : f. Seafomed, made fauourie. |
aifonnement: m. A feafoning, tempering,making,
on giuing a good taf unto.
Does To ie temper, make fauourie, give a.


er, cut-throat, mur-
rames 3 one that lee another f gaine,or upon hope, or’
romife,of reward.


AG affinat : m.4 murther,or murtherous att émmsitted'


for gaine, or in hope of areward; alfo, a fuddaine af
fault, made of fet purpofe, and witha murtherous in:


Aft D A eee. be not killed.


inateur. as Aff:


Affaffiné. Murthered, a fine, led: al afftaedsor.


Affaffiner.


fet on with a murtherous intent.
affinement: m. 4 killizg, flaying,murthering ; al-
fo,an affaulting with a murtherous intent. ,
To flay,killmurther for gaine, or vpon bo, S
or promife, above alfo, to affaile, or fet on wit


murtherous intent.


‘Affation: f. 4 refiner concoction by a forraine,or out-


ward,and drie beat.


Affavanter. To infty uét, informe, certifie, let row, gine


to wit,make filly acquainted with.
ault: m. 4x affault,a[fayling, fetting on.


Affavoir. as Afçavoir. To wit ; that is to fay. À
Affauvagi: m. ie: f Made wild, ra rude growne |


Sauage.


Sian ir. To make wild, skittifh,or wood.


e:m. Th'ancient Romanes As; a copper coynemortb
Somewhat more then a pennie fier 1.


Affe douce. The fiveet gumme that iffues from the feari- ;


fied,or cut fialks, and roots of th’ African and Cyrenian
‘Laferpitium,or Laférworte.

Alle bade The flinking iuyce,or gumme which ifues
a. the Laferwort that es ia S np Geet ae
menia, and Lybia : Apothec aries ca

cher. ws Affeicher.


Affediacre. An Archdeacon; + Binion:
AE f. Awoodcocke.


rm. A ceffor,in matter of taxes,cnc.
ciché: m. ée : f. Drie d,growne or made drie.


Affcicher. To drie ; to make,or wipe,drie.
Affeller. To goe to the floole. és


’


e:m. An affemb lo

| ieee ap oie Ne

of many ores fe Led: ; in-layed PRCGARARE.
ure of a roome, &e.


Affemblé. 4 rie flocked, trotipeds


incountred, come, drawne together d, couched,
clefts et, put, peegeds heaped, packed, ‘compatled


Afénblée: £. Aa affembly, congregation,companie, a


mecting,er drawing of people together yas at a bunting ; |.


(hence) alfo,a bunting, or a troupe of bunters ; alfe, 4 |
“Proclamation,


Summons of,or commaund ur
to, fouldiors, to meet, ‘or make their Rendevousat a |
certaine place and thence to goe into the field afisthe. È
fight,coaping,or incownter of two armies. :
G


Ors ginak irc (REA ER
THE-OHIQ STATE y Pure ie te
5 its % à


Z - 4: POUR ee


er


A SSS
Affemblement : Aflembl i
fein lang, pacig, + MS SAS


Afleribler. To affemble, draw, get,or gather together ;
En RS compact,


‘fembler. To affemble meet, flacke,troope ; draw,
age come,together,
embler vne Armée, Toraife an armie.
lembler le Confeil. To call a counfell.
embler à l'ennemy. To fight,buckle,coape,or in-
counter with th’enemie.
Ce qu’ affemble pille pille defaffemble tire tire:
fei a eder-opatr ine gathers reuelling difperfès.
flemblure : £. as Affemblement,
ence, Affent, confent.(An old word.)
Affencement ; &, Aflenceur. as Acenfement, & A-
cenfeur. fad
Ne:m. Ana, tien, or out of a dower,or
ter , for oe wife. on
cne, & advis. A portion, or gift beflowed b a
ther on bis w younger Sonnes or on bis daughters.


alfo, proportioned, fquared, meafired out; alfo, feifed
on,taken into bis owne hands.
enement: m. 4 iki, bitting, reaching, touching
home ; alfo,a Propor tioning, (quaring,or meafuring out;
alo fire fe ifng.

To bit, firi pa 2 touch home ; alfo,to pro-
prisme Square out; af, to féifesor take in-
to his owneh

enne. as Allens
Affenner. as Aflener.
ens: m. A certaine profit made of sipavabes 9
rowne woods ; as the Pawnage,
Aflentation: £. tt fat cg
entatoire: com: Flattering, foothing, ah
fent of


entement: m. fini coe
Affenti: mie: £ Affented agreed accorded unto; alfo,
mel, i dagr 3


a hunted beaf, a fent inh


Steele.
Afferimenté : m.ée:f. Sworne , bound by oath ; or, put
unto bis oath.


| Affermenter. To fiveare;put unto an oath,bind by oath,


thoath of.
A es
m, Ae [a
A dada ane
ap em 4 $e .
etes of enfin Dre
im. ie:f. sled ite, bite
unto, tyed in féruile bonds.
aera wt
Affervi:m.ie:£. x
ARR Slane of.


Are :m. te: f. Strucken,bit,raugbt,or touched bome; |


(3 re
Akind
eet ge rag made of, tempered sith,


| ie rs Prose tem


ASS

Affervic. ro fbieltjntbrallfbmit; make feruant unto,
or t

c:m. Thraldome » Or gan intbralling of; and


Affervi
bence,land bound for a debt; or fuch a binding thereof.
ms chy m. An afféruanting, fubieéting, in-
thralling ;

Affeffeur: een A ludge Laterallor,an Afiflant
Judge ; one that fits in Courtyas an affociate with,or an
3 and more particularly, an Afifant

unto a Prouoft Rex cede are
Affefforiat : m. À ting ; th? office
dutie,or place,of a ludge pot ie, or AfleC
Afful: : m. €e: £, Abandoned, forfaken,left folitarie,or


After. To abandon, forfake, leane without companie,
leaue alone.
= For,Affeuré ; as ;
4 eur il eft afleur: Prov. He that fêares, is af
ee € that Rares ‘falfe ground, treads furely ; or,


vuntoa


pie cet et és air ane es trufi, nes
sr boldneffe ; bar es alfo, as Affeure-


Affeuré: m. ée: f. Bold, feareleffe, bardie » dreadleffé;
con , fècure ; fiable, frmesonflans certaine; al,
affared, fetled. onfirmed ; 3 afo,affirmed.

n'eft pas afleuré qui trop haut eft monté : Prov.
He is not fa “pan got too biebs bee fits not fire that


ts too hig
PY cd :m. The Peace,or g00d bebauior graun-
_ ted unto one againft another who, if be breake it,com-
mits aan (by fome cuftomesin France; ) alfo, prote-
chon, (afegard, or fafecondudt.

Affeurément. Boldly, iy, affuredlly, confidently, Securely,
trufifilly, dreadlefly, without flinching, or feare; cer-
tainely, flably, firmely, conftantly.

Affeurément chante qui n’a que perdre: Prov.
Looke re PAPE TS
curer. Toaffure, feitle,confirme, refolue ; to
rennes af, to protett, fafégard, fafécen-
graunt the Peace agains 3 alfo, to lay vp in a
fafese or fire place; alfo, to for the fafetie,or
fivretie of; to warrant ; alfo,to afcertaine; a rme, a-
Affeurer vn oïfeau . To make, or man a bauke
throughly; L'afleurer au lardin sk To fet her out in
a garden ec. to weather.
Afleureté: £. as Affeurement.
Aflez. Inough, fufficiently ; very rad nek as needs ;
‘competent quantitie,or number,

fem aqui bon credita:Pro. 4 vt el is wealth

ton aqui fe contente: Pro, He hath ynough thats


es sf crops a: Prov. wat ch ood as a
: fealt; or,too much of any thing is good for no
Affez boit qui a dueil: Pro. He drinks pen that


pre a cote OU
confen dit
aie per fil conf the fan fled
e qui mor ne dir,


| + a atte
— Affe Serre faithfal fermant
ont Pa ee aman
dort qui tienne fait: Pro. As good fecpedte
crie as doe nothing. —


Pat


Ofiginal:from


THE OHIO- STE UNIVERSITY
ees


Ps,


uen, or place appointed.
Affignation ie ae affignation,


A:S"S


ASS


Affez en dir qui apporte bonnes nouvelles: Prov.
He that bath told good newes,needs tell no more.
Affez efcorche qui tient le pied: Pro. Looke Pied.
Aflez gaigne qui malheur perd: Prov. He gets y-

b tbat balker ill lucke or that loofes nothing.
eziecufne qui pauvrement vit: Prov. He that
feeds barely faits Vuficiently. E
ez parens affez tourmens: Prov. The more kinf
menthe more afflictions.
Affez peut pleurer qui n’a nul qui l'appaife : Pro.
He may weepe till bis rae ake, that bath no bodie to
appeafe bim.
ez fçait qui fçait vivre & fe taire: Prov. Looke
Sçavoir.
Affez va au moulin qui fon afne y envoye: Prov.
He’s guiltie ynough of an offence that appoints bis man
to commit it.
Affez veille qui bien fait: Prov. Looke Veiller.
De petit petit, & d’ affez aflez: Prov. From much
take much, from little take a little.
Rien n’a quiaflez n’a: Prov. He that bath not y-
nough bath nothing;or be that couets more then be hath
enioyes not what be bath.
idu: m.ué: f. Daily, frequent, oft, continual; dili-
ent, ferious, laborious,
iduellement. Daily,comtinually frequently,common-
ly, often,
ae uement. as Affiduellement.
continuance in.

Affiegé:m. ée: f. nefeged , beleaguered .

Afiegement de ville. A befieging,or beleaguering of a

Alfons 3a ed pane

ieger. To befiege,to beleaguer.
Afficheur :m. À À 560 4 Mar.
Affiement : m. À fitting.

her: m,Sfeele.
eer Affictte, —

1ette: f. À pas ps 3 alfo,the feat, (cite, or {ci-
tuation of a boufe,or place ; alfo,a plot for, or the plat
forme of,a building ; alfo,a couch, bed, courfe, or laine
of fone crc, in building; alfo,a fitting; alfo, land fur-


raifed, and extent layed, vpon land, for the payment of
a debt,e>c.
Fr nee À dorer. Size to gild with, gold fixe.
Affiette de taille. A ceflement,or ceffing of atax.
Monnoye de bonne affiette. Of a good forme.
Paftez d'affiette. Small Paflies,or Pies, ferued in, at
the firft courfe, upon Plates.
Vin venduen affiette. wine uttered, and drunke, by
alto, ,0r quarts, dc, in a tauerne.
ignal: m. ire unto a woman
for her iointer,or dower ; and which fhe enioyeth untill
fle haneleuied as much as fhe brought sith ber.
i nalderente. Rents affigned unto a woman for
the fame purpofe. EN ME SS
Affignat: m. An affignation, or appointment ; a diftvi-
bution of a limitation,or allotment,vnto; alfoya day gi-
affignement, appoint-
ment ; a diftribution ; an affigning, or pere; peng
a Ling.


5 Ing
É + ave ation.(Two,or more) to appoint a
S ine place fet 3


their meeting. |,
FR ee rm guess fr
for; allotted layed out, fet or put,ouer unto

rte or pited into bic mvse bands, ig


iduité : f. Afiduitie,frequencie,oftennefe diligence, |


ueyed and fet out to th’ vimoft rate; or th’ vtmoft rent |


Affgnez. To affigne ; appointor daine, or depute,for ; to
allot, lay out, fet or put, ouer (alfd,to gine day) unto.

Atligner fa main au fief de fon vaflal ; &, Affig-
- Mer d fon fief les terres de fon vaflal; To feixe, enter
vpon,or take into bis owne hands,as forfeited, tb'inhe-


ritance of bis vaffall. \
iilonnement: m. .4 making of baulkes in plow-


ing.
Aflbnner. To baulke,or plow vp in baulkes.
Affinenter. To cement,clofe,or glue together.
Affimilation :f. Acomparing,likening,refembling; an
application,or applying of things, together.
imilativement. By comparifon, femblably, in like


manner.

Affimilé: m. ée:f. Likened, refémbled, compared,
Unto.

Affimiler. To compare, liken, refemble, apply things to-


ether.

Alt zm. Affeffements ; or,impofitions.

‘Atis :m. rat | Set, fitting ; feated,placed,fetled, fixed,
Mae 3 affoslimitted appointed ; alfo,taxed,celfed, or
a (4 . «+
Ci trop haut affis. #hofé faulkes (or legs)are too

ig
Il om cœur affis en bonne part. Heis honeft, faith-
fillrefolute, valiant.
I n’y a pas bien affis fes lunettes..He bath miftaken
the matter; or be bath not looked into it fo throughly as
he might, fo diligently as he fhould,baue done,

Affife: £ An Affife;or Seffions (a word moft ufed as our
Affifes, in the plurall number) alfo, the cuftomarie fine
thats taken,in Brittanie only, for certaine beafts found
dammage fefant ; alfo,as Aflize.

Affifes de Iuftice. Are, by the cuftomes of Norman-
die, affemblies of knights, and other difcreet, and fub-
flantrallmenin companie of a Bailly,at a place,and for
Lnpeande afiessh d by a Senefcball or Baill

a ea is beld by a Senefthall,or Bailly:
La petite aflife. is held by a Preuoftall, or inferior,


Iudge.
Droi& d'affife de fix deniers. vj.d. Tour. Duernto
the townefhip of Tournay upon euery pottle of wine
retayled within it. ;
Allies: fThe folemne,or ordinarie Affifes,Se(fions,or fit-
tings of Indges ; alfo,as Afis, fubfian. ‘-
ance: f. Afiftance, helpe, fupport, countenance,
prefence of men m helpe of their friends ; a flanding to
1n extremitie.
Affiftant: m. An affiftant ; a belper ; a lander by.
Afité. Afffied, belped, aided, defended ; ftood by, or


unte.
AMifté de plufieurs autres. Accompanied with, or
Lowed,by many others .
ifter. To affift, helpe, defend, aid, countenance ; aif,
to accompanie,affoctate,be at,or be prefent at,fland by,


or vnlo.

Affize: f- as Alife; alfo,a courfe of fRones,or bricks, in
building.

Affociable: com. Companable, fociable,affociable, fit to
hold fellowbip witb.

Affociation: f. Anaccompanying, affociation, focietie,


Allocé :m.ée:f. Afüciated, accompanied, conforted,


ps |
ocier. To affociate, accompanie, bold focietie or fel-
At fad yon sf ei '
: com. #2 or kneffe -.
Mamie fs ier el 3 |
y O-


*


Original from
THE. OHIO STATE. UNIVERSITY
- = - s , > ‘


“
-


x du 1 ‘
op ee id the de 1


wtb os |


Te


Aflotir. To


| Affoupir. as


A-S.S


Affolé: m. ée : £ Sunned; feafoned, hardened pr dried

inthe Sunne zalfo, fetled, (as a borfè,érc;) vpon all bis
feet.

Affoler. To fine; to feafon,har den,or drie in the Sun.
s’Affoler. To /ettle bim/élfe vpon all bis feet.

Aflom nei iller. To caf} into a

onimé : m. ée : f. Felle icken,or knocked,downe;
alfo,ca/l ito a beawie fleepe; alfo,caft vp,or fummed,as
ares konng.

Affommer. To fell,firike,or knocke downe;to ouerbeare
with blowes ; alfa, to caft into a beawie fleepe ; alfo, to
(umme,or caf up a reckasing.

Affommereffe. main af. A heauie, or dead band, that
Atk rockes or fels dawne what{oeuer it flrikes.

A Dre gs m. A knocker, feller,or beater, downe.

Affopi: m. ie: f. Layed, brought, lulled, pects: caft
into a fleepe; alfo,dulled,benummed made fenceleffe,as
one that Dés: alfo,quieted,pacified, appeafed ;
lified, panes, ,aljiuaged ; alfo, repreffed juppreffedex-
t ASE

ae To lay, bring, or lull, afleepe ; alfo,to benumme,
dull make fencele|[e,as one that is afleepe;alfo,to quiet,
pacifie, appeaft, calme, alfuage; alfo, to fupprefle, re-
ALT el put under foot.

ement: m. A laying,bringing or lulling afleep
i a dulling, benumming, making {enc wf: ts :
wars ing,appeafing, aljwaging ; alfo,a repref-
/ fing pre uPorefing ing, extingurfbing.

Aflorbir. To drinke, foke,or fucke,vp.

Affortable: com. Sortable; fuitable ; fit to Pryor to be
fuited withall.

Afforti: m. ie: f. Sorted, afforted, fuited matched ; al.
fh, fiernifhed, or arnifbed fully. |

— iment. as tement. hequell: diffe

ortir. To fort, afjort, fuit ; matchyequa 07 =

der feuerall things bandfomely ; alfo,to pape flore

AIDE or forts of. for frnitures fa
ortifiement : m. Stuffe,or ture; alfo,a fort

or fuiting of things together ; 34lfe,a nd
ing,or floring with all forts of.


rete: i Sotted, befosted, doting on, too fare |


in lou
Il en eft plus affoté qu’ un coquin defa bouteille :
TE Poly affechea him too much.

eft plus affoté qu’ un fol de fa Marotte. The


pe

L'Affotée de. A mans Sweet-beart,or Miftris,on whom
the foole dotes.

Affoter. To fot, befot, make dote un, bring too farre in
. loue with.


s-AMorer de de. To dote on, or, be extremly à in lone
“wit

- In’eft fibon qui caste n ne svabloge: Prov, The beft
‘man may be


£ gro . pr ome AT data
Otter, as

; To afi, make fie bd, bring
‘aif ch :m. A genealogie,floce, progenic.


uplis mie: Supplied, ‘macerated, made foft,
alu To ipples macerate, make A ‘tender,
Alford m. ie + Fe Deafined ; made, or growne,


Eee To derfen,or make deaf


urdiflement : td dena making de.


1 —£ Fé


=


a


Digitized. by Go: gle


oa ym. A Starre,a Planet ; alfodeftinie. fate, fortune,


Aftr &te: f. Bound,
| SR ni


A ST


Affouvager. To affuage ; quiet, fill, pacifie.
Aflouvi : m. ie: f. Een pemapten {atised {up
alfo,glutted, faded, cloyed.


ua To fill, content, faliate, fatisfie ; alfo, to cloy,


Aken ine; :m. A fling cententing fatiati» a
tis Ne ce ri draps “3


re f pp SE, enuring ; or continu-
ance in a thing.
Aflumpter. To take vp from below unto a high place; to
take up into beauen
uinption. Ax a[fumption, or taking up into a high
place, alent Mine ina Syllogifine. oe 7
L'aflu umption noftre Dame. À folemne boliday kept
bythe Church of Rome the 15 of Anguft ; wee tearme it
our Ladie day in baruef.
Aflus. (Adverb.) On,or upon; whence;
Mettre aflus vne trahifon à. To accuft ofer charge
Dre ed 3 to lay treafon tothe charge of.
Armes


pete d'aft. weapons to be caft; as darts,crc;looke
A Lob;
Fy en og és. @Rab.


Aftelles. as Attelles.
Aftellier:m. 4 Stall.
ion: m. The name of a certaine bound-fifh, or
dog-ffh, whofe coat is full fet with fiarre-lke fpots.
rique: com. Starrie, flarre-like of, or belonging
vnto, a flarre.
Afteure. as, cete heure ; Prefently,euen now.
tic: m. ique: f. "Purfie, (hert-swinded, that of-
Anh and with paine fetcheth recat fr f
fthme: m. Pur t-windine||e ; an often,
ers 5 or di feat reg breath-drawing.
er:m. 4 ercho for Mafons ; Son NaiErs
yard.
Aftipulateur : m. 4 Record,or Witneffe; alfo, an accor-
der pt Be dors vato,anotbet ;alfo,an.affiftant,bel-


fee £ Craft baying and lines) mechanical


ao Seeke Atour.
im. À buckle-bone, or beaker 3 the fir he
f th nflup ; ales the Game thats played with buckle- |
bones aff a fina Land round member in Architcëture,
fometimes plaine, fometimes wrought, fometimes wry-
then; and tearmed by our workemen, an Afiragoll, or
final Boultell; alfo,the Plaxt,or Pulfe,called,the Milke


ee Diuimation by buckle bones.
as Abftraiét.

Aftrantie: £ The bearbe Maifterwort.

de: f. The Strappado.


Afire argenté. The Moone. 72
~ Aftre cornu, The fame.
L'Aftre dwiour. The Sunne.


bi d > > hard 2
pm cate sert D unes Ne
to force compell,conftraine.
ftrelabe. Looke Aftrolabe.


Abringeanc es or ECS binding matine co-
~~ Aftro-


Original-from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


un at


A T A


Aftrolabe: m. 41 Afrolabe; a flat-round me
whereby the feuerall motions of heauenly bodies, and
the length, height, and breadth of any other thing ynay


be difierned and found out.
ic: f. Aftrologie; a reafoning,or IE of


ly motions.
rologien: m. as Aftrologue,
Aftrologue: m. 47 Afrologer ; sa skill difcomer, or
ious beholder of cele il motions.
i meric m. An Aflronomer ; sheer à or profef:
or of the knowledge of flarres,or beane motions.
Aftronomie: £. 4 Afironomie; knowledge, or»proféffion of


the knowledge,of flarres. 2
Aftronomien. as Aftronome. ee
Aftrucier: m. 4 Oftridger;one that keepes or catches,

Oftridges. [Me |
Aftrufer. To preffè,or keepe downe.


Aftuce: f. Craft, fubiltie,guilesdeceit,coufenages
br - : m.ute:f. Aflute, craftie, fubtill, wylie, gnile-


dE m. Azure; skie-colour, or,the fluffe whereof tis


Afur d'Acre. Naturall Axure,asit is taken out of the

Mine.

Afurd Alemaigne; Germane Azure; is an exhala-

tion of filuer Mines; from the oh sat en, of whofe

fae it is choicely fer aped,and gather

ire Levant. as Afur d'outre me a
ur @outre mer. Beyond-fea Azure; the belt kind o

Azure, made of Lapis Lazuli, and refifting ho fire,

and water.

Cendrée d’afur.The whiteft kind of Azure.

Pierre d'afür. Lapis Lazuli; or,the Laxull flone.

Vert afuur. À colour betweene a blonket, and a greene ;

in mines of the copper which is min, ieee,
uer; am an excellent purger of melancho


To dye aine,or colour with axure.'
Afurin: m. ine: €. Skie-coloured ; cleere as rao shie ;
biew,or wanne like azure; ofjor be toyazure.
Afyle:m. 4 Saattuarie ; a priuiledged place; a ts


refuge for the affliéted, or offendor ; a place of
franchife; freedome.
oS mb Shot-free,or fcotfreesthat ss no-
i bis vié
Atabal. as Attabale ; salfo, a tynbrel or little brafen
drumme, to daunce by. “
A-tant. Forthwith ; incontinently.


| Ataraxie: € Refolution,conflancie, unmoueableneife of |


turers À (ane 24 quietne(fe of mind,
tar
Ataftre. The plaine part,or Architrave; 4/9,
a be lé bend ma feat on eae
es
À a Alls er; weavie.
Aten as Annan


:m. A ging of dees fr the pa


t er à :
Perse. To throw, Fee ang daflsor caf dome
to the earth; safe coxer, or orbite
 alfito ruine ppore[e,
‘| s'Aterrer. qe AA fi earth; ;tobee
nercromme,or choaked up, wi
Athanafie. The bearbe Tanfie.
r. To fill. Bourg,
:m. An Atheift; one that beleeues there is no


a
Nicene tteites icin te éme |


eer)


Atheifte. as Athée.
Atheiftetie. as Atheifine.
Athelan:m. 4 very finall fifh in the riner Laïz neere
Montpellier.
AU. A little paineleffe impoftume, whoft mattar
like omto pap.
Atte: :m. A miferable, wretched, or languifbing fel-


A m. A champion, at wrafiling, running, and
FA other common games of flrength, aëlmtie, or
ight.
Athleti ue: com. Champion-like, belonging to a cham-
pion; ye raga as achampion.
i less rs


Atout. with;together with.

Atrabiliaire: : com.Subiett,or belonging to eli,
or blacke choller ; or,as Atebiliaire. . -

Atrainer. To traile,drag,or draw along rato,

Atre:m. A harth,
Il n’y a rien en fa maifon fi froid que l’atre. Hee
heepes a very poore houfe ; bis cheere is xs cold as his
chimney (in which there came no fire this feuen yeare.)
Qui aMaraftre a le diable en l'atre: Prov. As good
bane a diuell to bis daim as a a fe epdame.

Atrebiliaire : com. Compofed 0 Fe melancholy,and blacke
choller ; oras Atrabiliaire.

s Auriter,. To monrne, wax heauie, become forrowfill,
gro fi

Atroce : com. Moft cruell,pittileffe,fell; ferce,terrible,
horrible to bebold ; alfo,outragious,hatnous,extr came.

Atrocement . Moft cruelly, pittilefly 5 fs fiercely,
pat: horribly ; alfo, outragioufly, ufly  ex-


Atrocité if Atrocities great crueltie, fiereeneff; fel
neffe ; terriblene[e,horriblenelfe;afo,outragioufneffe,
extremitie hainoufneffe.

Atrophe: com. 12 a confumption; one with whom his
meat ne ah towhom it does np good.

Atrophie . A confumption that comes, by. a feare-

rating i too little, or a greedie dewourine of too


Atrophié: m. ée:£. One thats in fuch a confwmption;
or as Attophe.
pi To confiume af, pine, ge lan mes


pied in La

ens. Bo; yneeres

me sr A kind of Hama icone ofed ite ate

emen,

Attache: £. A thing faftened on, or tyed unto, another |
thing; asa Libell, Proclamation, or publicke Editt pa-
fied onthe corner- ical ts, or fet up ere pla-

Te tl


ae gr Pane) fe,
Se AA


Lei datache. An Weiler gy eat,erephouad.
eS dcr nfs
merle papontes ali


—


: Bea Oa
THE OR: STATE UNS


A eet.


Attaché par les carrefours . Publikely excommuni-
cate ; or outlawed by proclamation; alfo,defamed by li-


bels fet vp on

Aachen 40% faflening, annexing, binding,
knitting, unto.

Attacher. To te, faften, clafpe, knit bind,annex unto,
to flicke, er fet vp, to bang, or clap upon, a poft, wall,
dc:


s'attacher À. To coape,dealemeddle, fcuffle, grapple,
quarrell, fight, babble with, hoe

Attainét. Seeke Attaint.

Attaincte. as Attainte.

Attaindre. Toreach, or attaine unto ; to touch; bit, or
firike nreaching ; alfo,to overtake, or fetch up, m go-
ing ec ; al/o, to get, procure, obtaine ; bring to pale;

(0,to attaint, or conuitt ; alfo, to appeach, accufe, or
charge with.

Attaint: m. te: f. Raught, attained vnto; touched ;
bit, firucken ; overtaken, fetched vp ; alfo,gotten, pro-
cured obtained ; alfo tainted attainted conuitted ; al-
fo,appeached accufed of,charged with.

Il oh attaint. Hess taken ; be’s farre in loue; heis but
a gone,or is no more bis owne,man.

Attainte : f. A reach; bit,bome touch; blow,or firoke ;
afo,a defignement, intention, purpofe, pretence ; alfo,
a gentle mip , quip, or iert; a fleight gird, or taxa-


tion.
Tirée d'attainte. A fhot within reach,or leuell.
Nul n’y ofoit donner attainte. None durfl attempt
itor deale with it ; no one durfi venture onit. —
Attalenté : m. ée: f. as Entalenté; or, prouoked vito,
put into a longing of. 3 j
Attalenter. To egg, prouoke ; put into a longing ; to fet
the defire on worke,to giue it an edge,or sip
Attaque: f. An affault ; incownter, ski fight; a
‘violent meeting of two armies,or enemies,
Attaqué: m.éc:f. Incountred,fcuffled or medled with;
afjaulted,or fet on. ; i
uer. To affault,or fet on ; to incounter coape, feuf-
fle, any way to meddle with. À
Attavanat:m. Aborfethats flye-bittes onely on the
flankesor omtbenecke
Made f. =: anger, teflineffe, pettifineffe,
oe mot.) "
Attayneux: m. cufe : £, Moodie,angrie, froward, pet-
ti a |


teflie. per A
ttedi :f. A toyling, wearying ; cloying, or trou-
+ ro ith rowastbefvocthing; 21,4 to 2
rifomene[festedioufnelfe. ; Sidaeya

Attedié : m. ée : £. Toyled,wearied ; cloyed,or troubled
with too much of. Hs


Attedier. To toyle, wearie; annoy; make loath; clay,or


ANTYT


Attelier: m. 4 worke-houfe, or fhop for an artificer.

Attelle : £. 4 fplent,or flicke to make a fplent of.

Attelles: £. The baumes of a draught borfes collar; the

20 flat flicks that incompal]e it.

Attenance: f. 4 dependancie vpon,a belonging vato ;

Pe Attente; hope,expettation.

|, Attenant: m. ante: f. Belonging, or appertaining to;

adioyning unto; depending on; aca cleaning,


Attendant: m. 47 attendant,retayner waiter.
Attendans. Afblers ; binding flones,(in Mafonrie.)

as m. gr f tig waiting on ; expe-

3 tarryin: j -

Attendant que Ib that,

Attendre. Toattend,wait flay,tarvie; expett,looke for;
to a ge pad on.
s'atten Totruftreft,relye,depend vpon.
A re la venue du boiteux. To flay for 1obn
Long the Carrier ; to tarrie long for that which comes

ut flowy.

De ce que tu pourras faire n'attends autruy : Pro.
Bid not another doe that which thou canft do thy felfe;
or, build not, relye not, on anothers doing of that which
oe.

‘Pourneant recule qui malheur attend : Prov. 1»
vaine bevetives that attends mifhap (which if it muft
come,burts leaft being met witb.)

Qui attend ila fort temps: Prov. He that attends
bath time ynough; or tobim that waits all time feemes
tcdions. ~
Qui s'attend à l’efcuelle d’autruy il difne fouvent
bien tard: Prov. Heithat waits on another manstren-
cher, makes many a late dinner.
Qui bon maiftre fert bon loyer en attend: Prov.
Hee _ fèrues a good mafier , bopes for a good re-
ward.
Qui fol envoye fol attend : Pro. He that imployes a
foole,expeéts a foole.
Touteft fait negligemment là où l'un à l'autre s’at-
tend: Prov. Nothing is well done where one altoge-
ther trufts vnto,or relyes vpon,another.
Tout vient à point qui peut attendre: Prov. He
that can flay bis time fball compaffe any thing.

rir. To fofien,mollifie, make tendcr,gentle, ply-


ant, :
s'attendrir. To grow tender, foft,centle ;nice,frint,
effeminate. : +55 cf
Attendriflement: m. A foftening, mollifyingmaking
tender.
Attendu : m.uë: ar flayed on; expé-
2 208 ee dr. :
Attendu que. Seeing that. .


Petit difner longuement attendu n’eft pas donné,


trouble with too much of onething. = hm" :

Atteinte. Looke aceite cone ; le mais rs were 4 a te rites ps à
ye: mb. Harnef[e for a Draught,or Tean we flay 3 ora little me s decre
Age the cattell that s Az it; all the fürniturewntoit,er | ly ugh Like may be {aid of any benefit or fauor:)
slonging ; alfè,a Licence graunted, bythofficers | Attenduc: f. An attendance,or attending. i
— “ofaforrefisvntoa Potter,Glafier,Tyler,Turner,Smith, Lure To retaine, detaine, with-bold, keepe or flay,
| the t ‘ rack:

cé en s’attenir à. To belong unto; to depend vpom; affô, to
Attelé: m.ée:f Spang be linkedor iayned in confanguinitie with.

toa i Attentat: m. A bg ù ling an

eler im. Th appeale; alfoya taking (by the pla “à

ture,pelonging to draught horfesor oxen;or unto that hisowne vfe part of a thing which the Court
_  whichthey draw. vied &y fequefired ; any attempt made,or courfe held on,con-
Atteler. To trarie to a publicke Order. > ?
= a Chariots Attente: f. Expeétation ; hope, de of san attending,

alfo,to barneffe them for its flaying,tarrying for ; alfo,a pr e opinion. ae

2
Original from


me THE OFIO-STATE- UNIVERSITY


artificer.
of.
collar; the
ging vato;


taining to;
r cleaning,


ter. ;
tafonrie,
gon; expe-


nd fab, ;
of that which


d: Prov. In
hich if it mut
¢ that attends
Us time feemes


jifne fouvent
yer mais tye


tend: Prov.
fora good ve-


that imployes a


n AV autte sat
here one altege


Le: Prov. He
ml
vile ;nice fu,
ping
aged ns EXPE


wet ar fr)
ese
cot ps


. Attenuri : m.ie:f. ‘Made thine, flender


ENT eT


46...


ATT


Attente d'un edifice, Th’inchoation , or vnperfeect
led of a building, guen ouer before it ibe fini-


Lions celuy laen attente, Let vs leaue bim a-
lone (to his hopes ; or, Sf ork eile ae «)
Dr mr Aron Incontinently ; without more
elay, or ado.

Attentes d’une muraille, &c. Denting parts,or pee-
ces of a wall ec.

Table d'attente.A plate of copper crc whereon fome
notable in{cription, or other thing, is engrauen; alfo,
a flat peece of marble cc charged with the like fluffe,
jon fet (as the i à commonly) onthe outfide of a


me or building.

Attent/: m. ée : 4 Attempted, enterprifed ; effayed,
preued,put unto trial.

Attenter. To attempt,enterprife ; effay,proue begin, put
into triall ; alfo, a plaintife or defeendant tg os
vato bis vf or benefit part of the thing in fit
poss 4 former fequeftvation thereof se teks


Ans: au prejudice l'appel. Ta goc on with bis


me notwithflanding the Appeale of the aduerfe par- :


Astentif: m. jue : f. Aftentiue, li leningsberdial cnrs
full, ay ng vigilant ; eaïnefily bent unto, excee-

_  dingly fet vpo

LE. Attentinely , carefully , beedfülly,


wifily.
Attenu : m. ué:£ Bound,or beholden to.
Attenuation : f, 47 attenuation, or extenuation; a


leffening, i > diminifhment ; a making thinne,


Seles €.

cfpondre par attenuation. Looke Refpondre.

Attenué: aes f. Diminifhed,leffened, pa brew wa-
fed, extenuated ; made thinner , finaller , flenderer ;


weaker.
Attenuet. To leffen , diminifh, impaire, appaire, wa
extenuate; pe thinner, er; weaker. sie


, finalls or as
Attenué.


Attenurir. To make thinne, flender,or finall ; to minifh,
extenuate,le[[en, impaire.

it: m. An overthrowing to the earth; a

couering with earth ; a Sarronnding, or ouermbelming


by the eartb.


Atte :m, ée: f. That hatha terme,or time gran- | Attifo


ted for the paiment of a debt ; alfo, put Of fromierme
to terme, from time to time
eur : m.Az ouerthrower(to the earth; ) arui-
ner;undoer,oppr Bee ce
Atterré: m. ée : f. Couered with, ouerwhelmed, ouer-
throwne ae ta earth; tote ice


Atterrer, ’ Ses aac 10 ouer-


Arrifile as Atceriflement.
Atteftation : f. An attefiation ; mt calling to
witnelfe ; a inftification by
: mi ée : f. Attefted ; protefted,auouched affir-
med a gite or by witneffe.
igs atteft eb atest call to Se
 meffe ; alfo,to t
Rares. Eee rs dog |


Digitized.5y Go gle


Attiedi : m. ie: £. warmed made luke-warme.

Attiedir. Ta warme ; to make luke-waime,

Acriffé : zm. ée: f. Decked , pranked , tricked , trim-
med,

oe :m. 4 pranking, decking, tricking, trim-


ë ‘Avifier. To decke,pranke, tricke, trim,adorne.


Attiffets : m. Attires,or tives, dreflings, trickings, at-
tirals, -

Attiler.as Attiffer.

Attiltré: m.ée : f. Suborned, appoafled ; inftruéted be-
foreband,taught the matter be bath to fay.

Attiltrer.Tofüborne,or appoaft,infrukt, or teach before

pers to informe, or forewarne of, the matter be is to


AGE. m.¢e:f, an pus ed, irritated, incenfed ;
alfà, fle{bed,or faftene ce ds
gr + Toprouok he VE SE againft ;alfe,
to fle

-Attinté :m, ée: E Decked, tricked, trimmed, pranked ;
alfa, fine fpruce,compt neat;alfo fitted fs igbsor(as
an arrow on the bow-ftring) mocked.

‘Attinter. Todecke,pranke, tricke, trimme salfo, to ne
well, fet right,place iuft.

Attiquers: m. Little notes,or tickets.

Attirail: m. A great maas retinue, traine, attendants,
followers.

Attirantons : m. Aa Artificers tooles,orinflruments.

Attiraux : m. Plough-geeres ; the tooles, or inflruments
belonging to a plough.

Attiré : m.ée:f. Drawne to; tolled on; inuited, inti-
ced,allured unto.

Attirement: m.4 drawing to; a tolling on; an inui-
ting inticing alluring unto,

Attirer. To draw,or bring to; to toll,or lead on ; sal, to
inmite,intice allure vito.

Attifé : m.ée : f. Kindled,or flirred,as fire,

Attifc-feu :m. 4 fire-kindler, or fire-ftirrer; and (me-
taphorically) a flirrer vp of firife, a firebrand of con-
tention,a raifer of edition.

Attife je: m.d brabling make-bate; a renewer,
a reuiuer of old, and ouer-worne quarels.

Attifer. Tohindle (a fire ;) toftiree the fire; to lay one
cole,or brand neere unto another.
Attifer le feu avec l'efpée.To prouoke az angry per-
fonextreamely.

nné: m. ée: Scorched, or balfé burat; blackifh,
or er aso firebrand crc.

Attifonner. as Actif

Attorné :m.6e : £ Dvefedyatired, trimmed decked,a-
dorned.

er To attire,dreffe, decke,adorne, trimme trick,
anke,

here : 4 genile touch;alfo,a glaunce ator fhort


ss sf cea Le pasteur À felt fofi-


htly mentione
rene mal gee, light bandling,
nit fe Rein of of alles nore Attouch:
handle gently, hy toc bt feele Lp 5
cep res briefély,glaunce at fleightly; meddle or
_ deale with but alittle any way.


Attour : m. 4 French-hood ; alfo,any kind of tire,orat-
Dame a womans bead,
Damoifelle ¢-attout. where woman that ufes
leo attire, ber
rsmée CA tinge sh attived. decked: 1
Artour=


Qriginal from
THE:OFIO-STATE UNIVERSEFY


< . . a


ANT T


Attournance :f. Az Atturneyfhip ; or, the following of
a cafe by an Attiracy;alfi,as Accournement.,

Attourné: mée: fas Atrouré ; al/o,atturned as ate-
nant,

Attournée + f.4s Attournement; 4/9,a letter of At-
turney,

Attoumement : m. Av attiring,dre/fing, decking ; al-
Sophe Atturncment of a tenant.

Attourner, To attire decke,dreffe ; alfo,to atturne, as
atenant. |

Att c: £.A waiting-woman,or chamber-maid,
that ufes,or helpes, to attire her miftreffe.

neur :m. A Groome of the Chamber ; one that
Her: in the chamber, to dreffe bis Mafler, or Mi-
re[fe.

Attrabilaie. as Atrabiliaire.

Attract : m. iue : À. Attrattine; inticing,all uring ; of
power,or propertie, to draw vato.

Attraction: f. Anattraction ; a drawing to.

Attrahiere:f, Eftheatage ; or,an Efcheat; Looke E-
ftrayeres.

Attraict: m. An attrattion,or attrattive; a bait,allure-
ment inticemcnt inueaglement.

Attraiement : m, Ar attratting,or drawing unto; al-
fo,an alluring inticing jnueagling,

Attraire. To attraétjor draw vato; alfo,to allure,intice,
inueagle , tollon ; moue , or prouoke unto, by faire
meants, ‘

Attraire tefmoins. To produce witnelfes.
Vn dormir attrait l'autre : Prov. One fleepe dvaws
on another.

‘ Attrament. Inke; or bleach for Shoomakers.

Attrapé: m.éc: £.Caught,intrapped apprebended;ouer-
taken; taken tardie, or in the manner
Toft attrapée eft la fouris qui n’a pour gifte qu'un
pertuis : Proy. Looke Souris.

At 1. Tointrap,catch, apprebend ; ouerreach,ouer-
take,take tardie,or in the manner.

Attraperie :f. 4 catching intrapment, intrapping.
Attrapoire : m. 4a intrapping,or catching; alfo,a trap,
the infirument,or meanes ee one is intrapped,
Attrayamment. Atrathuel,a uringh, inticingly.

ant. Attratting,attractiue, leading, or drawing
unto ; alluring jinticing. EX
.as Attraiét; 0r,45 Attraiernent.
Attrayeres : f. E/cbeats ; Looke Eftrayeres.
Attrecta ation : f,.Afoft, and often handling, touching,


feeling. . 0
À ance : f.Soberneffe;temperance,modeflie.flai-
e, gouernment ; a re in nine


maur.
| Attrempé:m, ée: £Tempered moderated, well gouet-

ned ; of a temperate,or ftayed bumour salfosmailiened,
eped in liquor ; alfomixed,or feafoned


“11


LU van ih,


A V'A


s’Attribuer. To challenge affume, or take upon him.
Attributif :m.iue : f. pre 5 attributing,
Atecifié im, é¢ ; £.Agriewed,growne fad,made forrow-


Attrifte-coeur. Heart-fadning, thoughts-griening.

Attrifter. To agrieue, make fad, heauie,forvow fill. *

Attrit : m.ite : f.Rubd, fretted walled, worne away.

Attrition:f. A rubbing fietting,wearing.

Attroupé : m.ée : f. Trouped,in troupes.

s Attrouper. To affemble in troupes, or companies; to
troupe us

s'Attruander, Toloyter, grow lazie , become fluggifh,
wax an idle truant: :

Aturré à vn’ opinion. Refolute,or obflinate in,an opini-
on ; fully bent to defend,or follow it.

Au(a Mafculine Article ; or,a Prepofition bearing th’e-
aergie ofa Mafculine Article) is ener fet before Maf-
culine Nownes that begin with a confonant, and fieni-

fies, In the ; to the ; at the ; on the; erc, asin A,

Avachi: m. ie: Loofened, flackened ; quailed, faded,
growne flaggie ; failed in lineline[fe, vigour, vebe~


mencie.
s’Avachir.To loofen, flacken, grow flaggie; quaile fade
faile of it former lueline(fe, VigoH?, and vchemencies
re wax faint, feeble, beavtleffe ; to. bang downe the
ad, s


eaa,
poe m. A wild open “
Vaillon: m, Akind of fhell-fifh.
Avaindre. Te take, or yg ; to bring, or lead
forth ; alfo, totouch,to reach vato.
Aval. Downe,or downeward.
Vent d'aval. 4 wefl-South-Wwefl wind ; ov a weflerly
wind that fomewhat inclines to the South,
Avalanche. as Avallanche.
Avalifque. Auant, be gone; fie vponit : @Langued.
Avallage : m. 4 lettinz,putting,or laying downe ; alfo,
a fivallowing or (willing downe ; alfo,a fall, or a fal-
ling downe,as ef riuers,or other waters; alfo, a Por-
ters hire, for the laying of wine downe into a féllor.
Avallanche: f. .4 great faking,or finking downe, as of
earth rc.
Avallafle : f. An inundation ; alfo,a {wallowing gulfe,or |
deepe fivallrw.
Avallé: m.ée : Ele put layed caf felled fallen,down ; À
ee à filed, gulped downe ; alfo;cut offer cut
owne. :
Boyau avalle. The difeafe called Burfling.
Avallé entetaflede vieille. Swagging, like an old
wines dug. 5
Les cheveux nonchalemmentayallez. Their baire
banging carelefly about their eaves. à
Avallement:m. A letting, putting, ar laying dawne,
a letting fall lata Supping up , a fwallowing,


Soaked , well. ing dowene ; alfè,a cutting off or downe,
. with, a Satire Asa Seige cab fill, ponts 2e Pe Fd
Attrem: t: m. A temper moderation, uen mea- lowne; alfo,to fup, er gulpe vp; tofwill, or fivallow
Sure,i proportion nodefie moderate dipoptin fas po pat A PAR whence; wah
ed bebauiour ; alfo , a moifiening, fleépingser foaking | — 1] luy avalla l'efpaule d'un coup d'efpée. He clave
ligue. AT ale one of bis fhoulders from bis bodie ; or, atone blow he
ately, moderately, modefily; | firoke offone of his fhoulders. .
ire sfoberly. IJuy avalla fa robbe de deflus les s.He pile
fe a infi, and even led,or plucked bis gowneouerbisfloulders.. =)
où ? Lalice avalla fon ventre, The Bitch growes big with
Re CRE _ahelpe 5, or the ssbelpes within ber make ber belly al-
 tnputed, ginen,or moft touch the. ST Sa Oke ee
: pid dd i afcher dru: Prov. (45 we f2y,) to
put vpon stocharge | fumble at a firamsandieape ouer a blocke.
Es Le Avalleur:m,. A letter, layer ; fer, cutter, downe; a
0 % gulper, >
wy


ae Digitized ty Cou le


: Original: from
Le ete OHO STATE UNIVERSITY


ot es


AVA


Sess filler or frallower, downe of. :: -

valleur de biens. 4 prodigall glutton; one that
confiumes his ovene,or other mens eftate, by mmoderat
eating,and drinking. À

Availeur de frimats. An idle fellow ; 2 man of finall

worth or capacitie ; a carele[fe companion.

Avalleurs de-pois gris. Looke Pois. .
Avalloire.A bole,trap-doore,window,crc,to let a thing

downe by into a lower roome.

Avalloiiere.as Avalloire.

Avalluation: f A valwationor valuing ; « rate, price,
or value fet downe,

Avalluer. To valwe,rate,prife ; to fet a price on; tobold
atarate,

Avaluement: m, as Avalluation.

Avance : d'avance. In hand,ginen before band, or in
part off greater fumme. |

Faire avance. To fürther,to forward ; to get, or fet,

ward, :

Avancé:-m.ée: f. Forwarded , forward, in good for-
wardaelfe, got,or put, forward; fürthered, aduanced,
accelerated,haflened, fhartened by baff ; alfè, giuen in
band, or before band ; alfo, thriven in, or profited by.
Avanceant. Forwarding, furthering, (etting forward,
putting out,or on ; aduancing,baltening , accelerating;
gining in band,or before band,

Avancement : m,4 forwarding, (etting forward,put-
| tag on,or out ; a gining inhand,or before hand ; a ba-
fening,or accelerating ; alfo, anaduancing, a getting,
or going forward, a proceeding,progreffion paling on ;
alfo, adsancement,pre ferment promotion.

Avancer. To forward, jét forward, further put on; alfe,
to hafien ; and, to fhorten,or cut off by baft; alfo, to
aduance,prefer, promote.

s'Avancer. To proceed, go on, get forward; alfo , to
thriue yncreafe preuaile in,profit by.

Avancer argent. Te gine money in band , or afore-


Avancer le doigt.To put etch outya finger
beyond bis fellowes. nee Fe
Avancer vnterme de loüage.To pay before the day,
or gine before band, ,

e Leiours'avance. The day approaches,or breakes.
vanceur : m. 4 forwarder aduancer ; bhflener , ac-
celeratet ; aifo,a foregoer.

Avanchaye : f. 4 groue of Oxiers,or of fuch like trees .

Avanger: To /atisfie, füffice, ferue the turne ; to furnifh
throughly,to beare the whole charge of.

Vous n'avanger rien, You goe no whit forward.
Nous avons tant de vin que nous ne pouvons a-
vanger à boire. #ehaue more wine than we are a-
ble,or know ba, to drinke. t

Avant : m, The time of Aduent ; which is about a mo-
neth before Chrifimas. rot.

Avant. Is fome times an Aduerbe pe Jig-
aifies, befèie,or ere, and forward; and fometimes 0
place, (then commonly following, bien ) and fignifies;
forth, forward,inward. RAS farrein, =
| Mons Ja main. me eee sete 7

vant que proccder, 4 prolonging, or deferri
ner ‘proceeding when the fuit is A te fer


ence.
: Etre bien avant de fefte. To line merily,.or in iolli-
tie.
Menreen avant. To aduance, put forward,preferre ;
sto open, declare what be hathto fay.
Vv To come, aduance, or flep forth ; to
grow, uaile, proceed, come forward


AUV : A


‘in the world.
Pour vn petit n’ avant n’ arriere : Proy, A little
breakes no fquare ; no matter for a little. |
Avantage : m. An aduantage oddes ; ouerplus ; additi-
on,ecking ; a benefit, fürtherance, or forwarding ; al-
f0,a mouating-blocke; a blocke to get on horfebacke by.
‘A l'avantage, Excellently,or exceeding well.
D'avantage. Moreoucr, ares furthermore , elfe,
bcfides,ouer and befides aboue and befides, with odds,
more than meafure.

Avantagé: m.ée:f. Aduantaged, hauing the aduan-
tage of 3 Alfa, benefited, priuiledgcd ; ced, fir-

ered,


Bien avantagé en nez. Noféd with aduantage, well
_ 40f-gowne , bauing a Gnomicall , or goodly long,


Nofe,
Avantager.To aduantage, gine aduantage unto, fir-
then. fe forward ; aduance,benefit, doe pie 8g
Avantageuferment. Aduantageoujly, with great ad-
uantage ; eafefully, profitably, well for a man.
Avantageux: m. eufe : f. Aduantageous,eafefi:ll com-
modious,bebouefull ; alfo, verie forward, full of for-
wardneffe, he
Avant-bras. Avambrace ; armour for an arme ; aif,
the part of the arme that extends from the elbow to
the wrift ; alfo, the underbone of that part,
Avant-chien, The leffer dog-flar, which appears when
dog-dayes begia.
Avant-conceu : m. eué:f. Fore-conceiued, formerly
deuifed,

Avant-cour. An outward, or little, Court before the
portall, or gate,of a great boufe. j
He. “3 A forerunning ; preceding, fore-
going. |

Avant-coureur : M. 4 forerunner, Auantcurror.

Avant-coureux : m, 4s Avant-coureur,

esa m. eufe: f. Foverusning , prece-
lent.

Avant-garde. The Forward, or vauntgard, of an ar-


mie.
Avant-hier. The day before yefterday, two dayes a-


goe.

Re ant-jeu: m. An affay, triall, or proofe before a game

egin,

Avantin : m. The arme or braunch of a vine, climing or
brought along. fiomtree totree.

Avantjoüeur. 4 Prologue, be that beginneth, or play-
eth before,the game,Enterlude,or Commedie.

Avant-iugé. as Preiugé.

Avant-logis :m. A roome, or lodging in the forepart of
ahoufe , flanding alone ; an outward gate with lodg-
ingsin it ,alfo, a Court-yard, or comming in; and, 4
Court,Porch,or Portall before a boufe.

Avant-main. The forepart of the band; or , that part
_ which is betweene the wrift,and the knuckles.

Avant-mur : m. 42 auantinure ; fore-wall,put-wall,or
outward-wall, Ù

Avant-parleur: m. 4 fore-fpeaker; ‘or one that is too
forward to fpeake. à

re : m. The ffart,or an adsantage,in a race,or

OG} e. à

Avant-penfer.To premeditate,or betbinke bimfelfe be- |

fore-band


Avant-perf e. The greateft kind of Abrecocke; or as;
Avant-pefche. re ep tt elas rap
fètonone fide;andred to the Sunne-ward, yet
than th'ordinarie red Peach; it comes timely,and eats
. delicately ; and therefore fome call fo, the ot


<=


Original trom


: HE JOHIO-STATE-URIVERSITY< ==


a. A re


ind of Abrecocke,

Avant-pied. The part of the foot thats next to the toes,
and confifteth of fiue bones.

Av mur | So much of the band as is between the
wrift and the knuckles.

Avant-portail :m, Aforeporch ; an outward portal;
a porchat the vtter doore of a boufè.

Avant-propos: m. À Prologue.

Avant-proumenoir : m.4a open lodge,pr clofe walke
for fustors rc, before the doore of a great boufe,

Avant-toict. An houfe-eaue,or eafing ; as Severonde,

Avanture. Avanturer. Avantureux. Avanturier,
Secke Adventure, &c

Avare : com. Auaricious, greedie, conetous, vnreafona-
bly defirous of, unfatiably thirfling after, money, crc.

Avarement. Auaricioufly, greedily conetoufly.

Avarice : f.Auarice couetoufneffe ; an vnreafonable de-
fire of, an infatiate thirft after, money crc.

Avarice fait petit monceau:Prov. Small us the beap
that auarice affeords (when wealth comes either to be
difplayed,or diftributed.)

Avarice rompt le fac : Prov. Looke Sac.

Quand tous pechés font vieux avarice eft en-
coresieune : Prov. The loue of wealth continues yong
when all fianes elfe grow old,

Avaris: m. Decay of wares,or marchandife; leckage of
Wines; alfo, the charges of the cariage, or meafuring
thereof; alfa , the fees, or veiles of a Cooke, ec,

Avaritie nt. Avaricioufly , couetoufly, greedily.

Avaritieux : m. eufe: f. Auaricious, fill of auarice.

Avau l'eau, Downe the water. !


Aubades. Morning Muficke ; fuch as fidlers play vn-
der chamber windowes, nés
Les vicilles gens qui font C mort fon-
nent des ao Prov. Looke


i
Aubain : m.4z alien, firanger,forreiner ; properly fuch
aone as is borne in a countrey foneere ours , as notice
may conueniently be taken of bis originall, and name ;
therein differing from Efpauc, who comes one knowes

_ not whence.
Aubain : m. ine:f. Strange, forreine, of another coun-


trey; alfo,cafuall ; duc,comming, or falli efcheat,
haine: f, Ejcheatage 3 alfo, 4 ; VA ve fib
fiance falling to the King, À le 24 the death of firan-
gers , or illigitimation of baftards ; any fuchcafualtie;


the effatesor condition ofa forreiner or
ciennement.aucuns ont prins le mot d'au
ur defherance: ae
roiét d'aubaine. E/cheatage ; the right of fucceffi-
on in the eflate of all tvangers dying in France, with-
out me rr a aed French-borne iffue: (This vight
one


(but efbecially, the firft) alfo, forreinnelfe, ftrangeneffe;
flraunger;(An-


3,07 fhould be onely the Kings; yet ‘Lords in-
- .croach vponit; perpen Res bigh iuvifdict:
challenge thereby the goods of all, though naturall
À Freachnien which haue dwelt within then libertie as
einer sor not free thereof. ==


é: f.Efcheatage, !


after Sunne-rifè ; 07, when the Sunne beginnes to bee


Digitized*by Go. gle


A V B


’ Enmes aubes, Inmy infincie, or fivathing clo
when i was in my cradle, ‘ Se
Aubeau :m. The white Poplar,or Peplar tree.


 Aubec: m. The pith, fap,or heart of wood, and timber 5


ur A
Aubeine.zs Aubaine ; A ind »
ide a ine ; Alfo,a kind of grape.


Aubeliere : f. A bufflera nifle,awbimwbau.
Aubenable: pon deed vate Efcbeatage; or unte
Droiétd Aubaine.

c : m.E/cheatage;as Aubaine.
Droid'aubenage.« Droiét d’aubaine; Or a kind
thereof’, and is,in fome parts of Fraunce,a new purfe,
And iii}. d.init in others a pound of wax due vnto the
Lord lufticer of the Bailiwike, Libertie, or Mannor
wherein a flranger,or forreiner dyes: In fime places
this duetie is lensed foure and twentie hourts after the
franger is buried ; in others before be be carried vuto


wriall,

Auber. To flit, flirve fhift, remoue from place to place ;
(a ruflicall a in er LE re

Aubere :m. 4 Desple gray horfe ; alfo, a bobbie.

ie - + The bawke tearmed a Hobbie; alfo,a

of Eagle.

Au à ee €Savoyard,

Aubergade. as Spm ;

Auberge : £4 kind of finall Peach alfoya lodging houfe,
or dwelling place ; alfo an Inne.

Auberge : m. ée: f. Lodged, boufed jparboured, inned,

Aubergeon.as Haubergeon.

Auberger: m. Th Auberge Peach tree.


Aubertimn. sei coynefileerzhinkes : Barrag;a//o,


\ as ert.

Aubes : £.The fhort boordes which ave fet into th’outfide
ofa water-mills wheele; we call them, ladles, or aue-
boords.

Aubefpin : m. The white-thorne, or Hawthorne,

Aubicon: m. A kind of great fig ; which,being fooner
ripe,is more eflecmed than any other.

Aubier : The pith, fap,or whitept and fofteft part of tim-
ber, fubieét unto worme-cating.

Aubifoin : m.4 Turkifh one; alfo the weed Blew-bot-
tle,Blew-blawCorae-flower, Hurtfickle. “
Grand aubifoin, The great Blew-bottle,

Petit aubifoin, The common Blew-blaw, or Blew-


ottle,
Aubin. as Aubier ; Alo, the white, or gleare, of an


egge.

Aubinage. as Aubaine ; o7 Aubenage.

Aubour.as Aubier,

Aubourt: m. A kind of tree tearmed in Latine, Albur-
nus; (it beares long yellow bloffomes which no Bee wil
touch.)


Aubun d'eeuf. The white of am egge.


Aucaigne. as Ocaigne ; Dogs leather well dreffed.
Auche: f. 4/ound bafpe of yron, or cleit of wood wher-
in the barrell of a windles turneth.


Auéteur. Secke Autheur.
Auétorifation. Looke Authorifation. =
Auétorifé. Authorifèd; eftablifhed , fet in authoritie.
Auétorifér.zs A . : ;


Aucun. Some bodie, fame ong; any,anyone.
Aucunement. Somewhat ; afiera fon, inamanner ;
alor and then ctherwbiles ;
at one time or patie
Audace: f. Audacitie, boldneffe, bardineffe, courage,
mettall, flomacke ; alfo, vafineffe ; before a
7 » ey


Original from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


vrs adc, Po


Dexia :f, Bold, flout, bardie, aduentu-
vous, baxardous, couragious, full of mettall, flomacke,
valour ;alfo, audacious, daring, faucie, malapert,pre-

= - famptuous ; rafh.
udience : f. An audience,or bearing ; a report,or exa-
mination of letters patents érc,in Chanceric ; alfo,the
reuenue of the Chancerie feale.

Tenir l'audience. To examine, or heare read , let-
ters pee before they bee fealed, or abfolutely


ed. :
Audiencé: m.ée : f, At a bearing , cometoa bearing;
alfo, examined, or beard read , as a letters patents,
ec, before th’infealing , or abfolute paffing thereof.
iencier : m. A bearer,or gi À
er in the Chancerie, that examines, of beares
read, all letters patents érc,before they
and deliners them out , being fealed ; he alfo receines
the fées of the feale, and thercout payrs all wages and
fipends affigned unto the Offices,and defiaves all the
ordinarie charges , of that Court; (an Vjher, or Cryer is
alfo,in fome Courts,tearmed Audiencier, but with the
addition of Huiflier.) ; :
Legrand audiencier de France. The chiefè Audi-
encier of France, and chiefe paimafter of all Chance-
rie Officers ; for unto bim the infeviour Audiencier (in
each Parliamentall Chancerie one) payes oner , enevie
balfe yeare, that which be hath veceiued,
uditeur: m, An Auditor bearer, bearkener, liftener ;
alfè,an Auditor,or Examiner of Accompts jn th Exche-
quer ; (of whom looke Auditeur des Comptes;) Alfo,4
er before whom all contracts of fale,
vents, are(infome places) acknowled-


de Paris. Certaine pettie
Iudges, who determine finally , and
om, or appeale, of fuch perfènall caufes as are
beforéthem, and exceed not the value of xx.l. P:
befides cofts of fut. ,
Auditeurs des Comptes. Are fixtecne in the Ex-
chequer, or Chamber of Accompts eflablifhed at Pa-
fewer in the veft of the Parliamentall Exche-
quers : Thefe mufi take no manner of gift of any Ac-
comptant ; nor, without expreffe order from the court,
examine or make report of,two accompts for one thing.
The Court being fet, they muft not goe forth(nor at any
ithout leaue,vnleffe it bewhen
jues in bis accompt
seb t bidding


laft that flay , and are


time out of the towne)w
hinfnanyor ally of theirs gue
they muft arifeand be
Court being rifen, they are t
RER any bodie in thé chambers thereof behind
Auditifs maiue : f. Auditine ; of a bearing propertie,or
ultie. Sn Ve done
Audition:f. Abearing. RSR
udi des comptes 7h’ examination,
and allowance of Accompts by an Auditor.
Auditoire: m.An audience auditorie; affem
je of bearers ; alfo,a Court, o ball of
= Seffions boufe,or Shire ball. ,
~ Auditoire des maiftres des Reque
a Court wherein the titles of Offices are


AVE
Ave. as Have; Dry, leane,witberrd.
Avec.With,withall, together with.


Avec letemps. At length, in time.in tb'end.
Aveille: & The bi
veulle : £, The bine-Bee,or Bee,
Aveindre. Seeke run «dé
Aveine.as Avoine; Oats,
Pain d’aveine. lannocks 07, oaten bread ; alfo, the
name of a certaine Bour‘ough in Normandic.
Avelaignier :m. A Filbeard tree.
Avelaine : f. A Filbeard, ‘
_ Ayelaine des Indes. The drunken date ; a medicina-
peat 3 called by th’ Arabians (and ia fome fhops)


Avelaine rouge, The red-skinned Filbeard; the right
Pi ot apo
.as Avelaine : d.
Avellaine. 2s Avelaine. arme
Aven Avoir. wealth, fübflance,goods,riches.
Avenage : m. Certaine quarters , or a quantitie, of oats
paied unto a Lord,or Land-lordin lieu,ov acknowlede-
ment, of fome other dutie; Alfo,as Aubenage.
Bourgeoifie d'avenage, Looke Bourg
Avenages.Outs,prouen er. É
Avenaire : com. Aa alien, flranger, fèrreiner.
Avenant. Seeke Advenant.
Avenat : m. Oat-meale; or, oat-meale flower.
Avene.# Avoine; Oats,
Avenement, # Advenement.
Aveneray.as Aveneron.
Aveneri:m. Oaten firaw,er flubble,
Aveneron. wild oats,barven oats,bauer,or oat graffe.


Ayeneu gers, forreiners ; (an old word.)
Avanger.
mere : f. Oalie belonging tooats; feeding on


oats.

Avenir. 4s Advenir.-

Aventure. a Adventure ; àl'avent:cela n'eft point.
I doubt, or,tis a queftion, whether that be; or, perbaps
that is not. 3

Avenue. as Advenue, — -

Averé: m.ée: f. Auerred,aduouched, affirmed ,verifi-
ed ;witnel[ed; alfo, fearchedor fifted out.

Averément : m. A inft eftimation of things; alfo, an 4-
verring auouching verifying ; alfo, a fearcbing, or fif-

- tingout.

Rocke, To anerte, auouch, verifie, witneffe ;alfo, to

= fearch,or fifi out,

Averlan : m. A good fellow, a mad companion, merie
Greeke, found diunkard,

Avernal: m. ale:f. Hell’fhof bell pit.

Averne : f. Hell; or (as we fay) the pit of bell.

Averon.as Aveneron. LT
verroncation:f, À purging, or wecding ; a turning,
putting ,or taking away, euill things a dinerting of
mifchiefes, alfo,an appeafing.

Averronquet.To purge,or weed ; 10 turme put, ov take,
away ewill ; 10 diuert mifchiefes ; alfo,to ie

Avertin: m. Frenzie,lunacie; giddi ef, ixxinelle; a
turning round about, or a lunacie,in beafis, manife
sir Eur turning;al{o.flubbernneffe.obfinacte,ful-

efeswilfuneesdifobedience. |

s Avertiner. To become 3 franticke, lunaticke;


füullen, felfe-willy, vines
Avertineux. Dixzie,giddie; franticke, lunaticke,
taflicall; esbumorous; wilfull,obflinate


Avefprement : m. À drawing towards eening ; the |


eucning-tide.


ay To draw towards nt gone
Il Avefptit. Th'euenin ming aprrecheeys it rate


drawes towards; nig
Avet:m. 4 Fyrre tree.
Avette. A little Bee.
Aveu. Seeke Adve.
Aveuément: m. 4-view ; the firft appearance, repre-
ju commnsi ing In fight of.
le : com. Bind,
fi roue oes 5 sai denen ju an errour.
: Ilen parle comme vn ave couleurs. Hee
pect of it like a blind mano lanhe A er, tot
Le randome he knowes not what.
Va aveugle meine l'autre en Ja folle: Ptov. Anig-
re Pajior leads an à sat Jhecpe beadlong into


Vn borgne'eft Roy au pais des aveugles: Prov.n
ordinavie [choller us held a great Dotter by the igno-
rant multitude ; and a meere Sivaggerer a tall fouldi-
our by women,and children.

Aveuglemént: m.Blindne  dnkneeswant of fight;
alfo,ignorance,crrour ; alfo,a blinding of the eyes, a
darkening of the underfianding

Avett, To blind, part à depriue of eyes, or


k
1


Pe leté: F. .Blindne(fe ; Dons er
grecs à ia ates inf à in ig-
norance,at randome.


pere f. (A kind of) pale-red wheat.


tray.
C'ett vn porc à l'auge. He &
readie to burft withall,
Augée: £ A trough-full, manger- fa; or trayfull of.
Auget : m, À little trough manger,or tray.
Augibis, (The name of) a grape, whereof an excellent
; rafin is made.
| Augive : €. Anogine ; a wreath, civclet, round band, in
rchiteéture.


with ogiues,

Augmentatif : m.iue : f Augmentative, able, fio
eafie,to increae,

Augmentation: f. Augmentation, increafe s amplifi-
aes an incr eafing, augmenting ; amplifying.
Atos Anincreafi, angmentor ; inlarger,


agen: :mée: £ Augmented, jncreafed, inlarged,
aig To anne crea: $ amplifie, intarge.


ugué. as Hieble; ceed shag thes : €
ure: m, Disina ;


rt: Fonds A vidluall binfelfe.


apte without eyes deprined


Auge: 21d Prough ; a alfi,amanger alfo, aPlaifterers .
ill be be


‘Branches d'augives. Branches ogiued or timmes


ie os birds, nai; dohe Er. old


Avifer. To marke,beed, fee,looke ine a
with circumpettion ; to confider aduife
e,indgesa,to.a


iétuaillé mde » V'iélualed ; re


be er of, j
Avidtua ee A vittualling.
Aeieesilen te vitinall ; to fa nifh, or fore, with vie


‘Avide: com, Gre goto nr ene a
tenous unfatiable ; eagar,defrous. |

Avidement. Greedily, bungrily, eagarly,ranenorfy.

 Avidité:f. Greedinet, couetoufncfe; extreame ef,
ardent affection, cagar defive..

Avier. To fet in the way ; alfo,as Aviver.

Avignon. vent A.as Aguyon...

Avigouri: m.ie :f, Tigcrews, luffie,able, Prong safe,

- enabled; made luflie, fireng;vigoreus.

Avilé : mée:f. Imbaftd, difefiecmed made vile; grcwn
cheape, fallen in price.

Avilener. To Ares difhonefiser do a villanie vate.

Aviler. To deffife, dififiecme ; imbafe , make vile, or
cheape ; to pull dewue the pre of, to "bring 104 lew
price.

Avili : mie : f. as Avilé.

_Auilier. To fill vp wine veffels, which by working kaue
eieéted part of their liquor,

Aviliflement: m.Aninbafing difgracing, dift éflecming

Avillonné .fv Environné ; rm pe 3 alo, affron-
ted ; vexed, molefied barrie
Avillonnement : m. 4 affronting ; vexing barrying,
mole

ether: To affront ; ver barrie, trouble, motef.
Aviné : m.ée: f. That hath taken.too much wine ;-alfo,.
giuen to drinking of wine ; alfo, winie ; or tofimg like
wine ; or, turned inte the nate of wine alfo, bik,
or feafoned, with wine,

rex vnvaifleau. To fill, or feafon, : a fl with


Aujourd huy. To day; this day; alfo, now , ats this
time,

Aujourd’ buy caiffier, demain caflé: Prov.

Aujourd’ uy en chere, demain en biere: Prov.

_ Aujourd'buy faéteur,demain fra@eur: Prov.
Aujourd'huÿ marchant, demain mefchent. Prov. |
Aujourd'huÿ marié, demain marri: Prov.
Aujourd'h ridemain moucheur : Pro.
pue huy Roy, demain de rien : Prov,

jourd huy Berens sain finge ord: Prov.
‘Aujourd huy Thre forier, demain trefarriere, 4
Pronerbe expounded as all the reft,ei(iwhere,

Aviron: m. 42 oare,or skull. ‘

Avironner, 0 row with oares ; (an old werd.)

Avis, Looke Advis. *

Avifé :m.éc:f. Aduifed, warie, confiderate, heed fill,
es, aljo,tould warned jinfermed.pa-

notice printelligence of.

“Avi lement: m, Aduiftment ; beed, warineffe, féreca-
Ping difiretion,circum fpebtion,confideration ; "2168
aduifing, warning telling informing.

Avifément.as Advifément.


ae 10 ma jh ag


tell informe do À

De ya era.We i LA

or fe, what maybe done 5 2
ihe Sea TRUE 4


jn makes beso narrowly and |


ve


he. EC
DST À
De L Xe
AV G
OM +
v 2


d
a
ete.
au


TORY V, M


Were


proches, bad-T-wift comes too late.
Qui bien fe cognoit peu fe prife, quipeu prie
Dieul'avife : Prov. Lake P Ker
Vn fol ayife bien vn fage: Pro. ee Sage. .

Avifion no@urne. 4 tly dreame,or vi

Avitaillé. as Avi@uaille.

Avitin. Biens ayitins.Goeds that come by inheritance,
and whereunto the eldeft fuccecdetb ; hewe-loomes.

Avivé:m.ée: £2 nickned,yewined made lining yohere-
into breaths put ; whereunto (ira is git®h.

Aviver. To quicken, make lining, put breath into, giue
fPrrit vnto.

Avives. The Vives; a difeafè in borfes.

Avivrewn corps. as Aviver.

Ant vn aul; as ail ; is Carte Secke, Aulx


Er oor as Albereau. A ind o hard white flot,
rs po eo kind of | fon
Aulberge. as uberge. -
in: m. The white thorise,or hawthorne.
Aulbin: m. An alien franger.forreiner ; as Aubain ~
Aulbina: ies m. as Aubenage.
ane he. Seeke Aumofne.
Aulmofhé: a Aumofné.


Aulnage:m. El-meafhre, the meafuring with an ell; |


alfa yneafure.

| Aulnaye. Aa Alder-groue,pr place to plant Alders in,

Aulne’:m. 4x Aller or Alder tree.

Aulne: f An EL; the meafüre focalled;(The moft com-
mon ee in France is three foot, feuenynches,and eight
lines in gra)

Her re de Bourdeaux. is foure foot and (very neere) a

A

Aulne de : Dijon. à is but two he abalfe.

Aulñe des marchans de draps de foye ;às halfe an
_ yach fhorter then the common,or ordinavie, Ell.
Aulne AE de, ra sonra
and about the fiftieth p hse pre is “ei
: th of it at this day; 9S à)

pe as hath bin 3 foot,8 2e La pare A
NUE de Provins ; as Aulne de Dijon;two Footed
a bal

L'Aulne du Roy. à (asth ordinarie one) three foot,
fenenynches, and eight lines.

Au bourde l’aulne faut le drap.There is but iufl mea-
fire,or,nomore then needs.

feftoyer fes pa-


Ifa vn'aulne gta eee
rens. He isa ie,or greedie ftarueling.
I] mefuroit le peril à F aulne de la peur. His feare
made the danger feeme the
Il prenoit la mefure de sas d’une dure
: He cudgelled them fo alt extreamly
with the ; (we ‘aywben ene bath lar ler buh
the meafurc of bis fhoulders with a good cudgel.)


eater. .


Il fçait combien en vaut l'aulne. He rowes well y-
her lh mr homnggar theyareof,
what fluffe there is ia them.


Tout au miel l'aulne. Fal wel nds,


throughly ; whences
Ie vous en bailleray toutle long, ou, cour du Io
de l’aulne. 1 min pay you bome ; (ener eae
and in eusll part.)
Aulné: m.ée:f. Meafiwred
Aulnée :£ Helicampane,Sc
ulnée cham


Aulonnes: £'Ouldernes, Medvinacks, Pledanies the
— whereof {ayles for fhips are made.


À onnier: m. A certaine [hrub that bearesa fruit ike


»\ wate,but fomerbat bi ae then,a Rafpis, or Steawber-
rie ; and therefore 1 thinke it may fafely be called, the
» Steawherrie tree.


Aulvent. as Auvent.


Aulx:m. Garlicke;Looke Ail.-
Herbe aux aulx. Sauce alone,or lache of the bed, eo
“Le mortier (ent coufiours les‘ aulx: Pro. Th’ i
preffions made by nature, or bad habit got by io.
aie feldome,or neuer, worne out.

Aulkx ; as Autres; others, @Gafc.

Anal ee .Greatgarlicksor,great mountain garlick.

€:f. Great cattell;o any kind of Neat as Oxen,
Kne,drc.

ue d'œufs. An Omelet; 5 or pancake made of egs.
Vireurs d’'aumelettes. “féllosves vaine compani-
hote es;people that bufie themfèlues.or loue
to be medling,in bafèor vmworthie imployments.

Aumoire: m. A caphoord s ambrie; almes-tub.

Aumonner. as Aumofner.

Aumofhe : £. An almes; a denotion; a gift beflaved,
with a charitable refpetion the poore.
Pure aumofhe: That which im our. Lew is called
Frankalmoine.
Efprit toufiours à l'aumofnf@8 à l'hofpital. 4 moft
beggarly,and lame wit.

Aumo{né. Given in almes,befowed to charitable ufés.

Aumofner. To beflow in almes , or free gift; to gine a
charitable almes,or unto charitable ufes.

Aumofnerie : f. An Almes-boufe. : :

Aumofhier:m. 42 Almner,or Amner ; alfo, an almes-

giuer sgagld time a Legatarie was called fo.

Aumo m.ere:f. Charitable, almes-gining,good
or liberal to the poore.

Aumofitiere: f. An almes-purfe ;or little purfe wherein
we carrie finall money for the poore.

Aumuce: m. 42 ornament of furre worne by Cagons.


. as Aumuce.
Aumuffé. wearing an Aumuce.
Aunaye: f. Ax Alder grone,or thicket of Alders.


Aune’: m. Aa Aller, or Alder tree.
Herbe de Paune.Helicampane,Scabwort,Horfelhe le.
Aunée: f. as Herbe de l'Aune.
Auner. To make one,or to ioyne ir. one; (an old wword.)*
Aunir. To clofesor fhut up.
Aunon. 4 Keeling (fifo)
Aunoye: f. as Aulnaye; an Alder groue,
Avoié:f.4 floe-wormespr blind-vrorme.
Avoier. 4s Advoué.
Avoine: f. Oats. La
Avoine folle. Wildoats,barren oats haueroat. gaffe
Avoine fauvage. Barven oats wild oats...
Avoine fterile. Red darnell,w. iif bao, Bennet.
Poures avoines. as Avoine
Bailler de l'avoine pour du foing, To returne a good
thrne with vfitrie; Gene Se better then bis word.
fon ayoine. Put him te it


Fais luy bien gaigner

rund mate bon me off lufily, take your fill penni-

worths out of him.

Elles ne hennifforent apres autre avoine- ‘That only

twas their defire, they longed for nothing more, their

‘minds ran upon-nothing elfe.

Manger fon en fon fac. To eifior chur-

Lifhly to eat all bi all alone ; (fr um Moyles, who

pow of prouender bung fo cl mane
> none but themfelues can come at it.) + ‘er

H es


A VO


I ne perdra point I avoine à faute de brailler. He

will want no commoditie which clamorouser impor tu-

mate, wor ds can get bim.

Avoine touilie croift comme enragée: Pro.Looke
ou

Avoir: m. Wealth, fubfiance, meanes, goods riches, pof-

Se ffions,abilitie.

Fy d'avoir qui n'a ioye,& d'amours fans monnoye:

Pro, Looke Fy.

Avoir. To bane;-to hold,occupie,ufe, poffelfe,enioy; ao,

to containe ; alfo,to b €.

Avoir beau. Looke afterwards ; or jn Beau.

* Avoir bec. Ils n’ ont quele bec. They are nothing

but words; or the belt thing in them is but a little taile;

or,they bañe no more of aman in them but the faceout-

fide, prefence.

Avoir bon bec. To peake difereetly, or warily ; to be

circum|pect ia bis fpeeches ; tobeed well what be fayes

(efpecia ma time of danger, | or during an examina-


on.)
Avot lebec gelé. To Play mumbudget; to be tongue
tyed ; to fay neuer a word.
Avoir d. by be cofined heated, guliadineaiae
the gentle th
Avoir beuche à Cour. To cat and drinke feotfree;to
be in ordinarie at C
Avoir bonne bouche. Te be fécret.
Avoir la bouche fraiche. Tant vous avez la bou-
che fraiche ! Good Lord what quaint tearmes, what
goodly words youvfé! Ironically.
Avoir fon Cardinal ; ou, fon cas. A woman to bee
troubled with ber monthly flux.
Avoir fa chemife ; & ce qu'elle doit avoir. The


Same
Avoir le cœur net de.Tobe fidly fat b-
ly refolued of.
Avoirfon compte. To be merrie, linély, iolly, light
hearted, at eafe; as one that hath paft a troublefome ac-
compt, or is cleere of a comberfome reckoning, and
> alreadie what he is to truft unto.

voir les dents à machecoulis. Looke Dent.
Avoir le feu à lafefte, To be bot, baftie, cholericke,
ge. fisrious ; forveard,ba xar dous aduenturous.

voir le filer. Te be pron à

Avoir du foin aux cornes. Ia du foin aux cornes ;
* He beares bay inh. 4 bornessbe us a frend, fereycurf
or dangerous Gilles to meet with; See, Foin.
Avoir froid, To be cold.
Avoir froid aux pieds. To be iealous ; or asin Froid.
Avoir haine à. To hate,or beare hatred unto.
Avbirles = derriere le dos. To be laxie, idle,
meglgent, 9 eleffe,retchleffe, not to palfe,not to care,


roi agé 9 femaine. A woman to. baue ber


Avoir Do Con Mart. The fame.


ie fon mois. The fame.
Voit le Moyne. ps gal avons le We haue
sor ve are cofened,
i beges. tele ae deity fence,
sy onthe Sapo
=, > sti a eg


Colle sr
e troubled with ber


: Avoir onc + À
Ep dear ne
| si7-veuset Auriculaire


Avoye: f. 4 Blind-
Auque: m. 4 Goof. qLangu
Do Emile Laine Auray sont le wind


Aureille: :f. Ancare. Seeke Oreille.
Aureillons: m. |


D ui


Frs À 5 alfo,to be craftie.fubtill wylie. a
Voir venten To prefber to proc bas
byt lad ti werid a frtog ne bane taser et


rere bon vent. To be long-breathed ; alfo, to haue a
readhe wit ; quicke [ent ; peri finelling.

Avoir leur vin. Avoir fon vin. Locke Vin.
Avoir la vogue. To beare fivay,to rule the roaft.

Il n'a garde de faire cela. Hee cares not greatly for
deine that; or, 1 beleewe be will take beed bow be does


Il a bien Monficur toy. I might be Mafter (or

Ws in thy mouth bel en + ‘4 # ste

He dé oignon. Thete ape in thes raw fème-
nl ots the them. :

Qu'auez vous à plorer?#hat ayles you,or what canfe

baue you,to weepe ¢

lly auraicy de l'afne. we fhall be troubled with fome

foolifh coyle, or vaine bufineffe.

Tay beau attendre ! Here’s Cao Le tarrying = 1

fa) to much purpofe indeed | (Ironically) alfo,as

Us ieee beau flarcer. They were faine to Pete


a qui fe contente: Prov. Contentment is trea-
ha fanonghsmer needs be more thats pleafed with what


Aller aqui bon credit a: Prov. 4 good report isa
Siefficient portion.
ezy afi wopn'ya: Prov. There is ynough where
there is not too much ; (a difference betweene fuffici-
encie, and fuper ‘fuitie )
Bien a en fa maifon qui de fes voifins eft aimé :
sue well doth be line within, who is beloucd without,
ores.” :
Ii faut avoir mauvaife befte par douceur : Prov. 4
mifchienous, froward,or rise a mufi be reclaymed,
caught or woon,by faire me.
Qui a argent a des chapeau “Pro. Looke Argent.
ae a a voifin a bon matin : Pro. Good neighbors
ord kind falutations, vfe friendly greetings , gine
‘ood dayes, or the time of Fe d
ui a compagnon a maiftre: Prov. He that hath a
ruler bath an ouer-ruler.
Qui n’a argent en bourfe ait du moins du miel ou
bouche: Prov. Let him that cannot (pend freely fpeake
t.
Qui n’a cœur ait iambes: Prov. Let him that dares
not fight vfe fight.
Le frere veut que fa fœur ait, mais que rien du fien
n'y ait: Pro. The brother lowes to fée, but not to make,
bis fifter rich.
Mieux vaut vn ns que deux vous l'aurez : Pro.
Better is one poffeffionthen two in expectancie.


s Avoifiner. Te FE, draw neerc, feat bimfelfe hard
unto.


>
€ cuifine pauvreté s’avoifine: Pro. À great
yes nw Sader dore toa beggar.
‘worme.


urelles: f. whoertle berries, yn-bervies,Bil-bervies,


AVR.


Doigt auriculaire. The little finger.

Veine auriculaire. entente: ; runs up along b

the kernels which are under the care, and u there di-

uided into two branches, the one whereof mounts vp

befare the For the other bed toe open.
e nes pain, ulcerations of the cares.
Viurifertent as enr tar
Avril:m. April.
Poifon Avril A Mackerell(fib;) alfo,ayoung baud,
. Or, a Page employed by his in baudie feruices.
Aurillage: m. An impofition layed (in fome parts of
France) wpon the profit thats made of Bees.
: Auriol : m. The greate ae of the fifh Turdus,on the

backe of a ruddse,on the bellie of a leaden, colour ; and
full of blacke,and wan fhots all ouer; fome bold it tobe
the Goldenie.

Auriou: m. as Auriol,

Auripeaux:m. the Mumpes.

Aurislage. as Aurillage,

Aürocfhe. The pay phe ite

Avron: m. Wild Oais,barzen Oats.

Auron: m, ¢s Auronnc.

Auronne:f. The bearbe Sethernwoed.

Auronne femelle, Female Sothermwood, great So-
thernvaood,mountaine Sothernwood ; fome alfo call fo,
dwar fé,or fivect,Sotbernwood.

Auronne de jardin. Garden Sothermwood. |

Auronne sak. Male Sothermwood, champian So-

thernwood,the leffe reg
‘Aurore : f. The mornin:
ss :m.ine: f Of or belonging to,the morning; al.

0, ear
Aut ces Afin ken, fignifi age of

1CC :'m. A stoken, Se ge: pre eo
dare ty de ann ben motion of | bindesel-
fo, fortune ; or,a luckie beginning of =e
ante uh Ami ue a,
se PT he ee
doe nothing.
Auftere : com. Aujiere, Marre orous; rude,
We foure or barfhof di dia tile
uftereinent. Aujterely; fiermely, eucvely, rigoroufy ;
ae sea arly witbo ut pitie.
Aufterité: £. Aufereneffe, mme rique,
Dre eS A oughnefferudeneffe, sharfhneffeof
fition ; want of pitie.
Aufferons. as Aouftcrons ;.aifo, the fruits af Ante
or Pet rie 3 corne.
Auta sealed ee belongin ne bs
Sout 307 58 Sout le
Auftre: m. as Auftrie.
The South,or Southerne,wind,
à 1: m. a sf. D South.
tinh An Aufiridge,or,
Autafi:m. À Southerne wind.
— 3 as well; fo, is muchfawells as many;
fo ma Wale RS a,

Il n'en alloit plus qu'autant. He wanted, ofsthete :

wanted, but as pa more. ys

Il fe retira avec autant de nez,He got him away, wha À

foane ynough; (a fpcech rs" er is expec


with the had) Looke Nez.

Autel: m. Aa Altar. Ur ©

À uc : com. à

* authoritie ; approwed,or a ir
ique: Seek... 102


\


AY T -


gine authoritie vnte, - . -

Autheur : m. 47 author ,aétor caufer founder: W origi
nall inventor the fir(t deuifèr,of a tbing;alfo,an es
or writer of bookes; alfoybe that fels with warrantic,
Telautheur tel œuvre: Proy. Looke Oeuvre:

orifation : f. Anauthorixation,or aushorizingan
allowing by authoritie.
Lettres d’authorifation. Letters patent, whereby a
woman is authorized, in th abfence,or vpon the refifal,
of her busband, to follow bis [uits, & manage his eflate.

Authorifer. To authorize,allow by anthoritie,put in an-
thoritie,giue authoritie vnta,

Authorit£: f. Authoritie,fiva).power ; credit, reputa-
tionsdignitie eflmation ; aifosreucrence,grauitic.
Authrice: f. 42 Autrix,Authorejjé,or Aéiveffe.
Autins:m.V ines which grow up along treesor,as hops,
twining about long Poles.
Aug pais Written with bis one athens or, by bim
t tne ut
Autom. as Automne.
Ventd’Automn. The South wind. .

Automate. Anything that goes by a vice, or peifè, yet
fècmes to mone of it fe

Automnal:m.ale:f.0


semé elging po bars.


Rofe automnale. À Muske Kofe.
Automne: m. Autumne,or harueft time.
Violette d'Automne. The Paunfie.

Automnel. 2s Automnal.
Autour:m. is (generally) a fhort-winged bauke ; and
articularlythe Gofha


D


emy Autour. 4 Pr of leane, little,and comardly

gofhaukesor fhort-winged bauke,

Autour. About,round about,in a rowrid,

Autre. nr, other, ought els, any befides ; different
from the (but in fome efpeciall,not any greet,

repett) ,

L'autre d'apres. The fecond,o next.

‘A l'autre. Now fhall Ibe troubled againe ; or,this fel-

Liaw comes to trouble me as much as ti form er did,

t.Otherwife,cls,on other termessexcept that,

if nat on any other condition.

Autres-fois. Her FN times paf}; fometime ; at a-
nother time;

Autruy. Another missy sel LN to another ; alfo, atber
men, others.


erp pe cuir large courroye. To cut a large
neg another mans leather.
ma x à ne ser à nulluy : Prov.
No ell can truly grace him that owes it not ; or.
À _— wi Robbe. pe à a
outaefté à au sas roy. A
came ere ‘oe sosatberse
and
Autumne. re Automne.


Auvent : m.4 penthoufe of clotbeoc, before a flop win-


oe

Auvernas. A kind of. blacke Grapes; tearmed otherwife
(by reafon of fe bue) Morillons.

Auviez. as Alefve; A kind of wild Pine.

“een ae user away,pulled of.


Ppa aoc m. ne belper ,aider,afif
Axillaire: com.0for belonging to,
illaire. Th’arm-bole ArteriesLooke Artere.
axillaire. The liver veine; or,a great branch of
. the hallow veine conueyed onder tbe cannell bone, and
Fee terra into th’ inner part of th’ arme,

e tis difperfed. |
E ÿ Axio-


Original sam


ee
THEO M1O/S 64 TENDERS HPVs


> ae €


TR. nv


Nig die 2


Fa CUT ENS


re
x


AE te


BAA


| Beeld


BAB


Axionomantie: £. Dininetios by a batchet, and leat
burnt. @Rab.
Axonne: f. as Axunge.
Axunge: f. Tallow fat foamesghtafe ay offwine;)
a/fosoyntment (thereof.)
Ayant. (The Participle of Auoir) bauing ; bolding; en-
10yin,
A de as Aide; Jo rs nce.
Ave: m, A grandfather. Fr
Aÿcule:f. 4 grandmother.
Aygne: f.Water. Langued.
Ayg uicr: m. A gutter, finke,oy fewer. PAM
Ayguicre : f. An Ewer or Lauer.
Aÿinant ; 45, Aimant ; a Adamaat,pr Loadftone.
Aÿmer; at, Aimer; To loue,érc.
Aynets:m. Little rods,or twigs, wherein herrings are
threaded,and layed on burdles to be redded.
Ayré:m. ée:f Ayred.
Aylement : m.'A lakes,or Prinie.
Aysle: f. assAile; a wing.
Az. An ace at cards,or dice.
Demeurer entre deux & az. Looke, As.
Refpondre entre deux & az. Toframe fachacun-
ning anfiver betwixt yea and no,that a man cannot tel
what to make of it ; 4 sdb taken from a dye
that flands edgeling, fe aé tis doubtfull aed FETE
alee ie ?
pee . as Zagaye, fi
m. À finall Medlar tree, called, the three-
Medlar,or Neapolitane Medlar tree.
— An bearbe ; a
Zez,gayes : in flead of, ayes.
Azile. a Afyle. A santieatie " Fab
Azime: com. Sweet, valeauened, wii
cere.
Azimuth. 47 Azimuth, or Vertcle cr bi dif.
cends from the Zenith.
Azur. Seeke Afar. À {
Azuré. A certaine a and long-legd spider, fil of
poyfmand
Azuré : m. he Sp: Arfa, painted or coloured
“with Azure.
Azurer. To make dre to paintor colour with Aqure.


Azurin: m. ine: £ .Agwrie, blonket, ns
Axure-lke. =


2B a
B“ letter,B. In Muficke, the Note, or Cliffe, called


a


Befabeemie whence
Pe care en biol: Prov. In diféourfe, to
), and on a Siddaine,
aie Er TN
t. Gaping, yawning.
nt:m. A gaping yeonings wide opening
g afunder.
. To gape,to yawne; tops or read wide.
Baal illon: m. 4 gag.


| Baaillonner. To gag. :


Ba-bat:m. 4 ales cos
nes
Babbiner See Babine. ; SM


mi. #bigor butter-milke.
Babil: vat “Bable, pratle, chat;
= babling ing


chattering ouer-muc
illard: m. A babler, tatler, , prater, pratler, chatte-


Digité L y Go gle


ni


. rer,iançler, word-monger ; talkatine companion ; one
€ tongue'neuer lyes (and yet be often lyes.)
Babillard : m.de : £.Babling,tatling talkatine.
Babillarde: rf A title-tatle; a pratling goffip; a babling
ile ifé ; a chatting,or chattering Minx.

Babi Tablet angel ouer-
b,ufe too many words.

Babi: . the roe hat b, the b
ons: m.The players that bang to a bitt.

Babine: £. The lip of bea as of - deg tees borfe,


cow,rc.
Babiner. Toplay with she lips ;to pratle,or talke bard.
Babiole: £ 4 to pr or fmall toy,
gi to play withall.
ioles. Trifles nifles trinkets toyes ; al. faire(but
deceitfüll) tearmes.
ion: m. A Babion,or Baboone.
Baboin : m. as Babion ; 4/0, a trifling bufiesor craftie
Lee 34 crack opeeaghaltersvnbappi rogue, retch-
e vi
Baboiner. ar Béboatlisé
Baboles. as Babioles.
Babort. The Larboord of a
Babote:f. A certaine little he Caterpiller, which in
drie feafons breeds on the bearbe Saint-foin.
Babou. Faire la babou. To bob,or,to make a how at.
Babouin.as Baboin; alfa fox place,vobereon boyes
fe to fide; a fliding plac
Baifer le babouin See Baifer.
pyr eae To baboonize it ; to play the Monkey ; to
vf apifh or Poaiftricks wesh or knaus{h prankes ;
ae deceiue,cofen, gull.
soultineric: f Apiflone fe fopperie, foolerie,childifh
ig baboonizing ; alfo,an unbappie tricke, wag eifh
primer bufie pranke ; alfo, a deceit,cofe-
age gullerie.
Babou cur: m. 4 babler; a reporter of trifles, a teller
0
Baboye: f. A fib, or fable; a foolifh tale ill-fauoredly


Babe er. To blabber with the lips; to fumble, to falter ;
ali fib fabletell Po tales. fib fer
im. A great ,07 horfe-boat ; alfo, an open
wveffell of copper, and re of water, for wine-pots to
in at meale times.
roid de bac. Ferriage ; the money thats due at a
fervie unto the Lord,ar ig gc the boat.
A bottle, hab.
Baccal: m. Aweefi
Baccar. Th’hearbe Haflivort Folefoot, Afarabacca.


Bacces : f. Berries.


Bacchanaleries:f. Pipébaiel parcs Pa rang


Beectoniee as Bacchanaleries.
Bacchanalifer. To rage, ped mad pranks, fare es mad
men; (as the priefis were wont todo
they celebrated his Rs)
acchanifante :f: An enraged,or fir ooman.
as Bacchanifante.
Bacche. — of wild Peare.


Bacclé:m, de: ée:f. Frames Pas ein (eh


t woodden boult.
Basie Taree as fa à cbinfide (with a
Baccolant. Playii at titter sorter ÿ viding the wild
Mare; tott up and downe.
Baccoler. To spélaemen


Original-fron


THE OHIO: STAT E UNIVERSITY


“EL le


BAG


B A C
the wild Mare ; as children who fitting upon both ends
ofa Pole,or Timmber-log(fupported only in the mid-
deft) lift one another vp and downe ; bence, alfo to tot-


tar, fivag, fiving, lift, or beaue often up and downe.
Bacées: f as Brilées.

Bacelle. as Chaftelleine. An old word.

Bachat: m. 4 Baffiz; a chiefe Commaunder,Gouernour,,


or Officer,under the great aoe
Bachelage: m. Bacheler ntifhood.
Bigpeleme: f. A bacheker, je degree,eftate, condi-
> of an Efquire or Bachele 4


Bache ette : f. A young,and marriageable girle, maid,
or wench. ŒPic.
Bachelier:m. A bacheler ; a youth of fixteene,or cigh-
teene yeares of age ; alfo pe that bath paffed Mafier in
a trade,but is not yet fivorne of the Companie ; alfo, a
Batcheler of Art; alfo, a title of gentrie infériour 10
Banneret, and faperiour to Efcuyer; a young gentle-
man that afbires unto Kni and the priuiledge
of bearing a Banner inthe field ; alfo,the Lord of a ca-
file, fort great boufe,or Place,that is derined from (but
in turifdetion equall with) an Earledome, Vicountie,
or Barone.
Bachelieren bufche. 4 woodden loggarhead.
Bachelier: m.ere:f Bachelerly, bacheler-like ; of; or
belonging to,a bacheler.
Chevalier bachelier. Marched onder other mens
colours, and bad twice as much pay as th'Efquire.
Bachevaleureux. as Chevaleureux.
t:m. A wherrie; or finall ferry-boat.
Bachoüe:f. 4 kind of | flat-fided basket,of wicker,clofe
wouen, and pitched ia th’ infide; vfed in time of Vin-


Bacile : tree oa ae ee seas Baflilie. :
S acilles doubles. The double Crowfoot, or Bachelers
uttons.


Bacinet. as Baflinct. Thebearbe Crowfoot.
Baclé: m. ée:£. Clofe bolted fout or made-up on the


in
Baden To bolt selofe oft fmt nf one a
fhert woodden bolt
Bacon: m. Bacon,or (the fat of Bacon) Lan:
Bacquaige. as Bagage.
por 5m. A ue: ,0r bucket ; alfo,a finall and fhallow
under a wine veffell, or the 5 Or
HT: mas: te receine the liquor that difils,
pe efcends, from it.
Bacqueter. To lade, or draineariuer, or other water,
with pales,or buckets,
Bacquicr : m. A bog fid in the


= i CRE


Badelaire: m. A fhort,and broad back fvord,banding
towards the ne aTurkifhfcimitar, 7,
Badelori : m.as Badault,
Badelorié: m.ée:f. Befotted ; made a gullsor foole,
oines: f. The great,and hanging lips,or flowching
CRM of beaftes (efpecially borfes ) of of beaftly pe


sae ‘th, aeBodaule; 3alfo,a lugler ; Tumbler ; or any


ert-maker.
À Bada enfariné ; & Badin fans farine. 4 notable
ee Afei in graine; alfo,a foole, or Vice ina
splay.
Aller en badin.. To goe flowly, as one that feemes to
count the fleps be fets.
Efcholier babillard prez le feu, & badin hors Ja
afle; Prov. Looke re er. mals
2m, Foolerie, i gg ling, iwg-
tng ny kind of ari gamba
au badinag, e. He bath ‘bis part readie, his
lofonat pe Sa a he hath got the tricke of it; be
dre os led bow to handle the matter, bow
8 dima | mr ih
adinement. Fi \apifhly,fortifhly, foppi
Badiner. To play the foole,or i iff ie,
and toyes; to tumble,or inggle ; to trite it any way.
Badiner les perdris. To driue Partridges inte a


Badinerie: f. 2s Badinage.
Baditin: m. The water Lillie or water Rofe.
Badoiiiner. C’eft, Befongner come vn Afne. Rab.

Olle: m. €e: a Hoodwinked ; alfo, decemed ; alfa,
befmeared;al{o,baffled,difgraced,unwortbily handled,
iniurioufly vféd,reuiled,reproched.
affoüer. To.hoodwinke ; alfo, to deceiue; al, tobe-
fineare ; alfo, to baffle, abufe, reuile, difgrace, handle
bafèly in tearmes,grue reprochfidll words of,or unto.
affray. as Baftroy.

Oy: m. A Beacon; or a watch-tovver of timber,
dc; alfa, an Allarum Bell; and, the greateft Bell in
ina Church; and chiefeft clock ke ina Towne; alfo, a
pre of timber , wbereont befiegers beat the és

ed.

Bafoiié. as Baftoué.

Bagage:m. The cariage of an armie; luggage,bag,and
aggage; alfo,the carters boyes, and Mulettier $y that

vatoit.

Bagagier: m, A carrier of fouldiors baggage, or lug-
gage.

Baga :f. A Baggage, Queane, Iyl, Puinke, Flirt.


5 4 fipe-fed bog. if A toy, trifle, nifle, thing of (mall va-
Bacule rf Af, pape. se iy elleries: £. Triflings,toyings,idi ts
: f A fquare, e c atelleries: f. Tri flings. sidle trickes,or,trit
ging,and beld vp,by chaynes, a pretie 22 mo ne - —
= Anabagers/e fortreffe,and let fal(as aPortcullis) | Bagateur:m. A maker of playing cards.
ina trice,with a wburrie, and to the confüfionof them etn: m. a dr AR ER gt
it reaches,or lights on ; alfo,as Bafcule. ere enth part of our penny.
“Ala of the wild mare ; alfo, the Bago m. as Baillon; 3 4 gag.
pueflment of mies in fome genes tobe capt onsbe | B Regn oire. ae Balgoire ke ie
umme with a stras e ans fran; 3
trade | De 4e Pes fre
Baculer.To bumpe secu Acte with aBatjor, | B zm. A man-baud; a Ribauld.
. 4s Baccoler. i Oak (is properly) a ringyor iewell witha
pou a sfapperie doltifimefe. ne nes or more calfo, the de : ing 7
aæuderie. launces ; (whence,Co bagues tera
4 sin foe dls ns saping at the Ring) aftssberoward beflowed on,or prize
ire val : red in bi thaédors the bef ix à publicke Gamer
crie,as bounds. @Breton. Exercifè;.as aa mreflling, running, leapingséres
if Penance fe | (cad : et ©
Ke ; bij a |
7h $y 4


1€


Original from j
J HEOHI@STATE UNIVERSITY:


~~.


eg i 2h. rule


oS OS Te 1. Loin MOD eee eS
t My) .
5 J Ê ‘


ÿ


B A I.


BAG
Hague po + . He bath woon the fpurres, or
pans, ines the vittorie, or day, ws abjo-
Do) bi


Bagues. (The plurall)is taken, fometimes for iewels,or
any ornament of gold, or b to, or worne
by, a woman; and fometunes for our whole fiubflance,
or fluffe ; hence; poor cr: gens, & mes bagues; my
Ga people,and goods ; hence alfo,
ues fauves. With bag and baggage , fafe and
fo {cotfree ; without the lofje, waft, or expence, of
any thing.
ué: m. ée: f, Beiewelled ; inriched, adorned, or
furnifhed, with iewels; alfo, tuckedor truffed,vp.
Baguenaude: £. A (forme of) ridiculous ryming,or ver-
Haste ufed (and thus named) inold time.
er 23 naudes. Bladder nuts, S. Anthonies nuts,
Piftachoes ; alfo the cods, or fruit of bastard Sene;
alfo (the fruit of red Ni hefbade, or Alkakengie) red
Winter cherries ; (all which being of little,or no value,
caufe this word to fignifie) alfo, een nifles, toyes,
paltrie trafb.
Baguenauder. To trifle, toy, dally with, idle out the
time.
Baguenaudeur : m. A trifler, erate leptèrer,
agerer ; a vaine, or idle, co
Baguenaudier : m. The Senc treesor baftard Sene; a
ub which bath bia miflaken for the true Sene; moft
improperly; for it onely refembles st and is not (bowfoe-
paw name it) any kind thereof, fayes Gerard.
aguer. To inrich, adorne,or furnifh,with iewels; alfo,
“Be é,0r tucks (wbence;)
er,& baguer. To per (bu) y and bag-


Bag petite: :f A wand, fitch, riding rod, whisking rod;
, 2 (boufehold) flewards, or pal s
Soe rod ; alfo, a little iewell ; (eight)
cloth Penniftone ; 3 alfo, a finall be on
conie.
Baguette d'arquebufe. The fé icke,
Baguette de Veneur. pure à
Commander à e.To commaund (like a few-
ard) abfolutely, per. a or with authoritie.
Si tu veux cognoiftre vn villain baille luy la ba-
guette en main: Pro. Hemi ap Ba 1-8
or) clowne,is to giue bum authoritie.
Baguetté. Beaten with aredor wand; allo, commasa-
ed,ouer-ruled,awed.
Baguetter. Fees like a fleward ; alfo, to Sirike


b
Sorc re 6 f.wandie, full of reds, ands,


or fwitches.
Baguien: m.The male Bay-tree([otearmed about Mont-
Bahu: m. A ke (a carter keeling.)
Bahutier : m. A trumke-maker.
Panier m. ere: £ Of, or belonging ma tre;
Chase bahutier. 4 Sumpter-bre - tre


pad, 5 See Bays Bayard.


Baye. —


Bagecriese 4 La A bathe print rome babe in


 Baigneur:: A ymoiflener. :
A'Bagpeux: es cufe:f. ass. myth ofithameb


Go gle


bathing.
Baignoire: m. A bathing-tub ; alfo eatand
ace ell made like a bathing-tub ; and (hence) po
ereinto new wine fals out the Preffe.
Caignoler: m..A little bath ; bathing houfe ; or bathing
in


Bail: m. 4 dian, or gouernour, of a Ward,
husband) of a wife ; alfo, era Shag gt
uernment ; alfo,the Deed,Infirument, or Leafè, where-
by a thing is paffed,or let,vpon.a certaine rent ; alfo, a

fa fort yeeldings paling ouer in farme, or by

afe ; See,Garde,

Bail à ferme. A leafe for yeares ; efpecially fuch a one,

au ges the for paver to reenter fo non-payment of

the rent.

arte ad on. A fee-farme ; (with like

Bal dl Tutt the publicke magiftrats let fe
e luftice. magifirats or fet-
pair land, rc, (feifed perde af Lo) pra | Wards
ro or of the rights of pv kings Demaine; or of the

profits o

Bail mage dei A per Va at bired out for a

pen time,and with claufe of reentrie,as before.

Bail de mariage. The war dfhip,or gouernment which

à husband bath (de lure) of bis wife, and of ber whole


€.
ail naturel. The wardfhi ther bath
parse dfbip a father or mother bath of


ei
Tenir le en bail. To be Proteétor of the
rar eb or to baue the Regencie, or Gouernment


thereof.

Bail: m. baille: f. Bay (of colour.)

Baile: m. The Bailife,or Vaifrae of a village ; qLan-
gued. -al/o (in Gafconie) a laylor ; or one that lookes
«ta a Prifon ; or an Officer that hath} power onely to ap-
~ prebend and keepe,malefattors.

Baile: f. erate @Langued.

Bailif: m:as,Bailli.

Baillarge. à ‘hind of {mall bar.

Baille:m. 4 Steward, or Oner{eer of; a Solicitor,At~
turney,or undertaker fra Church, Towne;Corporati-
on, Conimunalrie,érc ; alfo,as,Bailli ; alfo,an ordmarie
Bailife,or Sergeant.

Baillé: m.ée:f. Given, graunted,conferred,beftowed ;
yeelded ouer,paffed away; alfo, prefentedofferedyexbi-

bited unto.
Il luy l'a baillé belle. He hath payed bim foundly,be
hath giuen it bim home; or, bee bath ferued bum a
omyine indeed ; alfo, be bath faire and mannerly coufe-
ne


Baillement: :m. g, graunting, beflowing ; dea-
in nr 3 alfo,a prefenting,or exbibi-

t
Bail 10% beflow,conferre, graunt ; yeeld ouer,de-


_ an jou pr


Bailler d'aucun tout dulongde l'aulne. To courfe
- one foundly,to handle him{brewdly,to pay bim bome.
Baillerde l’ avoine pour du foin. To returne a bene-
with vfierie,to be better then bis word. 15


ailler balliuernes. To cog,, ane
Bae bales ;Bailleh sae hat hathidewe,
or fpoken foolifbly) faire a ores oem it
aGods ee Ironi
sla. billes bonne; (neere the
a ballet aa dame Ti


Original fr


2:
THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


B A I


IBA Ad I


Bailler le bouquet. Yo bid one do in bis turne that
which others baue done before bim (In fome parts of
sess whena feaft is ended, whereat neighbours
baue met and beene merrie rao the mafler there-
tei unto fome one of the company a mie ae
A tyes bim to make the next.)
ailler bris contre Robert, Looke Bris.
Bail des canards à lamoitié, To coufen, beeuil,
comcatch ; to play the mountebanke.
Bailler des caflades. To flout, frumpe ; lye, cog ; de-
ui ull,well-meaning people.
er des plus cornucs. Looke Cornu.
Bailler la Diane. Souldiours to rouxe their enemies
_ with a hot mornings allarum ; to gine a Camifadoe.
Bailler vne entorce. To offer hard meafure, to gine
a flr ewd wring, a cruell pinch, a vile blowe unto.
Bailler des febues à my-croift, ‘To deceine, cqufen,
ull,conycatch ; to lay tHimpofto.
ailler le fil. To flatter, cog, fmooth,glofe with ; (à vn
coutcau ; fo fèt an edge on 11.)
er foin en cotne. ‘To gixeone the boots, to fell
bin a bar gaine.
Bailler F4 foin à la mule, To deceine, beguile, gull,
conycatch.
Bailler griefs. To open ones griefes, to complaine of
wrongs done bim, before a Court, or affembly; to ex-
babies unto the Court a relation, or complaint of thefè
things.
Baillerla haire. To play a fhrewd tricke, ill pranke,
hard part ; toferue an euill touch.
nikon ar les iouës de. To lay fire bold on ; alfo, to
enter pars imbarke bimfelfe farre ; plunge at firft
into the middle of.
Bailler la main. To reach a band ; Looke Main.
Bailler lemoine. To crampe ; alfe,to bring ill lacke
unto,
Baillerle Moine par le col. To hang, or twitch
Bailler mornifle fur les levres du Roy.To coine


Baillerfur le mouffle. To lay onthe lips, to pafhon
the Jhout, to giue a dafh on the mouth,

Bailler fur fe nez du Roy. Te coyne falfe money.
Salter vne ocijlade. To winke,or caft a wanton eye,


Baile du plat de la langue.70 footh,finooth, flatter,
cog with.

Bailler vie mauvaife fecoufle à vn. To fhake, or
Swing one cruelly ; to do bim a mifchieuous turne,
Baillet :m, A palered,or fe colour ; ms borfe that


bath a BL flarregn
Baillet : =f. Of apale red,or
Vache b ef fea defi ab

Vin baillet. 4 jek apa avai. ba;
Baillette:£ A Pochard,or widgion ; or, alittle water-
fovle,that fomewhat refembles the Teales alfose leaf,
or graunt de leafing,or to ficrme.
Bailleur : m, 4 giver, ante bear 5 dealer,
buter,deliuerer ; exbibiter. ‘dons:

ailleur de bons iours. An ordinarie faluter os
ry one be ego 3 @ fawning,or populer flow; a
| cogging,or companion,

ee È ards Ala moitié; ou, de febues à


-croift. À coufeming lacke ; a mountebanke ; a es


much authori than
Di TV etre ir mére


Digitized-by Go: gle


— maintaine the peace,


and preferne the people from oppreffion, vexation, and

wiong : Towhich end be takes notice of treafonscom=

mitted, falfé money coyned; robberies, and murthers
done; rebellions,or {editions raifèd ; unlavfill,er po-

» paler affemblies made; Armes borne, ov fouldiours lem
nied, without warrant ; 3 Proteétions, ov Sanétuaries
violated; Pardons,and Charters abufed; Faires,mar- |
kets, freedomes,and other priniledges vfurped,or ~n- |

- suflly flood on: Hee makes proclamations im his ovene
name ; be calls the Ban,and Arriereban ; leads thofè
that be raifèd by it; and appoints thordinarie muflers
of his Prouince : hee determines Appeales fiom. the
Sentences of Prouofis,and other inferior Indges,at Affi-
Ses, whereof be is the principall Iudge ; andgs thercby
beld the moft oe ludge for Gentlemen, whobaue
euer pretended that their causes muf bee decided at
Affifes ; and yet for all this, (and though bee may baue
a Lieutenant) be is but aDeputie, either unto the king,
or unto fome lord; euery onewher eof (unto the Cha-
nr Eve bath,or may bane, a Baïlli within bis territo-


Baillis de France, Were but foure in old time, when
the French kings bad ioyned to their demains but foure
townes,viz.Vermendois,Sens,Mafcon,and S.Pierre
de Mouttier (all other the townes, and Bailiwikes of
France being then ia the poffeffion of Dukes,or Earles)
and therefore the Bailies of thofe townes are to this day
TM les 4 anciens Baillis de France, thereby to
differ jomerhat from the reft of the Bailifes royal,
whereof there are now very many.
Baillis de Prouinces. The Bailifes of Prouinces, or of
Siperiour Bailiwikes ; The Bailifes of Dukes, Marque:
Ses, and Eaïles ; called (foin difference from thofe that
belong to Vicounts,Barons, and Chaftellains ; which
reer’ unto, and oftentimes depend on, the o-


Bai Royaux. The Bailifes Royall, wherof (as I bane
there be very many (by reafon of the reunion vn-
Crowne of th’ ancient Dukes,and Earles eflates ;
pr otherwife bynew ereélions,)wbo befides o er pre-
vogatiues challenge tb entire decifion of royall,and pri
uiledged,cafes.
Grands Baillis. as Baillis de Prouinces.
Legrand bailli d'Henault. The chiefe luflice of that
coumtie, — .
Bailliage : PE NOM the office, iurifdiétion, or
autboritie of aBailli; af, the Prouimce, or precinét
. wherein be gouernes ; and fometimes (abfolutely) a
Prouince; In fome old authors,and cuflomes it =~ im-
ports,as much as, protective iuftice ; and ener bolds a
= bonourable ranke than fomple, or ordinarie imvif-
tion,
Bailliage du Palais. Is (at Paris) 4 iuri/diétion oner
‘Marchants,é> Tradefinen, which owe for their wares
within that citie,and the liberties thereof.
| Droi& de bailliage: Power to-heepe Afffes; or to
bauevnder bim a a faperiour feat,or Court,
of. ie he the decifion of fuch great caufes asin due
courfe, belong not to an ordinarie inyifdiétion; This
power eucrie Lord of dignitie (from the Duke to the
Chaftellain) bath;and bad withall(for the decifion of
Smaller caufes) a Court of ordinarie PRE Faure a
ep luge,or Garde vntill
‘the ne vi ic} swe an ordinance (madeat Pam
ouffillon) they were enioyned
tr rar onely one wrifdiction ia ome |
pes ich hit bee goucraed, almoft in one


and the fame ludge:, yet ht 2


Original from


THE: OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY.


B IAL


B A I
two feuerall Courts er Seffions ; an ordinarie onc,and ee 1 unto, or being readic for, the combat.
the Affifes. Bite mareft. À low bottome which the water bath


Bailliager : m. ere :f . Attending on, ov, belonging to,a
Baier Batre.
allie: f. Seigneurie gouernment, authoritie, rule ouer,
protettion of; alfo, a Bailiwike, or country luflicefhip ;
rt place, funttion, charge of a Bailife, or countrey
ice ; admmmiftration of iuflice ; and (as Bailliage)
7 Shire, Prouince , precinét, and compaffe of coun-
trey wherein phe sutras
Lettres debaillie Are (according tothe ile of Nor-
mandic) letters writs or obligations, izing bim
to whom they are diretted, to ony to execution vp-
on the goods or po effions,of another

Baillif :m.4 Bailife ; or,as Bailli.

Bailliffeur. 4 Guardian, Tutor, Gonernor of a Wardspe
that bath the Wardjbip of a Gentleman.

Bailliftre : m. as Baillifleur ; efpecially, one that is a
collaterall kinfinan to the Ward ov bis motber, or
grandmother againe maried,

Bailliftrerie : €. The wardjhip,twition, or gouernment
of an heire within age.

Bailliveau. as Baliveau.

Baillon: m. A gag.

Baillonner. To gag ; and | fometiones a Basilers to

jyawne,

Baillot: m. A trough,

Bailly.ae Bailli.

Baimaux. (En l'ordonnance du Roy Charles 5, de
l'an 1376; faiéte pour le reiglement des forefts)
Falfe printed for, Balliueaux ; Standers ; trees ~f
fanding in forefis for increafe.

Bain: m. A bath.

Bain de Marie. Maries bath ; a Cauldron, or Kettle
füll of boyting water ; or,a A 7 the heat therof.
Chevalier des bains, Looke Chev

Baiocque : ñ. 4 finall italian oan two (Itali-
an)pence.

Baioque. as Baiocque.

Bair. as Vair ; A kind of furrez or,that which in Blafon
is called Verrie.

Bairer.as Baifer.

Baifé : m.ée: f. Kiffed, fmouched ; finacked.
Baife-main : m. A kiffing of the band, apte
Deseo brin: os ner (in leu thereof) a
peece of money (greater pr leffe, as the cuftome is)paid
unto a Lord,at the fealing, or making, of aleafe ; alfo,
the fpirituall — Church, as offerings coc,


Baifement. 4
# Rie reaching to the


Ballers

tae To e,to Oe fmacke.

Tim Bafely to fubmit bimfe 2, doe re-

wr » yeeldrefpeët;vato an unworthy
a porte, ou la ferrure , ou le verrouil de I
pa vaffall to kife the nt de the ee
“cipall Mannor ouf of bis abfemt Lord, in

omage be fhould othersvife baue deb a bin


t:m. A little kiffesor prettiefinacke.
Bafeur = Ron Pace
Bavoom ec ei rr


nd vato amarifh ; a bog,or quagmire,
Baiflé :m. ée:f. Stoopin echelon declined, bowed
fa. downe, humbled ; deiected, abafed, brought low ; Let


‘A tefte baiffée. Defperatly,beadlong, without care
‘what may betide bim, or whether bee finke, or fivim;
alfo, refolutely or with prepared force.

Baiflement: t: m.4 bowing dovwnc,laying dovne,bring-
ing pret , letting fall an bumbling, fooping, inclining,


Baffler :m. ‘vs bean ling, Oe 3 a6 Baiffement.
Baiffer. To bow dowme,lay downe, bring low, let fall,
humble leieét, abate abafe.
Se baifler. To ftoo, pes to bow dewne,decline, bend,or
incline downewar
Baiffer bois.lls baiferent bois. They put their laun-
cesintheir refts,
Baiffer fes cornes. To humble bimfèlfé, tolet fall bis
Rd Baifler latefte,
Baiffer le hoe Fee eg the bead, ia


pet oe or off
sir net in fo, lie flew pr
elfe unto an exploitjor combat; ( th Sallie
of horned beafis, that bow dovone their beads , when
they are to meet an enemie) hence, alfa;
Tune doibs ia baifler latefte, Thox Vi outéef not be
fi refèlute, fo bardie, fo forward for the matter.
‘A la haufle qui baiffe. Looke Haufle.
Le jour fe baifle. The day growes old; it waxes late,
or farre on the day.
Baiflieres : f. The grounds, or lees of wine ; alfo, any
drinke when it diawes low ; the dregges of any fuch


Hor.

Bal: m. Adaunce ; a dauncing; Reuelsor,a Reuelling.

Balade, 4 ballet.

Baladin : m. 4 common dauncer of galliards, and other
Pirring,or linely Ayres.

e: &c 3 as Balafre ; &c.

Balafre: À flafhouer the faces a king Harry cut ;a gafh,

_ or wipe, ouer the faowt.

Balafré. Slafhed,or cut ouer the fac

er To flafb,or cut ouer the ore
alafreux. A cutter, fivaggerer, fivafhbuckler.

Er dem f. Aflafhing; or,as Balafre.

Balaine: f.4 whale,o7,the Whirlpoole,(akind of wball.)

Balan: m. As the latine Balanus ; any kind of Acorae;
or,any thing made like an Acorn,

Balan myrepfique. Th'aromaticall, and oyly nut, or
Acorne,called,Ben.

Balance :f. 4 balance ; a paire of weights, or ballan-
ces ; alfo,one of the twelue fignes in the Zodiacke.
Eftre en bal . To doubt, wauer,, totter in opinion;
be uncertaine, or in fiefpence, what to fay, or thinke,
what way to what courfe to take.

Peferen nfeucre alance. To examine very Li
cé :m.ée: f, Ballanced, weighed, peifed, ponde~


d; À
Balaton a 7 ARE peifé ; ponder, alfo, À
fla ra We ex (any way)
ser à, ii
cerfbalance. Sojiy French Hunters, when a
' without any
cae casa in bi mine beats


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


+ PA LA


Balapcans meu: :f Belonging toa ballauce ; af,
Balaneier me ph tallene makers alfo,the balance of 4


Locke.
Balancier mere : f. Ofor belonging to,a ballance.:
Balancieur: m. as Balanceur ; or th Officer that


2weighes money asfoone as à it 8 coyne


the (prit faile-of a
Bale fm hrs Acorne ; or thing made like an
Aorne ; as the top of'a mans yard crc; See Balan,


net tree.
Sal mA roue, er beefome s. alfoy a ‘Balleis Ru


# Donner woistours ide balay patie cheminée. 4k
a
aieh- Netioye au balay. Tomake cleane make repé
4
zit bis | Balayer. To Swecpe, or make cleane, witha bains.
, L Balayeures :f.45 Balieures.» :
ad, ta Æ Balayeufe:f. 4 drudge,pr five cpingveench.
ae Balbucie:f, 4 ftutting,or fammering.\ : :h
prepare , alchon:m.A Balcone; a little sur on the 7 va
ee ‘ Sens rl ro before a wind
by
Balioehins : m.The Canopie thats period ouer a prince
as ace
. ame.
= Bald daquin zm: An jron,artd open cre, fil of pitch
waxes lait, + B a Yagaball sal a fs
e: f. Abullet salfo,a ball ;alfoa 7, mars
5 ale, fib gene 5 alfo, the chaffe of heat other: corne;
| uc ence ;
—_ Pain de bale. coals bread, ‘warexnged brand y the
ua Reeling, pee ee ofbread. 5 -
ands end vlbet + Bal oe "Te ct ame cailed,tister totter.
Buriss a on ile ra
; iy Baler. To dauace.
ger itt Ÿ Baleftrier : mere : f. Croffebow-like, se ti
: Lana m. A ee ee broome.
à LÀ maulkin.
a TA Barbie Baleuoter.
oma 7 baenpens WAG,Wwauer, ficker, as a son inbe
nan 4 win $
len Acar Baleuftres: m. Looke Baluftress +
ae LE bay: me he a rar chemibée: qT
a i, of nner trois tours a 0
anal st}! mn fy wich times phi a chimney (a.cere-
afi bi tite say a — they go vite their
De he Zoe
1 Leanne pére rmiée:f. Sw ter diullaclasns, witha brome.
NC * Balier. Tofivecpe; or wake sort
a, mi Mp Balcure sf. À [fneeping, or making tleane , with a.
come ÿ 1 room: w-
east) Balicures. Swerpings ; the filth, or duft thats fivep
nt weiner _ outof'a roome ; ) lf amy hen fee
ett a it Min ergo chaps(of a man,or bea, caf.) ae
a 4 Te m. An egy ea lubber, cat bc ge
hen 4 en
nth FT out ary alifle; Or,a certaine marke fet ri à æ
Su bat of faylers in a nauigab a em t è où
ments “ bah es ages à fief nee br
: le “att | 3 <2 "
La i pres etl ws nb:
pra |


Balancines: ‘tthe lifts ; vo nl = belonging. to |!


| Balaufte. rhe bloffome,or flower of the wild Pomerat! La


THE OHIGIST


/


BAL |
Balivaginer. Toprattle, or babble; tovfe- too. me


gets: Standers ; trees left in a wood for thin
Bice sine thereof.
Baliyerne: f. 4 ye, fib, gull :( leur debalivernes.
Looke Bailleur) alfo,a babling,or idle difcourfe.
- Baliverner. Tocog, foift,lye,talke idle, vainely, or to no
purpose,
pa in. A dauncer ; as Baladin.
ner. To daunce high, or liueli
Baldor. 2 sr dam galliards,
Corantoes,or Figges.


| En AL Pre Ratt


“a ts Li twelue heel mn à
Ballons =m, “ie yey 10 is he


dauncing.

Balletrou: m e-bole; Membre viril : ‘ab,

Ballié : ny É fre Me me ri

Ballier. Tofiveepe; tomake cast alroone ie; )

“|B ieur : m. A fiveeper.

Balliveaux : ae Fee eft pinkie
wood fale, |


" fit iit 7
liverne. as Baliverne, + - ”
Ballizer vne Riviere. To rake, fowre , or cleanfé a ari-
“er,
Ballocher. To totter ; as one that goes ona robe ARE
B ae bridge. fa
on: m, A fardle,or finallpacke.
Ballot: m. A little packe,
omen pore Arifling, or lotterie; ia cafling oflots.; a 34
chufing.
Ballote. ll Alf, blacke Horehound, flinking
herehound.
Ballottement : m. 4 cafting of lots; a triall of matters


Ballotce Fa cf ls 1 che fiers ad magi
ts 5 10 chufe officers,and magiftrats;
lee ror dali Lawes. § propounded ; to condemne,or ab- :
rl 23 ar
BA allouétter. To toffe as a ball ; to twrne, or tumble a


thing often, and into fundrje laces. -
Balluque: Said, =" vafined ; alls a reel)


Bale. Looke Baulme. (ried
Baline: £. 4 cane,dennesbole.gr
Baloffe : pan tay nate nd with
_ chaffe,firaw, and ot, 45 Balo
aloïé : m. ée: ig so made clea ith a


broome..
seh m. A little ball ; son packes alfi,a fiber
Sub.& Adiec: Sec B long.
pes <a I aor
is


Dore)
Balo aber nqual firme and walike
“ but he length of the fides and breadth. ofthe


Balo ue ds 1smore long than broad,but ofe-
proportion seine? en br ne
i me rer :.com.as Balour.


eadtb,
Balorderie: f, Sofi Bc al lin
DES f. ts asof fatal,


horse,
ed, or the
: £ Bounded, or bounfed “te:


fines
|


ATE HAIMVERS ET


BAN B A N


ound ; alfo,toffed as a football.

Baloter.To her pe bounfe bigb from the ground, like a
football ; alfo,to toffe,as a football.

Balorte : £. A little bullet,or pellet; alfo,a final button,
or ball, in the mouth of a bit; alfo, one of thofé little
flones partie coloured beanes, or marked balls, which
beretofire were,and(as at Venice the balls yet) are,
ufed for lots , in the cleëtion of Magifivats; and


any one that will take it, ;
Banc: m. A bench,banke, fèrme, feat; (and particular-
) the (eat of a rower m a Gally,or Barge; alfo, a long
le, flelfe, er fandie bill in the fea, againft which the

Bancs.crofe wal of fone made(in vineyar
' w. made(in vineyards which
be planted on the fleepe fides of bills)to heepe the earth
1g 5 alfo, the Banes of Matrimomie,

le n'en iray pas ic au feu. 1 will net flirre an
iach, I not mooue a it , 1 will not goe one foot,


Bunespe: m. The circuit of countrey within which the \
inhabitants are bound to repaire vnto one certaine
mill, owen, wine-preffe, &c, paying a fee for their fe-
werallufesvnto the Lord thereof’; alfo, the Royaltieor
priniledye of bauing fucb a will crc; alfo,the venenne,


ence ;
Donner fa balotte a. To giwe his veyce to, yeeld bis
confe ent unto. x
Balotter. as Ballotter.
— : € The chaffe of cates, or barley; or, as Ba~
otc, “
| Baloufde: com. sottifhyblockifh, foolifh,
Baloyer: # Ballier. hee 1


Balrôter. To froth in bubbles. or benefit made of it.

Balfämine :f. The Bal/am apple (whofe oyle doth clofe | Bancelle:£. A little bench, forme, feat,or banke.
LR like Balme.) Bancquage.# Bancage.

Balfane : f 4 Balzane. Bandage: m.A binding ;alfo,a fivath-band ; alfo, the

Balfer.To bound.


gail: ofa crofebow ; alfo,a truckle for a pully; alfo, a


Henke 37e pr ES

4 if. 4 3 iy LON ANA Narrow peece 0

any fiaffe ; roma naar gares 4 filletor baire ad
a fivatbing band for a child ; a facia, fwath-band, or

_ tye-band, for a woxnd ; a bend in Armorie ; the fircak
: ofa cart wheele ÿaifà,a band, or companie of fouldi-

ours ; atroupe, or cine ; a faction, or combination, of a-


ny other perfons.
» Vne bande delarde. À flitch,ov fide of bacon,
| Cloua bandes. 4 ftreake nayle.
Bandé : m.éc :f. aux a abow; bound, fwathed ot ti-


| Balthée : m. À belt; arming girdle, or fword girdle.

Baluftre : f. as Balaufte,

Baluftres : m. Ballifters ; little,round, and fhort pillars,
ranked on the outfide of Cloifters, Terraces, Gale: |
ries, Orc. ; : :

Balzan: m. A horfe that bath awhite leg, or foot.

Balzarie: £ The white of'a borfesleg,er fer ; alfo (mate
generally) a white fpot,or marke ur any part of bis bo-
die. ;


Bambelotier : m. 2s Bimblotier; Or, 4 Brooch wee
Ban’: m. 4 Proclamation y voyce, or with found of
3


trumpet ; anedict, or ordinancepublifhed; the plea- | - edith firings,lacesjbands ; filetted ; alfo,garded, or
fro commaundement of a Lord laimed 3 alfo, welted ; alfo,bandicd,or combined PE i
a Proféription , Outlawrie , Bani; 3 o7,aPro- : m, 4 fillet bead-bard ; little band.


clamation of Outlawvie , or of banifhment ; gene-
rally any publike Summons ,Conuocation, Notification,
or Denouncement ; alfoa Fief, of Mannor, within the
tertitorie whereof the Lovd may caufe Proclamations
to be madc ; alfo, the territorie,precinéts, liberties, or
~ Limits of iarifdittion belonging to a towne.
__ Bans arbans.as Bians. ° PRO
Le decor rt are pr ns
cept fome priuiled ged Officers, and citizens) th
their la ss of the Crowutyive fmoned tx met ata


Bandée : f. 2s Ban de vendanger : €Bourbonnois,
Bandelette. A little band,or firing ; alfoa finall troupe;
a handfull of men.
Bander. 10 bend a bow, exc; alfo, to bind, fivaddle,
fivatb;tye with bands, faften with firings ; alfo,to ban-
dic,at Tennis ; alfo,to gard,or welt agavment, —-
A Bander & à racler, By booke, or crooke ; in allex-
tremitie, 4
Coucher rout abander,& à ac 4 allon fixes
_ and feuens ; tofet bis whole reft upon a defperat game.


certaine place, there to attend the king whitherfocuer, | - Youér à bander & à racler contre. To bandy againft,

and againft whom foener be goes; (Looke Atricreban) at Tennis ; and (by metaphor) to purfie with all info-
$ (Atte thofé that lift not attend bim in perfon lencievigourextremitie, .

(wbichin old time they were tied to doynay for a finall Se bander contre. To bandie, or oppoft bimfelfe a-
= pat bume.) > re gainf, with bis whole power;or to ioyne inleague with


others .

Ilsfe er faire vn entreprife. They are plot

ting a confpiracie together.
B Ct. A Captaine of a quarter in a good towne,
Banderolle:f. 4 little flag,or flreamer;a Penon worñe
on the top of a lannse by a borfinan that would be gal.


LP añderolle de Monfaucon . One that bangs on a


sei ¢ moulin ; four ; &c. a Bancage.. ;

Bat yendangs Aramis fr he bg
i Vi e ; whic is(common: Ly abponte: dl, an

© Cloche du ban. The common bell, whereby the peo-


Original from


—


at; (ond particule
Barge; af, 4 (7
» Again wich she
i winepards bic
to heepe the earth
ae

Wille Rirre ax
net foe one foot,
thin which the
lo one certaine
fee fer their fe-
the Royaltieor
alfo,the rewenne


tor banke.


hard ; alfo, the
ra pully; aff, «


narrow peece of
stor baïre lace;
fiwath-band, or
rie ; the fircak
parie of fouldi-
bination, of a-
of bacon,


1, fivathed ort
“cfg x
petber,


lo bind, fradile
rags; aoa
: gartiett,


ro fetallon fats
4 defperat gun.
Tobandy sal
fue vit ab +
opp infil #
yt mleagpe with


je, tony ego


Penon wot
papal be
2 thas bags 0 d


june Léo
ss aie


Ê


Den lit 8S
pid Rayaltie
ee.


banifbing.
Bandon :'m. Leaue, libertie, licence, fufferance, free


feope to do a thin: |
Abandon # large, roaming, ioauing, at Yan:
ome.»


Prinfe de beftes à bandon. The fuffering other mens
cattell, for bire, to graze all ower bis paflures,
Grand bandon grand larron : Prov. Much libertie
brings men to the gallowes ; or great libertie breedes
much theeuerie. i
Bandouilleres: £4 musketiers bandoofeers;or charges,
| _ bke little boxes, banging at a belt about bis necke.
illier : mm, À arr by the bighway fide; alfo,
anyone that bears a {crip or wallet, or bis girdle fcarfe
wife ;alfo,a musketier.
Bani:m,ie:f. Banifbed, exiled; confifcaged ; Looke,


Banni.

À Banie:f. Anexile, or banifhment; alfo,a confifcation ;
Looke Bannic.

Banicr. four,ou,moulin banier ; 4s four à ban.Looke
Bannier.

Baniere. as Bannicre.

Banir. Tobamfh,exile, relegate ; alfo, to profcribe ; con-

| fifcate, fixe. Looke Banni. |

Rate : nn banifhment exile; exiling banifh-
ing ; [eizing, confifcating.

Banlieues ÉTe circuit of a league(or thereabouts)from

atowne,or Mannor boufè(being the preciaët,and liber-

ties thereof) within which, if it be the kings, the ordi-
narie Judge of that place,if a Lords be,ov bus ordinarie

officer make Proclamations, and exercifè what o-

iuvifaiction they haue,

Banlieuë de moulin, Thee 2 of ground whofe

jababitants mufi carrie their grift vato a common, or

Lords mill : (In Brittaine it contains 120 cords length

-__ from the mill, and euerie cord 120 foot.)

er + m.A Proclamation,or publike crie for a thing;

45 Bancage. |

Bannal : m.ale:f. Common; which any one may, and
euerie one (re within that bbertie , or precinét)
mufi,v{è,and pay for the vfe of ; Looke Bannier.

Bannalité :f. The reuenew, or benefit of a common O-
uen, Mill, Wine-preffe,érc ; alfo, the libertie, or circuit
of countrey wherein pl Lord hath 4 thofé, or the
like ies ; alfo, altie it felfe.

Paks da peor brie 53 thofe that are appointed
tolooke unto,and keepe beafts out of grounds at times
wherein they are not to be eaten : €Bour i

Banne:f. 4 Maund, Hamper , Fi


Bannée:f. Droié& de bannée; as, Bancage: €Pic,
Banneret: m.A Banneret,or Knight banneret(inferiour
to a Baron, and better than an ordinarie Knight) a ti-
tle(the priuiledge whereof was to baue a banner of bis
Peas pp ari << whey ad
kings of France to fuch as bad ten Vafjalsjand means
to maintaine atroupe of borfè ; or vnto any gentleman
that bad valiantly carryed bimfelfe in two royal bat-
tels ; neglected after that Charles the fixth bad made
560 of them at the fiege of Bourges. Ths
Banneret : m.ette:f. 4sBannal:(qWallon) 4/,be-
À longing toa Knight banneret; whence ;-
Dame bannerette. The widow, or inheritrix of a
Baies £ Bu ur low, iari(didtion ion ; (anold word.
: f. Bafé " 3 (anold wor
* Droid de banniere. aberapiléieats pre


mer dre, whereto tenants of , and dwellers
nya libertie,or Mannor,aretovefort,


DE ar
t, or great Bas-


Digitizedsby Go. gle


B AN


Bannerolle. as Banderolle.

Banneux. Ofor belouging to a flasket,or bamper.

Banni: mie :f. Banifhed, exiled ; confined ; alfo, out-
lamed ;al/o, feixed,or confiftated ; alfo, publifhedcri-
ed,or proclaumed ; whence; - ;
Contraë& banni. 4 coniraét publifhed in Court,
Loft banni. as Ban,& Arriereban : €Norm.

\ Bannie : f. 2s Ban; Wo fèifure, confi{cation, interdi-

- tion, outcrie of goods, ec; or, the banifbment, or

outlawrie, of a man,proclaimed,
La ied'une ville. The territorie,or extent and
compaf]e of territorie, belonging to a towne,
Droiét de bannie. as Bannalité.
Le temps des bannies. The /éa/in wherein common
medowes are not to be eaten by any cattell.
Vignes eftans en bannie, The Vintage whereof 5
proclaimed by the Lord of the iurifdiction.

Bannier: m.ere : £ as Bannal ; Common,cre.
Seigneur bannier. À Lord that bath the royaltie, or
prmledee of a common mill,ouen, preffecrc ; or, that
may pre{cribe wnto bis vaffals, tenants,and any other
within bis libertie, their me of vintage and of {ale for
their wines, avt
Subjeéts banniers. Such as are bound to grind at a
Mill,ov to bake in an Ouen belonging to another.
Taverne banniere du Seigneur. The place,or boufe
wherin a Lord may(as be may in moft parts of France)
retaile bis wine fortie dayes before any other (that
dwels inthe fame libertie) bis.

Taureau bannier.4 common,or town, bull; for whofe
leacherie the Lords of France (who loue tobaue their
owne freely) exact a fee of their poore tenants.

Banniere : £. 4 Banner; fquare Enfigne, or Standard;

' alfo, arag,or fhread of cloth,erc ; (In old time certaine
Loïdfbips,or Mannor's were tearmed Bannieres.)
Banniere d'Orleans, 4 ragged coat, or torne gar-


ment,
Cheualier à banniere, ou, de bannier. À Knight
Banneret.

_ Droiétde banniere:as Droi& de bannerie.
En cent ans civiere en cent ans banniere: Prov.I#
onebundred yeares a Banner , in tbe next a wheele-
barrow ; the family which at this day is held rich and
noble may within an age become both poore in eftate,

a

annir. To banifb, exile,expulfé ; outlaw , profcribe ;
feixe,confifzate, by publicke aët,or pe a <
anniffement. À bani sexilement rele gation ex=
pulfing; proféribing , outlawing ; feixing , confifia-


ting.
Bannon. Banon. ;
Banon: m. The feafon wherein the cattell belonging to
awhole towne is turned out into, or may feed all ouer,
common paftures : €Norm.,
Seren That is common, or for euery bo-
ies ufe.
a ement: m. A proclaiming,or publifhing by found |.
cre.
anquage. a Bancage ; al/o,as Bandie,


B

t£ A banke, wher is L 3 Oi
Tor vested ie de À raertots
Rae
Banqueroutte: £, A breaking,or becomming bankrupt:
Banquerouttier. 4 bankrupt,
Banquet: m. A banket sai/o, a feat; alfo, part of the


| cheeke of a bit. 3
A Apart banque pois Par ef.


Original from


TFHEÉOHIOSTATEURIMERSIEY


B A P


fing fafting,
il = banquet que d'homme chiche: Prov.Looke
Chiche.
Banqueté: mée :fi Bavketted, feafted.
Banquetement: m. 4 banketting,or feafling.
Banqueter. To banket or feaft it,
Banqueterie : f. 2s Banqactement.
Banqueteur : m. A banketter; or feafler.
Les grands banqueteurs font rarement de beaux
faits d'armes : Prov. Great banketters doc feldome
great exploits, ;
Banqueteux : m.cufe : f. Full of,or belonging te, ban-
kets,or féafis.
Banquetterie. as Banquetement ; or, banquet.
Banquier :m. 4 Banker an Exchanger; alfo,a bench-
cloth,or a carpet for a forme ,or bench.
Banquier : m.ere: f. 4s Bannal.
Bans. The banes of Matrimonic 5 alfoas Rangs.
Baptefme : m, Baptifine. ; à
Baptifé : mée: f. Chriflened,baptifed ; alfo, appointed,
ordained ; alfo,taxed, limited. t
Baptifer. To Chriften,to baptife ; alfo,te appoint or or-
daine ; alfo,to tax,or limit. :
Baptifer fon appellation, mn appealant to publifh
bis grienances,and vuto what ludge ke will appeale,
before be proceed attually in the appeale,
Baptifer poffeffions contraires. À defendant in a
Suit of Novel difleifin to propound, e,c> alleadge
bis polfeffion againft the complaint of bis aduerfarie,
stifmal : male : € Baptifinall ; of or belonging to,
aptifine.
Baptiftaire. 45 Baptiftere.
Baptifte.S.lean Baptifte.s JobaBaptift.
Baptifte. Toile bap .Cambrick or,a kind therof much
worne by Nunnes in their vailes,
tiftere: m-A font ; alfoya Chriflening,or Baptizing;
alfo,as Papier baptiftere.
Baptiftere: com. Belonging to a font, or, vate Chrifte-


AS


ning.
Papier baptiftere. The Church booke wherein. Chri-


flenings be recorded.
Baque :f. A berrie..


a c sf Ayong wench, mother girls i
Baquet:m.4 pale,or bucket; alfoya final, sand
1 & Bag ead Éd PL af ANS PNEU
€f.4 Dacqueter.

Bar: m. The fib called,a Baft.
| Baradon:m. 4 drone,or dorre-bee. nti
Baragant:m. Dutch Grogeran, or Valentin Groge-

van, : =a
Barat: m. cheating, deceit, guile, coufenage, lying, or
_ flfhood;in bargaining; aa barter for, ta,
‘ exchange, \ | > ’
gnole, | :

| Barater. To cheat,coufen,beguile, deceiue, lye, cog.foi
| inbargaining ; alfe, to trucke, fout, barter,

x 4 chang e, , ct iv


Bars fer: m. A decener cheater, ‘coufener ;


SAR:
Sentrie ,Scout-boufe,or bole; and therupon our Chan. |
cer ith the werd Rarbican for. watch-tower, |
which in the Saxon tongue was called, a Bourough- l


Kenning.
Barbaian. The great borne owle, ;
Barbare : com. Barbarous,rude, unciuile, rufticall, ig-


norant.
Barbarement: m. Barbaroufly ; rudely, vnciuilet, ig-
Bar t ~ af Barbare; Or,clowne-like, like a bar-
Oy, mabe «+ Barbaroufly, unciuil
clovonifhly ; without manners , refpeét, or ledge.
Barbarie: f “Barbare (a part,or Lars “Afiicke )
alfo barbarifme 5 alfo, the trade of a Barber.
B de Bifcay.The name of a great bitter-fweet


, rudely,


cre de Barbaric. see Cancre.
$9 de] Barbaric. A kind of faire, fappie,e> well
tafting, apple.
C’eft vne vache de Barbarie, qui ne it


que fon propre veau : Prov. Applied vntofuch, as
refpett, or know not any but their own family. friends,
and kindred ; a rude,ignorant barbarous humor,
in:m, 4 /mallriuer Barbell; alfo, the fea Bar-
mo aps Mullet,or fore Mullet!
arine:f, A peece of coyne worth about fix Sous.
Barbarifine : m. Barbarifme, incite, manie 3
F arude vat, an ungentle deed,
arbaffe : £.A filthie great, or ike beard.
Barbaflé. vn bouc barbaffé. À bear d goat,
Barbaude : £. Bere ; Brewersliquor.
Bar icr:m. A Brewer,
Barbe : m, A karbarie borfe.
Barbe: £. 4 beard ; alfo, that part of a bor{ès nether iaw
whereon the cuibedoth ref,
Barbes.Locke after Barberoufle.
bpd de bouc. z 2 ren Re ; called ale
0,Starre of Ferufalem, Fofepbes flower, Noone-tide,
and rh be À (for the flower thereof ener |
clofes about noone.) 4 ae VG AAS
Barbe de chevre. Meadswert, Meadfweet, Queene
fr) TORTUE
La barbe d'vn cog. A Cockes rattles,o waddles.
Barbe de forefts. Water Plentaine ; (fome bold,that
Sopemort,or Brufewort is called fo, but they are in an
errour, fes Matbiolus.) ;
' B lupiter. Kzecholme, Butchers broome.
Barbe de preftre. #s Barbe de bouc. tue
regnard. Goats-thorne ; the fkrub whofe root
yeeldeth Gumme dragagant. |
A fabarbe. Tobistecth, in bis prefence, before bis
fice’ alfognanger bisbeard,n defpight of him; al,
to ace.


Faire barbe. To affemble together intronpes (as bees |
doe bcfore,or about,the doore of their biue a litile be-
Sore they fivarme) a fhrafe infe among the booves of |


Faire babe de: foarre à, To deceiue,delude,abufe;
leprine 0 in matters of religi
Bp eos pip ime Poe
 flead of Barbe there be Gi

Faire la barbe à. Tobarbe, tri
pe à teeth; to refist, make
ge ee barbe a. To oppofe unto,gonfront with, fer


Vos


Original from
CTHEÉOHIOSTATEUNIVERSITY


BAR BAR
where we Le let vs returne to our matter againe. | Barboire: m. A maske,or mummerie salfo,avifard,
Trouver Ste To meet in the teeth vik Barbolle. Part ofa womans Ce RACE


Barbe de ol: Prov. See Fol.
Barbe rafe,pied ferrac : Prov. Cleerely , all a
borne alt things difcbarged,and donc.
:m.ée:f. Bearded,  baning a beard.
Rouget barbé, 4 (ea Barbell ; or, fore Mullet,

Barbeau: m. The river Barbell; and at Bourdeauk)the

fea Barbell ; alfo,a little beard.
Barbecane.as Barbacane,

Barbel : m.zs Barbeau.

Barelé: see eae 3al/o, fill of fnags, frips, iags ; not-
ches ;
Flefche barbelée. bearded,or barbed arrow.

Barbelotte: f. 4 hedge Toad,a land Toad.

Barbelu : m.ué: f. Bearded, beardie ; oras Barbelé.

Barber. To barbe fhaue, trim ; to cut the beard off.

Se Barber. To grow bearded,or to geta beard ; af,
to (begin to) root, or, toget Jess baire-like prigs i la
growing at the root.

Barberie :£. Barbing ; the alt,07 art, of Barbing ; alfo, a
Barbers fhop; alfo,(the name of) a certaine round,great,
Bate ja sed ir

he [ops in wine, feathered Gillo-


ontbfties.
Pate fauva pes. mé: Williams, marfh Gillo-
vers, Cuckow Gi
Barberiot. The adn sof an apple thats lelfe, and yeelds
better cyder,than la Barberie.
Barberoutle: mA red bearded fellow.
Barbes:f, Pufbes,or little bladders, under the tongues
Fone ie cattell the which they kill if they be not
peus cured.
arbes aux veaux. The barbles ; a white excreffence
which, like the pip in chickngs growes 1 the
tongnes of calues and binders them from fucking.
Barbet: m. A little, young,or budding beard; alfe, a
Per: viuer Barbell 5 alfo, a water-fpanell or a any fhag-
aird
Pour Venus advienne barbet le chien, Looke Ve-


nus.

Barbet: m.ette: f. Rough, or fhag-haired,like a water-
og.

Rashietet, Fo grunt, mutter, murmure ; or as Bare


Barbétte : : f. Afinall beard ; alfo,a water-bitchpr fhag-
baired bitch.

Barbidant. Part of a womans,erc.

Barbier : m.A Barber ,alfo, Chirurgion; alfo,a certain


Sif, as
Malachite vaic laure? Prov. Oze knaue trimmes ;


Ds belpes ; ps à flatters,another,
eune barbier, & vieil medecin: Prov. À young


are and an old Phyfitian, (are commonly the
eft.)
: Prov. Looke


Au fanglier le barbier Looke Sanglier.
Barbiere:. Berbersmfzbarbareffeserwoman.or fhe,


arber,
Barbillon: m.A little Barbell; alfo,the beard of aneare
of corne ; alfo,the leffe fin of a “rte ag of a


broad-arrow bead,or any the li e
_Barbillons . The Frounce ; NL LE bred in the
of éme is cold rhewme. à bar
1€ :m Bearde Dedsiagge |, rough
by the notches it bath onit.
ard D. é. À dart that bath a forked , or
Barbinst beard, —


Digitizer


Go. gle


Barbon : m. 4 Barbell fifo.
Barbot :m.The wallowing of a feething pot.


yy Om zm, A confifed fumbling, or mumbling vp


Barbote: f..4n Ecle-powte; or, as Lote d’eau douce.
Barboté : m.ée : f. Mumbled or muttered,as words be-
tweene the teeth,
Efpice barbotez. Bearded eaves of corne.
ter, To mumble, or mutter words betweene the
teeth ; alfo, to wallow like a feething pot.
Barboter de peur,ou de froid, t The teeth)to fhake,
ar quake for feare; ta chatter,ov didder for cold ; to fay
an Apes Paternofier.
Barbotin : m.ine :f. pres of bearded;
Hg ay :fivormefeed, É
tte :f. The chinne we tl 19 helmet.


= te mangle allymaufy
a rc ETH pss pa, cde dd
bouillé :m.ée:f£. ¢ ch abou or budled to.


pe alfo,(potied,blotted,beraied,befimeared,begri-

Barbouilleme onfifd'iumbling of fiardr
arDoullement: m. AG 1e
pe pines togetbersalfina  befearing, raya ne

cr. To iumble,confound puddle, or mingle iil

mre 3 4//0,to blot, (pot, finut, befmeare ; bedafh
all oer.

Barbouilleries: £.7; val riffs, Sundry things of final
value iumbled or budled together.

Barbouilleur:m.4 diforderly iumbler udler mingler
alfo,a blotter,fpotter, fmutter, befmearer of.

Barbuteur:m. 4 Sicophant, a pickethanke,a prinie
whifperer,a : clofè detraëter, a  fècret tale-teller.

Barbu: m.uë:f Bearded ; beardie ; bauing a beard 3
full of, or ouergrowne witb,beard:

If barbu. Looke If,


Homme roux,& femme barbu dé cinquante pas
les faluë ns pierre ou poing, followes; bécaufe
they are bcidverie dangerous people.)

Barbuë : f. The bearbe Gith, or garden Nigella ; alfoya
kind of leffe Tur bot, or Turbot-like fifbscalled by ème,
aDab, or Sandling.

Bar u-marfés . Amelcorne , Starchcorne ;

courgeon,

Barbute:m. 4 man of Armes; tearmed fo iz old time,
becaufe be ordinarily wove a Barbute.

Barbute: f, Ariding bood; a Montero,or clofe bood,
wherewith trauellers preferue their faces and beads
from froft-biting , and weather-beating , im Winter;
alfo, the beaver of an helmet; alfo, a Bay berrie  alfo,
rs bearbe Nigélas or, the feed thereof’; alfo,a flopple,

2

Bare: m. Te kind of finootb red earth, whereof ‘vefeds

a made in old time,


5 OF 5 a6


¢. asBerche.
Barcbatns m. Great barkes, or, the great heats called,


dyters.
Barche:£. 4 little barkeor pinna
Bardablé : Le res or able tobeare a barbed


Bardache : m. m. D di) a youth kept,or acccompani-
Bardechier = petal to bugger ; 1


Seeke Bardococulé. aN ist

: f. The Cote, pears
vermin af
mes


Origine TEQRa


THEORO STATE NINERS SITY


a ee RE, 7 , +. PONT... —_ ri nés "1 = OR.
| é . =


r es | -
4 BA BAR
Bardane la grande. The burre-dock, clote bur great | lengththan breadth ; See Balon:

: burre, of Barlong :mgue:f More dane then rial, er lope
Petite bardane. ‘The loufe-burre, ditch=burre , leffe in one place thanin another. | :
burre docke. Beonguer: Tomake ; or grow, orbe, more long than

Barde: £, Along faddle for an Affe,or moyleymade onely n
ofcourfe canuas fiuffed with flockes. Barlué: £.4 glimmering ; or a dimme,duskie,or imperfett
lavelin de barde. 4 barbed Jauelin, for a borfe- light ; go x 24 ff.
man. Barme: f. The banke of ariner,ec. — -
Bardé: m.ée:f. Barbed, or trapped, as a great borfe ; | Barnabé : m.(A proper name)Barnabie. -
2 alfo, boundpr tied ouer and acroffe, -| “Ala S.Barnabé la faux au pré: Prov. (That is about
Barde:com, Blunt bloc kifb,dull-witted,bard-headed, the eleuenth of June.)
4 fattifp. Barnage : m. All the traine, fuffe and equipage of à
Bardeau: m. 4 fhingle,or finall boord, fuch as boufes | ~ great perfon carried, and going, along with bymin a
are couered with, progrelfe,or iourney. Looke Bernage,
Bardelle : f. 4 Bardello; the quilted,or canuas faddle, | Barnez. The Nobilitic,or Barons ; (an old, and feldome
= wherewith coults are backed, ufed,word,)
4 Barder. To barbe,or trap,borfès; alfo, to bind, or tye a- | Barocco. Barocco ; the name of a Syllogifiicall mood
eraffesrucrereff ese onerthwart. in Lagicke ; Hence(with an equinocall allufion to the
Bardes : f, Barbes,or trappings, for horfes offeruice,or word Broc) The Tiplers phraje;
| Les Conclurein Barocco. Te draw a meift conclu,
À Bardeure: f.A trapping of a borfe ; alfo,an ouerthwart out of a Tankerd, or Flagon; to conclude by quaffing,


binding, or tying. : or with a caroufe.
Bardococulage: m. 4 being armied , or coueredallo- | Baron: m. A busband (Pic. and in our Law ;) alfo,a
uer, with covles ; Monkerie ; or a Monktfh habit, Baron,or Lord Baron: In which fence it bath two fig-
Bardococulé: m.éc:f. Dreffedor armed in, adorned nifications; one generall, for an immediate vafjall of
or couered witha cowle,or Monkes hood. ° the Crowne,(whetber be be Duke, Marquelfe Earle,or
Bardou: m. 4 fot,a blockebead, a dull fellow ; (an old | Prince, that bath not any right,or prac ige, of Soue~
word.) vaigntie ; (whence,les Baronsde France :) Another
Baretter. as Bariner ; To churne,


: Special, for a Baronor the Lord of a Baronie (fee Ba=
Barge :f. A certaine fowle , that bath no fpleene; fhee ronnie )whefe ranke is (asin England) next below a
is sath, fomewbat leffe than a Curlue, but otberwife Vicounts ; (if their tenures be equall ; for otherwife a
vefembles ber ; alfo,the banke of a riuer,or water. Baron that bolds immediatly of the King, or ofa royal
Barguignard. A bargaining, or chaffeving perfon ; or Countie, érc, goes before a Vicount that holds of a
as Baïguigneur. Connlie,@cwbich is not royall ;) and bowfoeuer next
Barguigne : f, A bargaine ; or a wrangling,and dodg~ aboue a Lo.Chattellains.1n old time lesBarons were
ing in bargaine-making. th ordinavie Magiftrats of France; and the title grew
Barguigner . To cheffer; to bargaine > or (more pro- fo common, that all Hauts lufticiers (¢fpecially fuch.
_ perly) to wrangle , dodge, bag gle brabble, in the ma- as bad incroached upon le Droi& de Reflort)efurped


king ofa bargaine. — it: At this day(ne lefe commonly)the eldeftfonne to the
Apres befongne faitte le fol barguigne: Prov. Lord of a Won a in many Prowinces tearmed,le Ba-
The fool beginncs to range when his worke is en- ron ; And xo better than the Burghers of fome priui-
_ded;, or, When worke is ended fooles fall out about it; | ~ ledged townes,as Bouïges, crc, do flile themfelues Ba-


(viz. for want of agreeing before band.)
i im, A dodger, or hagler, a wrangling
bargainer ; one that ufesto cheapen much,and buy no-
thing ; or, ufes many words about a thing, but comes
not neere the price of it.
Lame f. ee we ious i

aricquer. To br an Elephant.
Baril. as Baril, . <
Barillet. 4 little barrell,


Barillier:m. 4 maker of barrels; alfo,an officer that


tends , and lookes to, the caske of a great mans fel-


Bariner. Te churne butter, ;

Bariquade: f. “ah in Le fe

Barique:f. The balfe of a Quevé, or Poinfom; a |
fomewhat bigger than pogo ¢ tit


aé:m. éc:f. Barricadéed, © ©
elle: f. A skiffe, or Lttle boat,like a Wberrie, or


an Elephant.
:m, A Captaine,or leader of Catchpoles ; an or-
ae Entre


Barlong : mcd vefill plot, proportion thats ofmore


mp GOc-gle


re de Me
mi: |
Bonne Togo ml and rs als:


rons ; (which degrees of Barons very often. deferue to
be Englifhed, Rave-ones ;) The Lo.Baron may of him
Self wall and fortifie the principal village of bis Baro-
aie ; and keepe the keyes of the gates thereof whether
th'inbabitants will or no; and in time of daunger, ap-
ae a (aptaine therin; but this with their confents.
arez vn heriflonil femblera Baron : Prov. Good,
(or gay)clothes will make a Monkie feeme a Monfieur.


Baron: m,onne: f. (Sain & baron) Of the male kind;


alfo,manly bardie,firong.


Barone: f A Bavonneffe; the Ladie of a Baronie,or wife.


of a Lo.Baron,


Baronie : f. #5 Baronnie. - :
Baronmie: f, A Baronie ; a Lordfhip of dignitie, fupe-


tiour 10 a Chaftelenie , and inferiour to a Vicountie;
Some define it, Any chiefe Seigneurie, next.vnto the
Soueraigne,held immediately of the Crowne; Otbers,
A title peculiar to certaine Sesgneuries thatare beld
onely of the King , and bane no other title ; which de-
finition agrees beft with the moderne, and th'other
with the ancie ies, wher eof originally
there weve but thiee, viz. Bourbon, Coucy, and
Beaujeu; all beld immediatly of the Crowne, and at
teng. é Dutchies, Marque/jates,or Earledomes;fo
that they baue left almofi no markes of, nor mata
ches to,themfelues behind them : For all, or the vs

és ‘the


+


Original fron


FHE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


BAR


the moderne Baronics are but the members of fome
Dutchie , or Countie (unitcd,a good while agoe to the
Crowne ; or of later time eveéted, by the King) and are
held (thofé by a direst, thet by a dependant , Tenure)
onely of the king,as, or in refpect of, one of them: yet
are they but little inferiour to th'ancient ones in other
points; for being ereéted at firft in emulation, or by
the patterne,thereof, either bythe old Dukes, or Earles
(who having vfterped the abjalute foueraignitie of their
territories, would alfo baue thei Barons as well as the
King had bis) or fince the reunion of their eftates to the
Crowne, by Kings, they conferred on them all kind of
(fbalterne) iurifdittion, and authoritie ; which they
flik retaine ; and in the right thereof baue (or fho
baue) each of them a Bailli, &c; aé alfoa walled,or
fortified towne , and the gouernement thereof, acol-
ledge, or Collegiate Church ; an Abbey, or Priorie ; an
Hofpitall; Foreft ; Faires, or Markets ; a Travers,or
Through-toll; a publicke feale for contrats and diners
other priuiledecs belonging tothem : At this day, an
inheritance, or Lordfhip, worthie of this title , muft
comprebend at the leaft three Chaftellenies , all ve
nited together, that they may be held by one bemage of


the King.

Barque: f, A barke Jittle fhip,great boat,

capt as im. A fayler,or skipper in, a flcerefinan vn.
toa barke.

Barquette:£. 4 little barke ; a boat.

Barrage: m. as Barriquade; Ais, a paffage toll, or
through-toll; fo tearmed of the barre that ordinarily
flands on the way wherein tis payable.

B. oùin.Pediars French filles language; any rude
gibble-gabble,or barbarous (peech; (ts compounded of
two Brittifh words, barra,bread ; and gouin,wine.)

Barragoiliner-To peake fiuftian; to ufé a language that
no bodie under i We

Barraté: m.éc : £. churned ; o7,toffed,as butter is in the
churning, VE +

Barraut: m, Alittle barrell; or veffel, bolding (moft
commonly) 36 Parifian pintes ; and therefore notmuch
different from our kilderkin,or ms « of 36 quarts;
alfoja water bag or budget. ;

Barre: ..4 barre, or (parte, for a doore; alfo,the croffe-
barre thats on the bead of a peece of caske ; generally,
any barre ; alfo,a bawkes pearch ; alfo, the part of a
papier iaw wheron bis bit refteth (a little aboue

is tufhes.)
Barres. The martiall fport called Barriers ; alfo, the
play at Bace ; or Prifon Bars ; alfo,(in the dt ge
ding ) defences,and exceptions (whether dilatorie, or
peremptorie) propounded in order ; or, as we fay,plea-
ded in barre.
La barre de parlement. The barre without which
Aduocates , or Councellors do plead ; (hence it feems
are ours called Viter-barreflers.) " +
La barre dutimon. The whip of the Rudder (of a
Ky ease ville. The barres of a tovene, ::
Auoir barre fur. To bawe the aduantage, or get the
fiart of; to be before bandwith, Prendre barre fur.
The fame, “db - ’ :
Donner barres à. To flop, toflay the courfe, or cur-


rent of. :
_ Planter à la barre. To plant the flips of vinesin or-


vas Go. gle


à der,citber wo together, or one againft another, or ome


Rs bare ou de Cou, Re
Barré : m.ée: £. Barred, fparteds boulted ; grated,


BAR


1


lattifed. *

Os barré. Looke Os.

Barreau. A little barve,or (parce; a boult ; alfo,the bar
of a Court whereat ers plead.

arreaux. Grates,or firong lattifes (of wood, ec.)

in a boufè, prifon,or ship.”
Le barreau des Pairs, The moft honourable barre in
the Court of the Parifian Parliament (celuy qui eft
pres la cheminée de la Chambre dorée) whereat
the Aduocates of a Peere of France do plead;
Les Gens de barreau. Barreflers, Aduocates, Coun-
cellors;pleading Lawyers.

Barrer. To barve,or fparre ;to boult ; alfo, to lattice, or
grate up.
tres. Looke Barre.

Barretade : f. Cap-courtefie pat-reuerence ; the vailing
rb the bonnet ; the putting off of the bat, or cap,in a fa-

ion, cre.


tion rc.

Barrette: f. A cap,or bonnet. xy
Parler à fa barette. To expoftulate with bim face to
face ; to (peake home, and 10 hs teeth,unto bim.

Barrez. The Carmes, or white Friers were called fo in
old time by reafon of certain clokes(croffe garded with
white, and blacke)which ther they wore, |

Barricade. See Barriquade. 3.

Batticadé :m.ée: f. Barricadoed ; flopped op by abar=
ricado, '

Barricave : £. A bole;pit, or bollow place aboue ground;
alfo, a love bottome, fleepe valley ; or deepe path, ina
wood, or valley.

Batriere:f. Arayle, or barre ; alfo, a pur let.
Barrieres.The raies, or lifts within which a Tilting,
Turnay,erc, or fingle combat is to be performed.
Barricrede Charpentier. A great peece of timber
borne up, gibbet-like by two pois, and fet before the
doove of a great boufe to the flreetward. :

Faire barriere à. To flop,binder, let; alfo,to backe;al
. fo,to fhrewd,or fhield.

Barrilt m.The(French)barrell ; ave[fell which (bolding
72 Parifinn pintes) comes neeve tothe Beere kilderkim,
(which holds 72 of our quarts.) sh:
Nourri dans vn barril . Brought vp in a Tub (a
fpeech vfed to the difèrace , or «sa te SH of
4. fimple,ignorant, unexperienced and home-bied boy-


CA
Dale little barrell; a ferkin,or balfe barrell,
Barriquade: f. A barricado ; a defence of barrels, tim-
ber, pales, earth or ftones, beaped vp, or clofèd toge-
ther; and féruing to flop up a fireet, or paffage, to
keepe off (hot, cc. x


Barren: €. The half ofthe Quenë, or Poinfas avef


bats fomewhat bigger than our barrell...
De Corfaire à Corfaire n'y pend que barriques
rompués: Prov. Noughi’s to be got of a roauer but
tra blowes. or SAS 54
Barriqué:m. ée : f. Barricadoed ; flopped, fortified,
or defended by barricadoes. 1
Barriqueau: mi. À férkin; or, balféofthe Barrique,
Barriquer.To barricadoe; te tifiejor defend with:
8 a agen 5 : f. : ‘
atrit :m. The braying,or cry of an FETE
Barroir:m. 4 Tri th'Oager wherewith Coopers
make boles for the barre-pimmes ofa peece of caske.
Barrot :m. A férkimsor barriket, ta
ts: m. Delayes in Law , ufed for the


eae min, Br, or Probe of
yer. To ufé delayes(as in Barroyements,)
Barroyet: To vf er Wary


| Bafauchieux. sCler
4 Bafchat: me ABalfas, a chie commauuder under the


. yeux “There fe a Di
| À es
| ot nt 4 é


BAS


BAS


Barry.æ Barrill; al/o,a kind of fireworke in awoodden
cat fahioned ie a ee le,or caske)thicke i in the mid-
dle,aad finall at both ends.
Bas: m, The ae betiomnecAits or lowef part of ; alfo,
as Balt ja packe/addle.
Vn bas de chauffes. 4 flocking, or nether flocke.
Lebas de la Couverture d'yne maifon, The eaves,
- regles of a boufe.
de manches. An half fleeue.
A plat du bas.(viz..0f the lower end of the table)eft
toufiours le primier vuide ; Prov.Looke Plat...
Bas : m.Bafle : f. Low,ba/e; bumble ; deepesunder ; de
telhed abie dl.
pe bord,ou,bord bas. The larberd, o1 left fide of a


ihe heure. aflez baffeheure. Verie late, farre in
the night.
Bafle luftice. Looke luftice.
Bas de poil. Of pore eftate, of fimall meanes ; of little
Chambreball bou of off
Cc reDalic, À priuic,or boufe of office.
Cour bafle..4 pa or the Court of a Lord,
whe hath no other than bafesor low iuvifdittion,
Facultez baffes.qui ales facultez bafles. Poore, of
meane etes wbofè fortunes ave at a great ebbe.
aia! baffle. 4 bad band,courfé chance , er; Looke


ach ( Aduerb, ) Vader, low, below.
Haut & bas la cheminée, the ordinarie cry of chim-
ney-{weepers in France.
Taullables es & bas.Taxable at the will and plea-


fare oj of tele lord. -
oon de peur des branches, Looke Branche.
afane.Looke Bazane.


i ané : m. ée sf, ya fwart, blackifh, of atawnie


hue ; alfo, fmutched,bedusked.


| Bafaner. To bleake, fimutch, beduske , make fart,


browne,or blackifh.
Bafanne: f. A fhecpes skin tawed; See Bazane.
afard: m, market place, wherein things arefold.
; or as, Bafochiens.


Turke § nd of vaulted
Br hag she ey Vr


Baiclé. Barred; flopped, fut up ; See Baclé.


Bafcule:£..A fivipe, feoope, or put-gally 10 draw vp
water withall ; alfo,as Bacule,

Bafculer. To fet vpon bis taile ; to bump, or beat on the
taile; to me gn suiple wnio; alfo,as Baccoler.


Bafculle : ees
x B sarfe-fallen. .
Ar bgf à grd andatins,v
oit ThE Si


du coeur, The fr broad part thereof bic


Wee Bethe. The rootyor bottome ope bad


4"


Digitiz@teby Go: gle 1


Bafilaire. Os Bafilaire. The na or nuke (bone) the cu-


neall,or findamentall bone of the bead ; Laoke Os.
Bafilic : m. The bearbe Ba bals Batter
Bafilic citronnier. Middle Bafill,or Citron Bafill.


Bafilic d’ equ. water b. bafill;

by ime nd finall sa fret the
plant yeelds a milkie,and fwoeet iuyce,

Bali snl Baill gentle bafh bafilfame af call


c gyroffié. Bufh bafill, fine bafill.
ee es pees The finall wild bafill,called by Herba-


abc stad Bafill mint, wild bafill, unprofitable


ant ba filic. Great garden hee bafill royal.
Petitbafilic. a aoe gentil Poker:
uc.A royal palace; a princes court ,kenour,boufe;
a fbire-ball, guild-bald, or fpacious place i a ci-
ne wherein Councels be beld and Inflice admin; fred,
by the publick Magiflrates.


Balilique. veine bas. The liner veine,
Bañlife:m, A Bafiliske,or Cockatrice,
Bafique : com. Low, fimdamentall, belonging to the ba-
poe ,0r bottome a8
ne: m. Balme, balfamum ; or more pr bal-
famun tree, from which diftils our Bale (or Opobal-
famum; for little, or no true balme is now adayes
brought into thefe Parts of the werld.)
Sache: f. The whole troupe, er companie of Lawyers
eee in the palace of Paris, bauing among them a
hing,and their peculiar Lawes ;bence alfo, veuell, aif


rule (for thefe fellowes are none of the foberefi) aa
certaine baudie Court, wherein wines that beat their


husbands are cenfured,
Fief de la Bafoche. Itient du fief dela B. He isa
pratling,or iangling L 3 br(as a Lawyers Clerke)


an unruly cope/mate ; or is wife à is bis mafter.
Roy de la Bafoche. The Mafler of Mifruleor mo
man anes the Clerkes.5 when they make |


frove |
Balochiens: sm, Rewellers, or | affèciates unto Maflers |

of Mifiulespand , Lawycrs Clerkes (whe for the moft

partareverie unruly) or, fuch as belong vato the ban-|
ä Court rs fre RE :

m. 4s Bafque (i the fir{t fence cnely.)
Bauer, A pe vd one that dwells,or PB '
pres re about Bayonne, necve Bifcay; afo,a

r0ys fo called,becarfè many that ae
Po 144 ad fein à in France come from that countrey 5


Tour de Balque .Cleaaly conueyance, legerdemaine; |
a nimble Pre ST pe prete pranke.
Bafque:f. as tour de Bafque; Ale, a fudden affright,
or fcarring.
Bafque de pores The skirt of a donblet.
+ of the old fafhion; or a « Spanifh
animale Pm ea
Bafquinier. See Vafquinier ,
Bale: fd bafis 3 the bales ct fot of a pillars allay


low 7
a i as a
Lings of tides ,in the
Bafse. contre. The be


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


BAS


B A


Bañle-danfe : f. A meafure.
Baflement. Bafely, lowly deiectedly bumbly,poorely; al-
Sn D mens faile of a fhip

: Toe . 7
Bañefle : £ Bafenafe,lomlinesftabieGt bumbleneffe; al-


fi lownelfe. '

Biker. “gp terrier, or éarthing beagle; alo, a low
frole ; ri Le dwarfe,or very low man. 4
Baffe-taille : £. Raifed,or imboffed imagerie ywberin the
reprefentation u made, not of; but vpon , the whole

eece. c:
Bfeté : f. Bafénefft abiection;too much bumilitie.
Bafleur : f. Humblene(fe, lowlinefe.
Baflier: m. The tub that receines tap-droppings; or, a
tub to put lyes,or the dregs or bottomes of wine,erc,in.
Baffiere : £. The fame. |
Batheres The bottomes, grounds, oy leesof wine ;
dregs that be fetled in the bottome of wine.
Baffille :£ Rocke Sampire,Crefimarine. .
Bafsin: m. 4 bafon to wafhin ; alfo,afcull; or fleigbt,&
bafon-like beadpeece,vfed at barriers.
ver 1ns.4é Bafsinets ; Crowfoot.
Baffin à felle percée. The pan of a clofe floole.
Baffin d'vne balance. Thefèowle ofa balance. _
Cracher au bafsin. Te lay out, or pay downe readie
coine; alfo,to giue fees ; or beflow a reward in band ;
alfè,as in Cracher.
Bafsine : £ A deepe,or gr rm
x Conféruers , er Comfet rs.
Ben :f.Warmed, fomented ; rubbed, ov cha-
fed untill it grow warme ; alfo bathed or wafted with
warme liquor,
ement :m. Warming, afomentation, or fomen-
ting ; a rubbing, chafing,or beating ; a bathing,or wa-


Shing, in warme liquor. Cty
To warme. vub,chafe,bug,beat a thing
antillit be full warme ;alfo, to bath, wafh, or beat in
warme liquor. _- ‘
Bafsinet.(The bearbe)


Looke Bafsinets.
Baflinet. A little bowle, a fmall bafon;, alfo,the feull,
freight belmet, or beadpecce,worne,jn old time,by the
French men of armes; and bence, a man of Armes
A which fence it iseuer vfed in the Plurall num-


Le A fee d'yne’arquebule.The Firepan,or touch-
an. me wi
ie baffiner d'un refchaut. The pan of a chafing
aifh,
Basfinets : m.The flower Crowfbot,King-cob,gold crap,


Low crave, butter flower, There be many kinds of
+ & that which we call, Batchelers buttons is one(the


double ove)of them.
Baffinets ants 74 pnt pea Crow foot, -
oe . Water pec be ow foot.
B fines de mari ones prez. The marfh Ma- | Bafteleufe
Petis balsinets.titile Celandine,Pilewort,Fi ts
Jo called, becan{e the flower of it les
the Crowfoot ; otherwife,no hind thereof. :
nr :£, A warming pan,
: m. Apannell,or packsaddle, ;
‘A baft vuide. renvoyé à b.zmptie handed ; with a
flea in bis eare; as wife as he came ; without effecting,
or getting what be went for.
on aie — Me mat-
: ‘carried,jn what fort foener handled,


Go. gle


Baftage :m. A certaine toll exatted by fome couniry
Lords for euery horfe that palles by them fadled witha
packefaddle, though be carrie nothing elfe; for if bee
doc,they take toll both for bis faddle,and bis burthen,

aT Sufficiencie ; what is ynough,

ard: m, A baflard ; the brood of a whoore ; the fon
of the people 3 one that came in at the window; alfo,a
courfe bowlter for cheat bread ; alfo, as Baftardeau.
Bon baftard c’eftavanturé,mais mefchant c’eft de
nature : Prov, Abaflard may bee good, but nature
makes bim bad,

Baftard: m. de: f, Baftardly, bafé borne, misbegotten ;
Safe, adulterate, counterfeit, not rightly bred; vn-
lawfilly begotten.

Couleur baftarde. 4 weake, faint, pale ,wan,decai-

- ‘ed colour.

Efpée baftarde. A fhort ford; ora fivord that is


Fenclts battarde, A falfe window.


Baftardage: m. Ba de palerdiie,

Baftardaille: £. Baftardie ; alfo,baftards, or, a crue, or
haot of batards. ¢

Bastarde: f.4 demie Canion,or demie Culuerinsa final.
ler peece of any kind.
aftardeau: m. A damme, or water-flop, made of
piles,érc.

Baftardic.as Baftardife : €Norm.

Baftardiere : f. A feed plot, nurfe garden, or nurferie,
weve yong trees are fet to bee afterwards remoo-


ued,

Baftardife : f. Baftardie 5 baftardifine; the breeding ;
fate, condition, qualitie, of a baftard; alfe, the fuc-
cefion of baftards , or that which fallsto the king by
the death ofa baftard. à ;

Balle: f. A wily fleight orfubtiltie, a craftie pranke ; :
an odde tricke, or fhrewd turne; alfo, the skirt of a
doublet,érc. :

Bafté: m, ée: f. Sadledwith a packefaddle.


| Bafte. (A Verbe 1mperfonall;) No more,tis ynough, jt fuf-


ficeth, be bow it
eau. as Bateau. ;
Baftelé: mée :f: Fugled ; buffoonized ; tumbled ; idly
talked ; alfo, toffeduncertainely vp and downe.
Bafteler: To ingle , or tumble; alfo; to play the buffoone,
or foole ; totalke verie much, and verie idly; alfo, to

to Series &- Fualiogs lle + downe.

ie: ing ; tumbling ; puppet-playing, a-
ny füucb foolifl ve 5 or legerdemaine ; alo, buff


e.

Baftelet :m. A little boat.
Bafteleur: Aiugler, tumbler, puppet-player,, one that
profelfeth any of thofé arts ; alfo,one that leades bears,
_ apes, baboones,or dauncing dogges about the countrey,

ets afcuruie lining by them. |

e:f. A woman that makes a profeffion of
Fugling, Tumbling, and fuch other idle , or bafe


will,


B


exercifes.
liere :f, 2s Batcliere. ;

Bafter. To faddlewith a pannell, or packefaddic; al
fo, to looke, or gaxe,as out of a window ; alfo,to fèrne,
or faffice.
Tore que l'ame me baftera au corps bileft 1 bave
breath in my bodie.

Batti. Looke Batty.

Balti: ro.À maker of packefaddles; alfoya bafe lubber.


: mere : £.Vfually bearing, or fadled with, 4
packefaddle. ists oe ‘


Baftilde,


Lip


‘Catan


BAS


Baftilde: fThe fortreffè , or fortification tearmed abas
fiillion,or baftile,
aftille. as Baftilde; ora fortreffe, or “ig oe
with towers,donion and ditches ; (in Paris,\a Balti
is a8 our Tower ,the chiefe prifon of the kingdome.
Baftillon : m. 4 bafti Lie + 4
Baftiment : m..4 building, frame boufe or edifice;alfo,
a compofition, or compaction of many things together.
Baftine :f. The skirt of a doublet,or coat; alfo, a pad ;
alfo,as Bardelle ; 4/0, a pack/addle,
Baftion :m. (The fortification tearmed) a Baftion, or
Cullion-bead.
Baftionner. To fortifie with Baftions,
Battir. To build, make, frame,erect; vaife,or fet vp ; al-
So, to compofe ; contriue,deuife.
ir à quelqu'vn fonrouler, To teachone before
band what he fhall fay or doe.
Denier fur denier baftitla maifon : Prov. Pennie
upon pennie builds the boufe ; by little and little great
matters are effeéled great workes finifhed.
Baftiflage: m. 4 frame, a compofüion; a building, ma-
hing Rating,
Baftifsant: m.ante: f. Building, framing making, rea-
ving, erecting ; compofing ; contriuing.
afton: m. A flaffe, bat, cudgel ;trunchion ; club; al.
fo,afivord,and(more generally)any weapon of offence;
@, a Battane, in blazon; al/o , aflay , prop, fup-


ter.
Bafton d'Adam. Adams weapon ; a mans yard.
a A battle-axe,
afton bouts. À quarter flaffe; or, a
which bath a pike at both ends, #FyM ep
Bafton àfeu. 4 Harquebufè,Caleeuer, musket,érc.
Bafton paftoral. Water plantaine ; or as Verge à


berger,
Bafton de potence. Looke Potence.
Bafton rompu. à baftons rompus. ..A cutting,pin-
king, lacing, oc, croffe billet fafbion.
Bafton royal. A kingly Scepter.
‘A dague & bafton.Large meafüre,beaped meafure,
meafure with aduantage.
Le tiers coup debafton. ar mL ed
_ the Cryers flaffe in an Outrope ; and bence(metaphori-
cally) that attion,or effect, which abfülutely carries a
matter,
Par rain,& bafton. By a bough and a bat ; (a fafbion
7 Of Linevie and Seifia vfed in fome places.) an
Eftourdi de bafton. Looke Eftourdi..
Entendrele ru dubafton. To be a cuaning Fencer,
old beaten fouldior; of much experience in the world.
Faire mordre au bafton.To make the more eagar;or
make to bite at the offered bait, |.
Mettre la main au bafton. ‘re dial bimfelfe of
an itheritance,by the delinerie of a little rod er flicke
tobim unto whom be paffesit. pi
:* Saulcer le bafton. To do the deed; or , to performe,
withrefolution,an ineuitable exploit.
Sgçauoir bien Je tour du bafton.To be fubtile, craf:
tit cunning,pf great experience; 10 know well bow
». Wings are to ag cr seat
iret aubafton. To vaftle,tug, firiue,con-
eink: lose En


v


+ ni ‘yn faquin


a)


Coane
à fu vancall à ed que de hear on


maigre: Prov. 45 good goa foot as ride on a


; Batans dvnpoition. The gill ofa fifh.


BAT


seve bine ‘
ide maftin fait fon compere plus de bafton ne |
doit : Prov. He that makes a mafline bis
tetdoet cattiews cudgell about i te ge
Tel porte le bafton dont à fon regret le bat on:
Many a one prouides a rod for bis owne taile, or wears
a bat wherewith bimfelf is beaten,
Baftonnade : £..A baftonadoe ; a banging, or beating


with a cudgel, 2
Baftonnade: m.ce¢ : f.Banged,bethwacked with a cud-


ell,
Baltonné.er Baftonnadé ; Cudgelled.
Baftonneau. 4 little aff, trunchion, cudgell, bat ; a


B tem Seat nee wand,
aftonnée : f, The fire i ip.
Baftonnement : m. 4 ps eae A a Chd-


gee.
Baftonner. To firike,beat,bang,bethwacke witha cud-
ell; to gine the baftonadoe unto,
nnet.as A ts moe of a bridle,
onnier: m. A flaffe-bearer ; or Vergier ; alfo the
carrier of the Crucifix in Procefions; alfoya great man —
in any company. |
aftonnier : m.ere : £.0/,or belonging 10, a faffe crc;
alfo bearing a faffe; and bence,
Sergencbaftonnier.A Mace-bearer,or Sergeant of
B ty Mace. dmifiaeies +
alty :m.A territorie,or demefue. ging toa place,

Baily : Fe + f. Builded made, framed, RE, tee
réd,or fet up.

Bat : m. 4 frroake,or beating,

Batable : com. Beatable; batterable; worthy, fitor apt,
to be beatengwbich will indure hammering as mettall;
or may be battered with cannon,as a fortre fe; ce; al-
So,quarelfome , contentions, litigious; (for fuch a one
comes by a knocke,and wil, now and then.put vp
all be comes by.)

Batail de cloche. 4 mill clapper. .

Bataille : f. A battell, or fight betweene two armies ; al.
fo, battell, or maine battell; the middle battalion,
or [à nerve of. ait en Rare: Gene-
ral, moft con , marcheth; alfo, the whole army:
enti "le any fauadron, battalion, er er
ae en Socal on parts de chats; la ane
ades ongles: Prov. The faiveff battels are d
with edged tooles: (but that is onely when Rte à
tants are not worth keeping.) ;

Battaillé : mée:f, Battelled, fought; alfosclappered or


bung witha clapper.
Batailler. , . To baitel, wage battell ; fight , frine,con-
tend, :
Bataillon: m.A battalion , or quadron (of footmen,
Batallier : m. ere :£. Battelling; for battels ; frere


Banging toybattelis, bof:
5 f. Effeminate, obfcene , or fcurrile, dif


cou,


Abell clapper ; alfo, a batant; the
peece of weod,that runnes all along pon the edge
the lockefide of a doore,gate,or window. - :
Vane porta deux batans.4 fovelding,or two leaned,

e. toe ae Mae |
Mittal: =

Il arriua tou Te
very lately,towards ; or (as in this @) Ie viens de
Licncorescourbatant: 1 come = mt CHEN ROW;
or,


Batant.


/
Original from


THE OHIO STATE*UNIVERSITY


‘


BA T. ‘BA A T


or, ill through the haft.1 made thence; or,it may | and boothalers doe. HT i
» be en mé ee latelyt |. Batre le chien devantle Lyon. To punifh a meane
came, from thence. |


3 thence. er/on in the prefence,and to the terrer,ef a great one.
~~ Iles chaflatout batant. Hee purfucd them verie ci it


atre fa coulpe. See Coulpe.
bard ; 8,11 les a mené batant iufques dans les por- | - Batrelesdraps. To full clothes.
tes de la ville. He gaue thema bot,and bloudie chace, | Batre l'eau. Toloofe bis labour, or imploy bis time to -
enen vite the gates of the towne.
Bat-beurre: m. A Churne-flaffe. ra
Bate: f. À Rammer ; a Pauers beetle; a Dawbers bea-
ter ; tb'infirument wherewith floores of earth are fet-


no purpofe.

-. Batre les eaux. 4 Deere to take foyle.
Batre leur eau.Todifgefi,or fhake down,their drinke,
(by exercife) as borfes which be ridden two or three


led,and beaten leuell. miles after they haue beene watered.
Bateau: m. A boat. Batre les flancs. To pant bard for want of breath.
| Bateau mere. Looke Mere. Batre à froid.To worke ont a thing with great paines,


Eftourdi de bateau. Extreamly benummed,and ther-
by unfit,or vnreadie, for a fuddaine imployment.

Nous menerons le bateau d’un'’autre forte.we will
bandle the bufinefJe,or carrie the matter,after another


or toyle,as a Smith, that frames a thing out of cold yron;
- alf,as Branfler la pigue.
Batre la laine. To leacher,to baire-beat it.
er ts liétiere. A borfé to reft,or continue long,in
t X ;
_ Batre le pavé. See Pave.
Batre à tout poulmon. To pant extreamely, to be al-
. moff out of breath. ,
Batre les rues. To rewell,jet,or fvagger up and down
the flvects,a nights. :
Batre le tambour avec les dents. To chatter,didder, ~
fay an Apes Paternofter. FA ?
Se batre. To fight, combat, bicker, goe to it (at


Batelage
atelage : m. Iugling,Legerdemaine..
Batelee. vne batelée de, &c; a boatfüll of.
Batelerefque: com. 1ugling,or Iugler-like.
Batelerie: f. 2s Baftelcrie.
Batelet : m. A little boat,or skiffe.
Beckuy as 3 vor pa

atelier: m. A boatman.fhipman,skipper.
Bateliere : f. À ferrie-woman,or boat-woman.
Batellé. Clsppered; faid ofa Bell; in Blafon.
Batemare: f. À wagtayle,or water Swallow.
Bateinent: m.A beating ,thwacking,lamming,bumping, -

Swindging,battering ; alfo, a threfhing.

Le batement de 3 mer. The working of the fea;alfo,
| _. the ebbing thereof:

Baterie: f, A beating; er batterie.
Bateur: m. A beater, cudgeller, fwindger ; alfo, a thre-


he)
jateurs d'eftrade. The forragers,or forerunners of an


Armie.

Bateur d'or. A gold-drawer,or gold-layer. ©
Bateur de pavez. An idle, or continuall walke-ftreet;
aietter abroad in the firects ; one that fees the towne
fèrued when honeft men are in bed; a laftinious, or vn-
thrifty night-walker;generally any loofé or mad youth,
diffolute or diforderly yonker.
Lagrange eft prés des bateurs. (Said ofa Nunherie |
thats necre unto a Fryerie;)the Barne flands neere the


Thr à

Batifé. as Baptife. .
Batiture de fer. The skales that flye from yron in the
hammering thereof.
Batoir : m. A rammer,or pauing beetle ; alfo, a Launde-
af fefiesalisn threfhing floore,or threfbing
ce; alfoya fulling Mi Le
Pe heal pee lore sand hence;

Au batre faut I concrete Much loue is loft by
pa tc TaN as ; .
Batre.1v beat;thwack,bumpe,{wi udgell,belamme;

alfo,to batter, (Frapper He fn aT Na

de plufieurs coups iterez. Nicot. AMSA

Batre de l'aile. To fmell ranke, or firong ; (e(pecially

at th’arme-holes.). |
. Nebatre plusque d'une aile. Tobe half vndone;to
reft but vpon one only afjurance ; to hawe but one belpe


Sharpe.) ! S
S'en batre les ioues. To repent throughly, or affit
bimfafe cruelly, for.
Ils fe faifoient batre à credit. They got themfelues à
~ cudgelling without any purpofe ; or, being out of loue
with their eafe, they would needs take up a cudgelling
on their credits.
Occafion trouve qui fon chat bat: Pro.He that will
beat bis cat,inuents a caufe fort. :
Qui ueut batre fon chien trouve aflez de baftons :
> Prov. Soy Seely a pr à Tisan
eafie matter to find a flaffe to beat a dog witball,
Tel qu le bafton dont à fon grand regretle bat
on: Prov. Manya one carries about bim a cudgelt for
_ bis owne fhoulders. :
Bat-fain. 4 rude allarum giuen to a whole countrey by
ringing,and beating of pots,kettles,bafons cc.
Battans d'un poiffon. The gylls of a fifb.
Batte : f. The boulfter of a Saddle.
Les battes d'une porte. s les Batans.
Battecul:m. 4 great linnen vaile, fuch as Nunnes
weare,
Batteler. To ingle,érc ; as Bafteler.
Bart he yell tema
att :f. The little yellow water. ile.
Battequeuc. The (une.
Batterie : f. as Batcrie; al/, a Platforme for batte-
~ > = . ‘


rie.

Batteur. See Bateur. MEL

Battier: m. A backney,or biréd'iade.* - -

Battre. Looke Batre. .

Battu. Looke Baru. -

Battue: f. .4 beating, or flroke with the feet, in a fet-
‘led, and proportioned time ; (4 tearme of borfeman-


rip.)
SRA fri beating.
ans debettinn abe dde that fe from braffe


left bim. -
=Batrele beurre. To churne. set 1 while it is hammered.
gli PANNE NOR À mare 9m MN RE MS
r aux To tomake aroad,to fee tu: m.uc: tem ; knocked, t 3
ie ae dent x 5 feck ~ finadges, belammed,cudgeled: alf, bartered; aif
Batreleschemins. To belay. the way, aspurfetakers | — threfbed; alfo,churned. IRÈNE Pan


| £ Original rok
Bislieed br GOK gle THÉ-OHIO STATE UNIVRRSILY


.: ’


B A V


Batu de mauvais vent. Vnfortunate, je, dif
graceful ; euer hindered, or crofjed by one mifchiefe or
other


Le batu paye l'amende. Amende.
De on ae ils font sr Same difèafe
affitts,or fickneffe infecis,them all,

utant pleure mal batu que bien batu: Pro. As
much weepes be thats but fleightly,as be thats fhrewd-
ly, beaten ; (whereunto agrees ;)
Mal batu longucment pleure: Prov.
Tel menace qui eft batu: Prov. One may threaten,
and be well fivindged wht be bath done;(we fay,threa-
tened folkes line long.)

Batué: f. as Battue.

Bature. 4 beating ; firipe ec ; as Batture ; or, Bate-
ment,

Batus. An order of Friers which in their nightly Procef-
fions whip their owne backes extreamely; (A feét of
people ny this name, and whipping themfelues
twice in the day,and once in the night, were driven out
of Germanic by Charles, fonne to the Emperor Hen-
ry the feuenth.)

Bau.Lanavirea rant de pieds de bau.The hip is fo ma-
z. foot broad,or wide.

au de bite. The forepike ; the part of a {hip wherein.
the Bitts are placed.

a m. A driueller or flauerer ; alfo,a babler; alfo,
a frouter.

Bavarder. To driell, or flauer ; alfo,to bable ; alfo, to

fcoffe, or flout at.

Bavardife sf, Slaucring ; alfo,a babling ; alfoya mocke-
rie,gullerie, flout,or ieaf.

Bavalle: f. Anidle tale,vaine tatle bible bable.

Bavafler. To prattle,tattlebable,ufe many words.

Baubance: f. Looke Bobance. _:

Baube. A pratler,babler jangler,tatter.

BAptyas. Parolle tremblante, & bauboyante ;
Faultring.

Batic: m, A fot,a{fe,doult dull-pated noddipeake,beauie-

B seat cokes, groffe-beaded fui, ufr
a or Baucale: m. A glaffe-violl, water-glaffe,

; cess (great bellied, long necked,and narrow mou-


i. À SE rae Pw,
auche: f. 4 rew,r or courfe, of flones, or
bricks, in building. err ; :
Baucher. To chip, bew or quare, timber, érc ; alfo, to
ranke,order array; lay euenly.
Baucheron: m.4 x cond aba Squarer of timber;
thats


be that doth the firft work thats to be done upon a piece.
Baucie:f. The root of a Parfenip.or Carrot. (v.m.)


ie :m. :£. Bold,infolent,i
le: com. Merrie,blithe. j


lent. (v.m.)


of timber.
au


seo ,cheerefiull glad,
Bande bite Lake Ba ib Lithely,illilyjnall fres.
à le ACER a ae


Baudere
Baudet:
TEE abe ona


reioee, exhilerate, cheere


‘a TA ed by Go. gle


B A V


Baudoüiner-To doe,leacher ,or ingender like an Affe.
er. as er.
Baudrayeur, a Baudroyeur ; al/oya belt,or bandricke,


Se nd asBailler. (v.m. ;

Baudri. as Baudrier, Aine. ;

Baudrié. curried,and coloured,as a Cow-bide.

Baudrier :m. A hide,skin,or peece,of dreffed,curried,
and coloured Cowes leather; alfo, a belt, baxdricke, or
fword-girdle of that leather.

Baudkier. To dreffé; currie,and colour,the bides of kine,
dc ; alfo,to make belts,or baudricks.

Bancyoy: m. À rauenous,and ougly fifh,called the Sea-


Baadvoyes. To dreffe, or currie leather, erc; as Bau-
er


Baudrc ie: £.(TH art of) dreffing,or currying of lea-
ther aff, baudrick-making ; i a gs or fireet,
wherein curriers,or belt-makers,dwell,


oyeur: m. A leather-drelfer; a currier and co-
lourer of leather; alfoya maker of belts,or baudricks.
audryeur. as Baudroyeur.
Bauds: m. 4 bind of white hounds ; Looke Souilli-


ard,
Bauduffle: £:rhe great rufh wherewith poore boufes are
thatched sll ter or ra d a aa
Bave: f. Foame,froath ; flauer,driue
Baver. To foame,froath; flauer,drinell at the mouth; al-
a famble,or falter in peaking ; alfo,to toy dally, tri-
Mali. -


Baverelles: £ The sof aborfes bitt.
Baverette: f. 4 À or mocketer te put before
the bofome of a (aerine) child. .
Baverette à babillons. The plate whercat a bitts
players bang ; the flap to bang the players at.
Baverie: f. À foaming, froathing,flauering,or driuelling
at the mouth; alfo, a trifling, toying, icafling ; idle tal-
king ; flouting mocking.
Baverole:f. A bib; as Baverette.
Baverotte. as Baverette.
Bavefche : f. The focket of a candlefiicke,erc.
Bavette. as Bavererte.
pue Bavard. ce
aveute: f. À certain skalele[fe fifh, that couers ber fel
B when {he lifts with ber pin es fe
av nt. Focmingly, flauerinely.froathity.
Baveux: m. eufe:f Preah in ares
Plus baveux qu'un pot àmouflarde. we fa, foa-
ming at the mouth like a boare.
Bauffrer. To ranine,denour, eat greedily.
we ur:m. Arauener, dexourer, glutton, greedie
teder.
Bauffreure : f. A rauening, devouring, greedie fee-
apes les premieres baffreures. After the firft bits
greedily let down ; or after we had flayed our flomacks
with a fnatch or two. ; |
Bauftroy: m. A watch-tower ; or, as Beffroy.


Bnuge: Dain mrter made cl ana


1 wr te sd
que rer ac er
| Pom injective bras living ‘ithe lar ep
ie, 0 5.
Baugeart: m. A fcowndrell ;a fturuie, or beafily com-
Baviere: £ A bib,erc; as Baverette; alfo, a Germane
f alled Baveere. \
-Baviere d'un armes. The beaner of a belmet. ral


Original from


THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


B À V


Faire reste Bavicre:To pu Pockes; se
trauell for them:

Bauldrier. as Bauder,

Bauldrieur. Looke Baudr

Bauldroy: m. The re pr diuell of the fea; an oug-
hand jauenous fifh.

Bauline: m. Baulme ; alfo, Balme-mint, Speare-mint,
Garden-mint.
Baulme crefpu. Crifpe balme , croffe mint, curled


mint.
Baulme fauvage. Her{é-miat, wild mints, water-
mints.

Baulme: m. Baulme,or Balfamum: Looke Bafme.
Baule de Iefus Chrift. Awexcellent balme, made
of the beftoyle;and old wine...

Bois de baulmé. The fivect wood of the Balfume tree.

Baume: m. # Baulme, "4

Baume: f A hole,denne,caue,grot.

Bavois: m. 4 Table,or Paper,containing th’ eftimate mate of
the rights of Seigheuriage,Foiblage, and mir.
according tothe feuerall rates of gold, filuer and buki-
on, then currant, or made currant by the kings Ordi-
nances.


Bavoler. Te wag,wauer: flicker, or fiye low, like a gnat


in Vintage time.
Bavolet: m. 4 Billiment, or bead-attire, worne by the
women of Picardie ; al/è,4 Shittle-cocke.
Bavoleté. Chambriere bavoletée. 4 fhittle-braind,
or giddie-beaded wench ; alfo, one that weares a Ba-


volet.
Bavon: im. A bib,mocket,or eset for the bofinée of
a flauering child ere.
Bavouer. as Bavois.
Bauracineux: m. eu :f. Salt; er clammies (from the
__ mineral Borax ; which the Arabians tearme Bau-


Baus: ser as Bauds ; alfo, the béémesser floore-timbers,
f afer she ht bei nt «tree ul
to fide within the Hould.

Baufine: m. The Baulme tree, or Balfome tr wath ; a,
Baulme it felfe; Looke Baulme.

Quins: m. Streamers (infhips coc.) «
Baut: m. Baude: f. us socond,merrie, blithe.

. m. Ba
Lebaya Te iid Pb dapled bay. :

B > m2 Aman that gapes, or gazes earnefily at a


ens 34 fiye-catcher, a greedie and unmannerlybe-


Bayarde: f. A woman that earncfly bebolds, ay
Fa aie lookes, and in n looking gapes, at a thing; a
gaxing bo

Ba m, d; alfo,a basket,or

cee and ln eet at

pofe,aboxt os key

Bayart: m.arde: ray, bent we tearme a

ay bor ft,a bayard.)

Baybaye: £ 4 AE mecer inanih wate =

Baye : £ A he, fib, foift, oper aig ke,
or emai berrie; cloth called Bayes; afi,

4 -
set ftre de bayes. Looke Repaire.


r. To gape,or open the mouth very wide; salle sale fad


3 and gazing about, as vert boidons doe
jen they come into an honourable prefence ; (bence)
3 aa, teeta ig


plates a Frei: 30> :
‘€ i


B E A


the mouth wide open.


pre m.4s Bailli,or as Baile; aBayliffe. Po er .


Bayonnette:f. Akind of {mail flat pocket-dagger
nied with + tr or agreat knife to Potage


re a t Arbaleftier. (an old word, )
BaZane : f. Sheepes leather dreffed like Spanifh leather,


and coloured red,greene;or yellow,erc, for fhoes,or the
couerings of bookes.

Bazaner. as Befanner ; a/fojto blot, flaine,or befmeare,
(as with blacking ;) to 5 bleake;to bedus


ke.
Se bazaner. To wax bleake tawnie,fwart,blackifh.
Bazanne. as Bazane.
Bazaverefque:f. The name ofa delicate Italian Peare
thats ripe im Auguft.
Baze:f. A Bafis,or Bafe ; the ground, fndltion roto
foot of a thing; Looke Bafe.
azenne. as Bazane.
Bazette. qu baz. (Linnen) cloth which is bus balfe
not beene throughly whitened. -


Bazilles: e pie Sampire,Creftmarine.
Bazoche: Looke Ba anche.
Beant: m. ante: f ‘Gaping, opéning the mouth sil,
alfo, gaxing wiflly;vnmannerly,or affectionately at:
Bearn. .4 Prownce of Aquitaine, ated at the ae
foot,of the Pyrenean mountaines.
Cape de Bearn. See Cape.
Ceft la loy du pays de Bearn que le batu paye l'a-
mende: Prov. The cuflome of Bearne is,that be thats
beaten fhall pay for the bloudwipe.
Beat: m, ate: f. Happie, bleffed, hely, facred ; perfect ;
excellent.
Beat pere. as Beaupere.
Habit de beat,ongles de chat: Prov. A wolfe in a
fheepes skin.
Beatifié: m. ée: f. Beatified ; made ble(fed.


Beatifier To beatifie ; to make ble (fed, facred,or bappie.


Beatiles : f.as Beatilles.

Beatilles : f. Trinkets,or vaine toyes, wherewith finicall
people decke themfelues strifles,nifles,odde attiress al-
fo,~women of a low flature.


Beatitude: rep ainc fn


fina of pereon, perf gouine yor trengu-


Beau: : in, as Beauté ; (whence;)
Quand beau vient fur beau,beau petd fa ee:
Prov. Beautie fet off by beautie lookes beafly or, bear
tie ufed as a foyle to beautie foyles it.

Beau: m. 2f. Beautious, faire, beautiful ; feemely,
comely ; proper, bandfome, erace fill; of a goodly pre-
_fence,of a fiveet pet of a pleafing dye,or bné.
Belle dame. lind of Dovale ale, or feeping a


om beau:rake ou leiflere, foft and faire not too fet
there hoe’; eke often Fer. . 4
"A beau ieu bel argent. Round play, in me ne
in good proportion ; to good purpofè; pp gun e
asin;
‘A beauieu beau: rétour. A tit for a tat, ‘a tut ‘fore
> tufh,as good e it as was brought:
= Lay beatt’attendre. 1 flay to much purpofe; bere’s
goodly tarrying fure;1 [ball but loofe my labor bow long
foener I tarrie.
Ilabeaufaire chois de. He bath good leaue io chiufe.
Na beau fe leuer card. He may lye long ynonghrsbe may


Fr ee ben face itera tle,
EE
she te fr mes


’


BEA B E. C

Baillez luy belle. Goodly betide him; fome bodse fpit pit made like the beake of that bird;
in bis mouth, for now he bath bitit furei : alfo, the anterior produétion of the fhoulder blade ; (fo
1! luy l’a baillé belle. He bath fold bima bargaine,be tearmed by fome ifts. ) |
hath given bien the boots,a gleckesor gudgeon. Bec de cigne. À Swans-bill ; a Pinfer, or Infirument,
Il l'avoit failli belle. He fcaped faire, or miffed it nar- wher ewith Surgeons pull bullets, dc, out of the bo-
rowly; be was very necre it, be was very like to bawe die. '
bad,or bit, it, Bec de faulcon. A fafhion of Pollax borne by the


Beau chanter fouvent enuye: Prov. Sweet finging
often loathes vs.
Belle chere &c. Looke Chere.
Belle chofe eft toft ravie:Pro.A goodly thing is quick-
ly faatched vp.
Belle femme mauvaife tefte: Pro. Faire women ei-
ther curft,or cruell,be,
Les beaux hommes au gibet: Pro. The gibbet makes
an end of proper men.
Petites pucelles font enfemble belles: Prov. Looke
Pucelle.
Qui viét eft beau,qui apporte encores plus beau:
Prov. No man's efteemd fh faire as be that comes full-
B handed.
caucoup. Much,greatly,a great deale; alfoymany.
Besace offrir à yn qui peu demande, c’eft uy
nier tout à plat {a demande : Prov. Te offer much to
> thet acketh little, is flatly to denie him the little be
asketh,
Trois beaucoup, & trois peu deftruifent l'homme:
Pro, viz. To fpeake much,and know bust little;to fpend
much, and haue but little ; to prefume vpon much, and
defèrue but little. \
peau ls zm, A flep-fonne,or fonne in laws Seeke Fils.
eau-frere: m. A brother in law,
Beau-pere : m. The title of a Frier which is a Confelfor ;


à, a father in law; alfo, a father that bath beflowed


* all bis children in mariage.
caupre. The fprit-fayle of a fhip. ;
Beauregard fr A Summer fi or Graunge ; a bonfe
for pleafure,and recreation. a R
Beauté: f. PL ten eatieere
Line{Je,goodlineffe,gracefulneffe.
Beauté Grecque. See Grec, 1:
_ Beauté fans bonté eft comme vin efventé: Prov.
| Beaute without goodneffe ss like wine that bath taken
w


ind.
_ Beauté de femme fafcheux refveille-matin : Prov:
A (wanton) womans beautie breeds a refileffe mor-


Boning & folie a ® compaigne: Prov.
Beautié and folly are often matcht together,
| Brdeieunell de beauté desgarmi d' humilité:
_ Quand beau vient fur beau beau perd fa beauté:
Pre M ined cn are Late beer
roa parle gy Lred Vine.
| Bec: m. The beake,or bill of a bird,eoc ; alfo,a Point of
At which two riuers meet. :


< dand Fader ec
appeal troie. 4 hasle pra earn eNO


‘fir the
rine s See
cane. Old-fafiioned fhoes baning

ke beakes,flicking out for their toe-peece.
b Storks-bill,Pink-needle,

alberd,or pollax:s alfo,


- (tre


ee by Go gle.


Peeres of France, and by the French kings Penfioners:
ee ioners;


Bec de grue. «es Bec de Cicoigne aff
. as Bec de Cicoigne ; alfo, 2 Surgeons
toole matt aCranes bill. Ph ra,
Bec iaulne. See Bejaune.
Bec de la lampe ; The focket,or funffe of the lampe.
Bec as Bec de Cane.
Bec delezard. An inflrument wherewith Surgeons
draw out bullets,and the fblents of bones.
Becde licure. An vpper lip cleft up to the nofe.
wee ao Wild tanfie, filuer weed; alfa,the Porpoife,
or Sea-hog.
Bec de perroquet. 4 Parrats beake ; a Pinfer which
opens CT es des vo 3 pplints
of bones,and other bard things,out of the bodic.
Coup de bec. 4 Le Pare oh -ftroke with the
ofan angrie bird; and (metaphorically) a fous, feoffe,
te a alfo,a mifchie fe iniurie,or ill turne done;
e.
eel bec. À Parafite,or Buffooue.
Tour de bec. A kiffe; alfoa word of the mouth.
Avoir bon bec. To fheake difcreetly, anfwcre warily,
aduifedly,or cunning |y.
… Avoir le Ex el. To be tongue-tyed, filent bufht,as if
bis lips were yen together.
Elles n’ont que le bec. They are all tongue,they eda
‘doe t but prate, bable, tatle ; or, they are but a
» little fhout-faire, all their ref is not worth looking
at.
Ila bien d'autre paille au bec. There’s other kind of
os ee be 15 another manner of man , then you
tl € Of.
Faillir par le bec. fa caufe ne faillira par Je bec.
His matter will not be loft for want of words.
Fairelebecavn. To teach one before hand what
ll P à Ja plume par le bec. He drew bis
through bis lips ; be baffled,rid,gulied abufed bim.
-Tenir le bec en l'eau. To dally with ; to delay,amufe,
or bold in fufpence.
Il n'a pastenulebec en l cau. 4 man may Safely
\ foe drunke; but he that fayes, with water, wrongs


Becaffe: € A woodcocke ; See Beccafle.
Becafieau, Becañine, & Bécaflon.. 4 Snite, or |
hs mpe. si a N
Beccane. Akind of blacke grape wbich yeeldeth an ex-
ee wine. Sn : A


Beccard. The female Seine.


ocke. $ |
The fea Pie; alfo,akind of fifh.
ASaiteyor Si j DEAN A


et


mn li
sneak dep on ray 3 eake- ke;
beccuë. Zhe elbow; tearmed fo by fame


Rec


Original-from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


echebois: m. A Speight,or waod-picker.
Bechée:f. A beake-fiull,or bill-fiull of; alfo, the pecking
of an angrie bird. Ts
Becher. as Befcher.
Bechet: as Brochet ; A Pike-fifh. . ,
Bechevet. tefte à celte Bechevet. The play with pins,
called, beads,and points; alfo,the lying of two in a bed,
the one right, the other with bis at the feet; See
Befchevet. \
Becheur. # Befcheur.
Bechique: f. 4 medicine for the Congh:
Bechiftre. A rempef,or forme.
Bechu: m. ué: f. Beaked;bauing a beake,likea bird,
booked,or fharpe,as a beake. "
Bechus. À kind of deformed thing in the fea, thats nei-
ther Clone plant.yet feemes to mone of it felfe.qLan-
(à


Bcrquade :£.:A pecke,iob,or bob with a beake.
Becque: £. A ditch, or trench made vpon the high way;
(alfo,as Beche. @Norm.) :
cone 2 ; sr of Heraldrie.
cquebo. A Woodpecker,or Highaw.

Bccqu as Bechée. -


cq crete :
Becquer. To pecke,or bob with the beake.
au The. name of an apple i to be eaten


Bequet. 314
Becquetant: m. ante: f. Pecking,as a bird ; alfo,nod-


: m. Owr Ladies


sa)


pence na


a 20 gle


Pa, an oes RSS, Tages) ENS Er UE à
BEC B E G

Beccufle: f. A tumult,oprore,burrie,burliburly. uanceth Meacockes.

Becdafle. GRab. as Beccafe. s As on:m, A Tabret; alfo, the belly.

Becdoye.-A Dolphin. : 214 Monbedon. My pretie rogues fiveet bully.

Be . The daintie little bird,called by fome,a Gnat- Ce que dit le bedon, a de credit fon : Prov. The
fi or Fig-eater ; (Lrather thinke, that wanting - belly muft alfo be liftned"unte; the appetite beares great
the bird, as we doe, we want alfo a name for it.) fivay in al bumane a€tions, :

Beche : f. An inflrument of Husbandrie, &re, perp 4 -dondaine : £ That part of the belly which is berween
> erage in-bending, and beake-like,bead; and à B nauell,and pere A

the opening,or breaking up,of bard,or ftony gr onner. To play upon a taber.
mhercinte the Felcher Par em pr Bedoual. as Bedouau.


A young Brocke,or Badger ; alfo,a fea-cob, or


Seana
Bedoue. A Gray,Brocke,Bofon,Badzer.
Bée:£. The bleating of a fheepe ; alfo,a hole ouerture,or
< opening,in the wall,or other part,of a boule oc.
Béc. gueule bée. Gaping, with an open mouth.
Beelant. A fheepe. rere
Beellement: m. A bleating; or,the crie of a fheepe.
Beeller: To bleatsor crie,like afheepe. °°
einent: mA gaping.
een: m..4# Arabian Plaat,of two kinds, viz, a white,
and a red one; (which difference is bred onely by their
roots.) wee ne bl
Been blanc, The white (Arabian) Bene; Some of our
moderne Herballifts call frothiePoppie,or fpatling Pop
ES Bene.
een rouge. The red( Arabian) Bene; the fame Her-
baliifis call, red-Valerian, or Cow-bafill; and others,
Limeworte,or Catch-flye,red Bene; allimproperly. ~


Béer: To gape, or open the mouth very wide: Looke


Bayer.
Béer contre vn four. is,in effe6l,as much as, To balt
before a criple, or fpeake Latine before clerkes.
Befflé: m.ée: f, Deceined wocked, culled.
Beffler. To deceine, mocke, or gull, with faire words,


cht.
Beffleriés : f. Fooleries,mockeries eudgeons,gulleries.
tm. A Beacon, or, aWatch-tower, from which


ding with the head; alfo, playing, or checkiag , like a things may be difterned farre off, alJo,an Allar un bell;
hor/bwith the mouth. as tte affi,a fuddaine feare ; alfo,a place wherein wild beafts

_ Faim becquetante. Biting,or pricking,bunger. are nen 3 Looke Baffroy.

Becqueté: m.ée:f. Pecked,or iobbed at. Begauder. To loyter.

Becquetement : m. A pecking; alfo,a nodding; alfo,a ir ra pa m. À fambling;or maffling in the mouth,
checking with the mouth. M and (moft properly) the imperfect pronunciation of a

exer. To pecke, like a bird; alfo, to nod with the child,that begins,or but learnes,to fpeake.
bead; alfo,a borfe to play,or checke with themouth, | Beguayer. To famble, fumble, maffle in the mouth ; 10

Becquillon: m. A little beake,or bill. eake imperfectly, or, as a child, that but begins to

Becu. as Bechu. eake, ,

Bedaciet: m. ere: £ Beadle-like ; of, or belonging to,a | Begude: f. À Cote,Cottage,thatched fhed,oz fhelter.

B Beadle. : x B ef À Sea-mew. |
edaine: f. 4 barre of fleele, or of yron; alfo,a | Begue:com. Fambling, fumbling,maffling in the mouth; -
forked arrow or a Croffe-bow; alfo,i Lenya fat. spé yor childi{hly, peaking. der ou
guts or gorbellie ; al/o,the belly; andbence; Nees beau A ship whofe flemme, beake, or nofeis--

endre bedaine fur la plaine. To take the meafire. __, pointed with yronyor braffe.
of bis belly on the ground ; or,to fall on bi belly: | Beguée: m. asBeguer. : a

Bed An inclofed wood sa esd that eguer: at A Sergeant, or Officer , vse the

es not open,or,is not common. - D NON + Commaundements ginen, and Commi ent oùt, by -

Bedaud: m. .4 fedle, miniop, fauourite ; a dilling; or | the publicke Magifrate @Besrnois, i sage
darling. 4 it. 2s Begayemenr.

Mon petit bedaud. My pretie apeymy little bullie. ** | Begueyer.as Beguayer. “
:m. A Beadle; a Verger ; alo, (in Norman- | Beguin: m. A Biggin for a child. pa:
dic, and other places) an under Bayliffe, or yeoman to ines: f. An Order of Nuanes, or religions women,
@ Sergeant ; or Catchpole inferior to the Sergeant. * who commonly be all old,or wellinyeares.


Beguiner: To put ona Biggin. aa
as ‘
Bebe oaycordia rots aerated,


ke Ben, ë
Bee. eri forme empire Qi.


” ; . A . "


BEL


Bchiftreux : m. eufe : £. Tempefiuous,yaging,flormie.

Behourd : m. À ue or Turn of many together with
—— and battleaxes; alfe, a bufiling, or bluficring
noyfe.

Bchourdir, T6 iuft together with launces rc, tomake a
bufiling,or bluflering noife.

Bchourdis:m. 4 bufling, rombling, iufling of many
men together ; alfo,a bluftering of winds.

Feu de behourdis. A bone-frre.

Bejaunage: m. Simplicitie,want of experience,lacke of
hnowledgeunskilfulne(fe; doleifhneffe, fortifbneffe.

Bejaune: m. A nouice; a late prentife to,or yong begin-
ginner ina Trade,or Artsalfo,a fimple,ignorant,unex~
perienced, Alfe; a rude, umfaflioned, bome-bred =
don; a fot, ninnie, doult, noddie ; one thats blankt,
re nay nought to fay, when hee bath moft need to

cake,
Payer fon bejaune. 70 po his welcome ; a fee exa-
Gted, by fchollers, of fuch as ave newly admitted into
their [ocietie.

Eau &f. mn rap mi
Jaunife: f. Simplicitie,young ignorance unskilfulneffe,
want of experience; fine dai

Beige 3 Corruptly, for Bignet. Ra

Beille. as Bague.

Beillottes: f. Akornes ; or,Oake-apples.

Bcifle :m. ThOrelep,or under-batches,of a fhips
1: m, belle: £ Faire ec ; as Beau.

Belaud. as Bedaud ; or,a fedle,minion,fauourite.

Belenne. 4 certaine little, skale-leffe, great-beaded,
Small-mouthed and {har pe-beaked, fifh of the Mediter-
ranean,or Grecian fea; and there but rave; in our fea
neuer fèene.

Beler. # Beeller. To blayte.

Beleter. as Beeller.

Belette: £ 4 weefill. |
Belette IGide. Authors agree not what bealthis is;


The old ones,and moft of their interpretors hold it to be

the Ferret; others, a Fitch, or Fulmart3 others (leaft

probably) an Otter,or water Wee, :
Beliard: Ramme.


im. ‘
Belic. A kind of red,or gueules in
Belier: m. 4 Ramme ; alfo, th’anci
D called. a
ier marin. The fa Ramme;a great, and rauenous


entmie to fifbermen.
fre reflouer. The branches ; the two grea-


| ds a Préfle.
j 4 s.Citches,blacke Citches,
ier. A ball made of a Rammes cod,


teeth,


Beliné: m ée:£ Rammed ;aff,cftned, beled, qu
Beliner. To ramme ; alfo, to cofta, beguile, deceive,


Be: m. as Tiretaine,


Belem Abe abn ml mf


2f A crue


read ply tb beggar


re


belin. To mumble, as one that wants


Beluteau: m. A boulter,or boulting clot.


Py DELS ty, bafely, vagabond


b ile. | DS. Et
| Bélier meting baw sage se


BEL


lad, ble, flibie ab af, a thing ef liltle, ov me
Beliftrefle :f. A woman Beggar ; a Doxie, Morte, bafe


Queane.
Rene: Lu og begging, importunate, beggar-
cor beggarly,
Beleralle op
tre. as Beliftre; a ar;@c.
Belitrer. as Beliftrer 3 tobeg Gt.
Belitrerie. as Beliftrerie.
€: com. Fairifh, reafinably faire, paffable, fofo,
femewbat like.
Bellateur : m..4 Warrior ; a prefiffed Souldier.
Bellatrice: f. A Virago, er Warrioreffe.
Belle. The fiminine of Bel,or ef Beau; Loeke Beau.
ye fe Nighifhade ; or ,a kind of Dwale,er
ping Nighifhade.
Belle-fille: f.  fep-deugbter ; (Locke Filles) aifo, the
B xed of a ae fl ers Sweet apple.
cilement. Fairely,beautifi, 0.[à ext
at leifure,by lisleond bte. ia te
Belle-mere:f. 4 flep-mother,or(moft properly) mother
in laws as,the wines mether,in regard of the Luskand,
Belleque:f.4 Coot.
Bal ¢. as Belette, ÿ fi dof
ettement. Pretily; alfo.faire and fofily; at leifure.
oe hg ha ema 5"
-videre. The flower called Bl bells 30r,# Bel.
vedere,
Bellic. asBelic. sa
Belhqueuiene Ih zvarlikely
ue sent. Martially,warlikely; warfrrinely.
Belligueux: m. eufc:f. warlike, mor mb


fill of prowefe, valiant in armes ; warfaring, fit fer


warre..
Belliric: m. A round Mirabolan plumme, fomewbat leffe
then the Chebule.
Belliftrandie: f. Beggavie,vagabondvie,roguerie.
Belliftrandier : m. 4 beggar,a great needie vogue.
Bellocier. À Bullace tree,or wild Plum-tree.
Bellot: m. otte: f. Prettie,iely, fomewbat faire, neat,
ème.


MaBellotte. My prettie Pigsnie.
Belluge: f. « Belugue. —
Belotte. as Belette. 4 Weefill. ;


Belouze: f.The lower hazard ina Tenis-court.
Belvedere. A certaine fbrub which growes to a mans
beight, in the proportion of a faire tree, fill of pleafant
greene boughes refembling branches of Hyfope ; it m
well be Broome tode flax, which by Italians us cal-


, Belvidere.
Belugue: £ 4 fparke, or parkle of fire ; (Proveng.) al-
Milan marin ae


Bakes: m. A boulter,or boulting cloth.
Belutage :m. A fifting.or boulting of meale,


Belute t. as AS
Be er. To boult ; alfo,to fsvine. ï


acértaine Arabian Plant of two
bearing a white, the other a red root; |

held very cordiall; fime (improperly)
or frothie Poppie, white Benes-and red
Valerian,


Go gle


B EN


Abri, or red cow-Bafill , Behenrubrum ; See
Benarric. The little black-headed bird called, a Gnat-
frper | :
Bende; Bendelctte. See Bande ¢ Bandelette.


Benedawbe gs ales, worth about three fo
à ‘ure of coales,worth about three fous.
Benedict: m. te: f. Blif app bleed.

Huile benedict. Oyle extracted by diftillation from
tyles,or brickes, which haue beene fleeped fome time in


very old oyle. 4
Benediction: f. A benedittion, benifon,bleffing ; a wi-
Shingo all good lucke unto.

Benefice: m. A benefit, fasour, pleafure, good office,
good turne ; alfo, a Benefice; alfo,a Prixe,or Billet in
a Lotterie; (in old time a fief was alfa called, Bene-


fice.)
Benefice à fimple tonfure. The place of a Prebend,
or Canon; any Benefice,or {pirituall lining,that is with-
out a charge of foules.
Beneficence: f. Liberalitie, beuntie, beneficence, plea-
fure-doing.
Beneficial: m. ale: f. Belonging to a Benefice.
Beneficié. An Incumbent, or beneficed man; onethat
bath a Benefice.
Beneficience : f. Beneficence,liberalitie; a beflowing of
fauours, a conferring of benefits, adoing of pleafure


any wa}.

Benehicier: m. as Beneficié.

Beneficier. To give a Benefice; al/o,to conferre benefits,
beflow fauors doe pleafisres,good offices,good turnes.

Beneft. asBenet.

Beneftier: m. A boly-water pot,or flocke.

Benet: m. A fimple,plaine,doltifh fellow ; a noddipeake,
a ninnybammer, a pea-goofe, a coxe, a fillie compa-


Resercle : com. Well-willing, friendly kind, gracious,


fauourable ; gentle,courteous.
Benevolence: f. A well-willing,or good will;a fauour,
kindneffe, benenolence. ”
nift,
Benignement.Benignely,cently,courteoufly,fauorrabl,
grainy kindly Uberaly burp. " 3
i : f. Benignitie, humanitie, gentlene(fe, cour-
te pie aio Fr ebountie,goodnef]e.
Bening: m. Benigne: f. Benigne, gentle, courteous,
acrous ; fauourable, kind, good, liberal , bounti-


Benjoin: m.The aromaticall gumme,called Benjamin,


Berjoin ‘he hearbe Maifierswer
join francois. 7) i te,
Peliorie f Speine. mew
Benir. To ble[[e; to wifh well unto.

Benir la table. To fay grace.
Bente. pus it

nift: m.Benifte : effeds +.

Eau benifte ees inke. |

Eau benifte de Cour. Good words. Looke Eau.

Pain benift. Holy bread. Looke Pain, © ;
| est et Banne; alfo Jacke fr

: A Binne ; or,.as 3 eat facke
corne,or coales ; alfo,the bead,or pus 3 Stag.


| Bennel: m. À Tumbrell, or clofe cart ; a dung-cart, or
dung-pot.


netic: Baféyor law iurifdiétion (called fo in old
t:m. Bennet (a mans name ;) alfi,as Benet.


Go. gle


BIE R


Benoiét:m.éte: f. Looke Benift.
Benoiéte: f. Hearbe Auens ,Bennet,or bleed,
Benoift. as Benet,c> as Benoi&,
Benoiftier : m. A boly-water pot,or flocke.
Benoitte. «s Benoiéte.
ee + var à

uarre; b, e,(atermeof Muficke.
Roue :f4 eae, or Sea-guil, ibd
Bequée. as Bechée.
Bequebo : m. A wood-pecker, or highawe. qPic.
Bequenauld : m. A prattle-basket ; a prating boy.
Bequenaulde : f. 4 pratling girle.
Bequer.as Becquer.

ueru: m..4 weewell, or little blacke, and corne-de-


nouring vermine,
Bequerut. A kinde of Olive.
Bequet: m: The ffh called a pike; alfo, the name of a
‘owrifhaple ; as ars om
Bequet de mer, A daintie,little,and long-nofed rock-
Sifh; not very common, nor aboue fixe fingers long.
Bequilles : £ Crutches, for lame perfons.
Bequillon: m. A ttle beake, or bill of a bird, oc.
Bequu. as Bechu. Re
Ber. An old word, g as much as aut Seigneur ;
or Baron, alfo, as Berceau; 4 cradle; and, bence;
Apprins au ber dure re se au ver: Pro, Men
loofe not till they dye the dy their youth fèts on them,
Berangene :f. 4 certaine Spanifh fruit, that refem-
bles apeare, and growes neere the ground like a Me-


lon.

Berberis. The barberie tree.

Bercail: m. A flocke, as of fheep, oe.

Bercé: m.ée:f. Rocked, fhogged, or wagged vp and
downe, as in a cradle. ‘ j
Te fuis tour bercé de cela. Iam throughly acquainted
with that ; Looke, Berfé.

Berceau: m. A cradle; al/o,an arbor,or bower in a gar-
den; alfo, a cafe of tinne,wood, barke, érc; wherein a
broken member is inclofed,thereby to repofest,and keep
it in the inst forme which it bath pleafed the Surgeon
to gine it.

Bercement:m. A rocking; fhogging, (winging.

Bercer. Toreckein acradle, alfo, to flog ,or fwing ; See


Berfer.
Berche:f The peece of ordnance called, a Baft.
Bercherie: f. Prouifion, or Store, of Bafès (im a fhip.)


Heron Je a Fae, our Ladies henne.
in: m. The called,a Lympynesor a et.
Bote :f. 4 ce fheldaple, afin. ve
Bergamafque. Il boucle fa feme à Ja Bergamaf-
ue. 4s the (Italian) Bergamasks, who buckle vp
their wines crc. with a denice like a truffe for aburft
Mai, d
Bergamotte : f. À yellow peare with à bard rind, good
for perrie ; alfo,the delicate Italian {mall peare called,
the Bergamotte peare. 2
Berger:m.Afhepheard:
Bourfe de berger ; 4s Malerte de berger.
Malette de berger. The herbe fhepheards purfè.fhep-
beards ferip, picke-pur{é, teywood, coofewced, or cafe
Verge àberger. The taxle, or fullers thifile ; alfiswa-


ter Peer
Vn berger à peude bruit gardant les brebis à la
Lune fé of one that bangs in chaynes.. ~


ere: f.A rarde(fe.
Bergerescecfed drinke Made fol bard wine, and |
bonnie. + CE ee ove


Bergerie: « |


75 K


BER


Bergerie: £ 4 ld, 07 fheepe-boufe ;
DA ares of vor gi ren
€,


of fheepe.

Bergerolle: f. A young fhepheardeffe.

Bergeronnette: e The little bind beled 4 Wagtaile ;
al/o,a young,or little, fhepheardeffe.

Bergerotte. as Bergerolle. A young fhepbeardeffe.

Bergier. as Berger.

Bergiere: f. 4 fhepbeardeffe.

Berichot. as Berchot. A Wren,

— Cortuptly for Befycles. A paire of ppeétacles.


Rab.

Beril. as Berille.

Berille: m. A Beril; a fix-fquare precious flone, of an

Boe LE pryarys
rlafte : f. A flafh,gafh,deepe cut,great wound.

Berlafté : m. éc: £. Slafhed, gafhed, wounded ex-
treamely.

Berlaffer. To flafh,gafh,wound extreamely.

Berlan:m. 4 ne boufe ; aboufe of gaming,
or of any other diforder.
ps rs du berlan. Pet-companions , ale-
knights,difordered vathrifts;a knot of idle,and grace-
Jef fellowes, that,oner a pot, vfe to cenfure, and de-
ride all Eftates.

Berlandier. 42 ordinarie baunter of. pers dnd tipling
boufes ; alfo,the keeper or ovoner,of one of them.

Berle: £. The great water re water Parfely,
or falade Parfely ; called alfo,Belders,and Bell-rags.

Berlin. as Berdin.

Berlingaffe :£. A peece of coyne worth about vj. d. fler-


ing.

Berlingue. as Berlingaffe.

Berlong. as Barlong.

Berlué: £. The being fand-blind,or purblind; duleffe,or
dimnelfe of | if bt.

Berlué. Pur. De one fand-blind.

Berluement: m. Purblindneffe ; or,as Berlué.

Berluquer. ‘To trifle out the time (a word fometimes
vfed at Play.)

Bernadet : m.A kind of (mall-beaded,great-eyed,wide-
mouthed, rough and thick-skinned,dog-fifh.

Bernage : m. The carriage, , boufebola-fluffe,
mr: og agile 4 Tran of a princes court,
or campe; alfo,the neceffarie carriage base age;or lug-


e belonging to an armie,or any other companie;alfo,
pas a Dares fe genre eer ad
neff 3 alfo, Meflin, or feuerall forts of corne mingled ;

C5.
Bled bernage; Looke Bled.
Bernagoé: f. 4 Carpenters wimble,or Dible.
ee oy eerie A a
Bern oper name; Bernard; i
or fhi iad lo. f de et ?
Bernard hernie. À find offal and (fit ef)

d Crabfifb,er Cr ; 46 Branchué. x

Pal Parcs Benard :Teberay i


P. e

Berne: £. 4 Sive, or Vanne; alfo,a great kettle; alfo, a
kind of Moorifh garment,or {uch a mantle as Irifh gen-
tlewomen weare. =


Berné:m.ée:f. Vanned, or winnowed, as corne ; af,
-¢ tor ina Sine; alfo mocked, flouted,rid-
di 7 at, y P
Ia efté berné.He hath bene foundly toffed throughly
canualfed ; (a plrafe moft commonly applied 10 an igno-
rant,or aûed fellow, that hath prouoked a lear-

ned penne,or fall aboord him,


Berner. To vanne,or winnow corne ; alfo,to cannalfe, or


BER ae


to([t in a fine ; (a punifhment infliéted on fuch as com

mit groffe abfarduties)alfote gpl rat 5
“ abufe, af feof at.

ernie : f. Rug; mantle thereof.
Berresih san Sa be.
Berrôette:£ AWbeelebarrow.


Bers. as Ber(vieil mot) or,as Berceau ; qVandom.
Bers de chari Sides yackes,or r'ayles of a cha-
riot or waggon.


Berfaut :m. A Quintaine, or whintaine, for countrey
youths to run at.
Rocked in a cradle ; Seeke Bercé.
Ula f longuement berfé qu’il l'a endormy en fon
inion. He bath by and words, and long perfiva-
fons aed afleepe his iudgement, and woonbim to be of
opinion.
Berfeau. A little cradle ; or as Berceau.
Bee To rocke,in a cradle; to fhog,or fwing vp and
e


Latefte luy berfe en gondolle. His bead totters like
a boat in a florme.
Bertaudé : m.ée: £. Curtalled; alfenotched,or cut un-


euenly.

pce 5 To curtalla borfe ; to cut off bis eares and
taile ; alfo,te notch, or cut the baire uneuenly,

:f,. The name of a French queene, which was an
excellent boufewife ; whence the Prouerbe,
Au temps paffé Berthe filoit . The greateft women
did in old time (bin.

Bertonneau. ABret,or Turbot. @Ngrm.

Bertouder,or Bertourder. as Bertauder.

Bertoufer. The fame.

Bertrand: m. Bertrand (a propername for a man.)
OsBertrand. The fhare-bone ; or, the coniuntton of
the great bones which flanke the fides, and whereunto
the thigb-bones are fufiened.

Roy Bertrand. The (little) wren.
Defchaufler Bertrand. To be drunke, mellow, cup-

Shotten; to whip the cat, {hoo the goofe, or fee the de-

ill.

Qui aime Bertrand aime fon chien: Pro.Loye me,

loue my dog. |

as Beril.


Beryl.

e:f. A wallet,{ivip,fatchell,bag,pouch,or poake.
Mettre à la beface. To beggar, impouerifh, undoe,o-
werthrow the eftate or fortunes of, turne out of boufe
Qu plus de d qu'il chaffe il ne luy fa

i plus defpend qu'il ne pourchaffe il ne ut
aE dice à Prov.( Although the vntbrift pelt pe
pocket, yet may bein good time,carrie a wallet.)

Befacier: m. The bag-bearer;or wallet-bearer of a beg-
ging,or beggar ly companie.

Befagué: f. 4 (double-tounged)mattocke.

Befanner. To gine leather a graine, in dreffing ; or to
dreffe a fheepes skin like Spanifh leather ; alfo, as Ba-
zaner.

Befant: m. A Befant ; an auncient peece of golden t
(worth fiftie Sein Tourn.) ee bar the
French kings were acc d to offer at the Male of
their Confecration in Rheims; to which end Heni

the d (after fome difcontinuance of that c. )

se see


cafe of them to be made,and called

en 3 but they were not worth abone a dou-
Aumes-ace,on the dice.
:m.A Se wind. \


b. -
Re er
Befthe:


Big Fiza by Go. gle


D"


Original from


THE-OHIO-STATE*UNIVERSITY


Befche:£ 4 Spade. ;

Befthé: m. ée: f. Pecked,or picked at; alfondiggedope-
ned or broken up,as the earth(by a Befche.)

Befche-bois: m.The bird called a Speight, Heigh-haw,
or Wood-pecker. ;

Befchement: m. A digging, opening,or breaking vp of
‘the earth ; alfo,a pecking,or picking al.

cher. To pecke,or picke,as a bird; alfo,to digopen,or

breake vp the eartb(witb a Befche.)

Befchevet: m. as much as Double chef, & Double


f
8
i
‘ h

]


chevet; Looke Bechevet. à
Befcheur: m. 4 digger,or deluer ; a labouring man.
Befeau: m.That fide of a loafé which in the ouen cloue to
another loafe,and thereby wants cruflinelfe, ({Parifi-


en.)

Besfler. as Beffler.

Befiale. champ b. 4 commion field,ground,or paflure ; 4
Common ; Looke Bofialle.

Beficles. as Befycles; a paire of Spectacles,

Beficlier. 4 Spectacle-maker.

Befier : m. The bearbe Orage.

Befle: m. 2s Beifle.

Befmus: m. 4 fot, « doult, gull, woodcocke, labcocke,


affe.

Bebbche: f. as Hoyau; Looke Bezoche.

Befoing: m. Need,neceffitie,want,or great vfé,of.
Beloing fait vieille trotter: Pro.Need makes theold


wife trot.

Qui a befoing de feu le cerche avec le doigt: Pro.
Befoing, Ne dfill,beboofefill expedient nece(fari

oing. Nee 00 expedient,neceffarie. —

Belo Pane. working, labouring, trauclling ; bnfjing

inf.
Befongne: £. #orke, bufineffe, an affaire; labour, tra-

well


Befongnes de nuit. Ones night-geere.
Befongne taillée. Seeke Tai
Le vite des befongnes. Harueft; time, reaping
time. |
Apres befongne faitte le fol barguigne: Pro. wife
sa à the worke, and fooles agree for it. à
Apres befongne repos & denier: Prov. Eafe and
wealth fucceed labour; Seeke Denier.
Le parefleux aime bien befongne faitte: Pro. The
fusgerd loues to find worke done to his bands.
ne fait fi bien la anne que celuy à qui elle
eft: Prov. No man followes a bufine[fe fo well as be to
whom it belongs.
| Befongné: m.¢e:f. bt, laboured, trauelled in,
buficdyoccipied, filly employed.
Bef , trauell in ; to bufie, oc-


4 ,
pis reg À ; alfo, to doe, or leacher


‘A bien befongner: Pro.The mof:
data eb heh werd or, the aaah sag


worke. |
SLR f. A little worke, finall bufinelfe, trifling
affaire. MS VERT:
Befot. À dillingsor fivill-pough; the lafi, or yougeft ebild
{q. as Vile. Thi
, te
; €: f. À fhouell headed with yron ; or as Befche.


: £ The tilings,dregs,or bottomes of love-vun-
i wine oe. ‘ . “ ?


\: m. A twinn


ca a cn


BES


. Amande beffonnc. To almonds in one‘fhell.
peace i See Beftiail. a
:f. A beaft; alfo,a fot,lmske,doult,lurdaine,leobie

blockbead ; fines A ET a
B blanches. Sheepe,Goats,érc.
Beftes de compagnie. Troupes of wild Swine, confi-
fling of the Sowes, and young Bores, who folow their
dams vatill they be about 18 months old.
Befte douce,ou fauves fallow Deere,red Deere,Roe,
Goat ; any barmeleffe game ; (Our buntfinen cal the
Buck,Doe,Rayndecre,Elke,Beare,Otter,and Martron,
beafis of the Chafe of the (weet foot.)
Befte legicre;e Stag,Hind,Buck,Doe,Roe,Rayndeere.
és mordantes. The Wolfè,Bore,Otter, Fox rc.
Befte noire. À wild Swine.
Befte puante. À Fox,Orter,Badger,Polecat,erc ; any
vermine ; (Our huntfinen call the Roe, Fox,Gray,Ful-
mart,Fitch,Polecat,Squirrell,and white Rat, beafis of
the Chafe of the finking fot.) lunes
Befte re Befte douce;Befte rouflesthe fame,
Beftes de fomme. Horfès,Cammels, Moyles, Affes.
Beftes de voiture. Carriers, or cart-borfes ; draugbt-
borfes,or oxen; pre i
Faire la befte à deux dos enfemble. To lacher.
Prendre du poil dela befte. To takearemedie for a
mifchiefe from that which was the caufe thereof as to
go thin clothed when a cold is taken; or in drunkennes
to fall a quaffing,thereby to reconer bealth,or fobrieties
neeve unto which fence our Ale-knights often fe this
phrafe, and fay, Ginevs a baire of the dog that laft bit


ws.
Vivre en befte. Looke Vivre.
Bonne befte s'efchaufte en mangeant: Pro.We fay,
quicke at meat quicke at worke ; or,be that eats apace,
commonly,works apace, _
Telle befte telle tefte: Pro. Looke Tefte. . .
C’eft folie de fe prendre aux femmes, & aux beftes:
Pro. Tis but a folly to quarrel with women, and bealis.
En vicille befte n’y a point de reflource: Pro.Ofan
old beaf there is no recoucrie ; when an old man runs
into errors, or loofes the vigour of bis fpirit, there is no
bopein him either of amendment,pr of reinforcement.
2 faut avoir mauvaife befte par douceur: Pro.Look
voir.
Le loup fçait bien que male befte penfe: Prov.One
aue ss well be thoughts,or {bifts,of another.
Befteau: m. as Batail. The clapper of a Bell, … :
Beftelette. A brie beaft. Bans
Beftement. sty hi ; witle/ly; heartlefly; dully,


Aine:


Oxen, Sheepe,erc. AT
Beftiail privé. The beafis which we feed and put into
the houfe a nights ; tame cattell ,as Oxen,Kine,Calues,
Ss CPCs - 3
Bet : .Beaflly,fltbie; fenfuall,vicious,rude.
Beftialité: € Beaflineffe, flihinefe, fenfualitie, rude-


Belloie:£.4 little beaft.
Batic peer eu dulets pleckifines wat of rit

+ Le Sy > .
B . To flab, foyne,thruft, gine a floccado vato;


(an old word. 1
Beftourner. To amaxe, aftonifh, make dixxies (an old À
Belper Bed: na a

yclier : m. APRES

ÿ


BEV


Befyn.-well nigh sobioalee, almoft drunke,fonnwbat ouer-
Scene, (v. m.)

Bete. Looke Bette,

Betelle: f. À acim © + À 98
bles the Gilliflower plant; or, baflard Pepper. 4
mong th’ Indians Betle,& Betre.

Betoine:£ Betonie ,Sarxiphagon (am bearbe.)
Betoine coronnaire, ou de couronnes. The Clove
Gilliflower.

Betoine fauvage,#s Armoires ; fiveet Williams,

Betonim. Beef? ; the firft milke a female gines, after the
birth of her young one.

Betofite. a Betoine.

Betourne: com, Dizxie,or giddie in the head. (v.m.)

Betrefcher. To trim,tackleymake tight a fbip,érc ; aff,

to decke, adorne,tricke up ; fetsranke,or difpofe things

orderly,or band{omely ; (an old word.)
:£ des bettes. The hearbe Beet,or Beets.

Bette blanche, The common white Bect, or bef? kind

of Betts.
tte eftrangere. The Roman,or flrange,red Beet.

Bette noire. The blacke Beet,or worft kind of Beets;

( rev cr Dodoneus call the common red Beet

Beta ni

Bette + ons prez. as Berre fauvage. ;

Bette rouge. The common red Beet ; alfo,as;

Bette Romaine. The Roman,or frangesred Beet.

Bette fauvage. Hearbe Pirola, Winter-greene wild

Beets.

Bette-rave. A kind of delicate ved niche LS
led, yeelds a re vermillion fap.


ping, bowfing,quaffing ; and bence ;

Entrer en bettes.To grow wat melo i crn
king; or to fall a chatterin offips whemthey
pa together, hb Late

Beturte : €. 4 finke-holr. :

Beu: m.beué: f. Driunke,bowfed, bed set Guile,
quaffed; fucked up ; receimed,or foaked in. « |
Apres beudodo : Prov. After drinke reff, \

Beuf: th. An Oxe,a Beefes Beefe; Looke Bœuf

‘oy:m.4 ere i ré high pane ot
werie ; See Beffroy. turf

Beufle : m. 4 Bu go vid Oxe. tho
Prendre vn beufle parle mufcau: Prime
4 bard,or Page oy

Beugler. # Bug |

Beur. moe Alubbetly Menke or in ed of


Berke, Thema a faceted deca Pee,
Beuriere: f. 4 churne ; safe Beuriere | EH 0
Butter. Éd


a Sa bieante: Butte: Fe Fatah
Tour de beurre. One of the three
+ Maries church in Rean; built wi :
he of that diocefe fora toeat
- butt Lent. Shin
de beurre cienbha Cee a EE
pet eianers ina


win
Benyessent m. A fipper ; a final drunkar
es nlinesiling tecfingsbowfn,
ro,


Bettes. Beets, oc, (as before im Betces) allo; sping fip- | Bezet:


BIA


Beurriere : £. 4 butter woman.


re oor: ps oc ne
Beuvandes f. Small wine, boufebold wi Pre


Beaman. Ariuer in tbe Prouince of Solongne;called
fo, becaufein Summer it is all mee er up by the earth;
alfo,a drench,or mafh for aborfe,

Beuveter. To drinke,to fip,to fap.

Bou ette. See perd

veur: m. A drinker, fwiller, er ; 4 tolle-
Cela fent fon beuveur d'eau hes we dycerne
by that bow firitt, pare, or poore, a diet be keepes ; or,
that fauors of a poore,or farued, fpirit.
Prodigue, & grand beuveur de vin, n’a du fien ne
four,ne moulin : Pro. ‘The tipling unthriftkeepes nor
myll, nor ouen.

Beuvoire de Venus. The fillers thiflleor tazle.

Beuvrage: m. Beuerage,drinke. -

Bezanne: as Bazane.

Bezant: m. An auncient coyne of gold ; Looke Befant.
Bezans. ones ee 3 À (they muft euer beround,
whole,and of mettall.

Bezanté dor. omer Or yor, charged rer eal 5
atearme of Blafon.

Bezarder-To dye. Barr rag.

Bezer. À Cow to runvp a downe ,palding vp her baile,
when the brixxe doth fling ber.

Aller à Sain& Bezet. To trot, gad, runne, or
prena up and downe, like one that bath a brixxein

Ws tayi

Bezoard: :m. A Beaxar fonc; (breeds in the maw of the
Goat called,a Beaxar.)

Bezoche: f. is,in fome countries, the infirument of Hus-
bandvieteavmed in others Hoyau. Looke Hoyau.

Bezole: £. The name of a certaine fifh,ibats found (only)
in the Lake of Geneva.

pas . as Bians (in maf ie ;

iais: in. Byas,compalfe a ping.
Biais ed te dé is gateor doremade
Je nele prends pas de ce biais. 1 meane it not tbie
wap, 1 takes it not in this manner.


I nes’y print pas de bon biais.He went not therighe
ex L to worke ; be tooke not a right cowrfe i. in the mat- -


Biaifant: m.ante: f: crooking bang loping, chine
Bi ferent Crookingly,obliquely,byas-wife,a lope, with
Biaifer. To kd aftope, fetch a compalfingo on);
Bleue: € tpn Slpenfeyaee compa obliques,
Bie works | bath | ed i due unto |


Original from
THE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY.


BIC

Biberon: m. A tipler,qua, ersbibber,fuce-fpig gots al-
fo, an Ewer; ae injtrument wherewith Surgeons
draw milke womens breafls; alfo, a tap, or fau-
cet. |

Bibet: m. 4 Gaat. ENorm.

Bibette: £4 wbeale,or blifier.

Bible: dB. ca

ibliopole: m. A Boo v',or Stationer.

Bibliotheque : f. À Librarie, ]

Biblot: m. as Bibelot; or a finall (quare peece,in chec-

er-warke,or whereof checker-worke is made.

Bibul: m. The fialke of great Hemlockes , vfed by the
cr people of fome places in flead of a canne,or pot,

Lo drinke in.

Bibule : F Blotting,or browne,paper.

Bicarne: m. The great Veriuice grape.

Bichard: m. 4 Hind calfe ; or, a red Deere calfe.

Biche: f. 4 Hind ; the female of a Stag.

Biche de mer. as Cabrole.

Fed de biche. The gafleof a Croffe-bow ; or,the end

eo


thereof:
Il a mangé de la biche blanche. Said of one that is
ligbt-witted,fhittle-headed,giddie-brain'de.
Bichecoter. To leacher it.
Bichecoteric: f. A {eacheraus tricke,a laftiniaus part ;
firkerie,an odde pranke,or ierke,ia whoorifine.
Bichet: m. A meafire for corne, crc, bolding about
two Parifian bufhels,or rather (according to th’ vacer-
tainetie of meafures) of no certaine (cantling; for in the
countrey neere Lyonsit weighs about 70 pound ; ino-
ther pi but 54; and,
_ Bichet demarrons. (4 facke full of great Chefinuts)
weighs but 36 pound.
Bichcteau : m. A little Hind calfe. 2
Bichette de Lyon. The balfé of the Bichet; or, a inf?
bufbell of Paris. ;
Bichot. 2s Bicheteau ; alfo,a meafure for corne ufed in
ie, and containing about fine of their bu-


Bichotterie; as Bichecoteric.
Bicle ; #5 Bigle. qRab.
Bicoque: f. A little paltrie towne, bold, or fort; not
ftrong ynough to hold outa fiege, nor fo weake asto be
ginenup for words.
icorne :com. Double-horned,hauing two hornes.
Bicornu: m. ué: f. 45 Bicorne,
Bicque: f. A Goat; or,as Biche.
Bidault de calebute ; See Bidet de,&c. ‘
-Bidaulx: m. Cowardly firaglers after an armic sor, as
Bid


| Bidaux. Footmen, fouldiors. (veil mot. :
Re |
Bite m. A ttle nag, or curtall ; alfo, a final Pi-


idet de culebute. Membreviril. _. |
bide rm, A great cage,or open basket to keepe,or feed,
pullesn in. LIRE
Bidonne: £.4 kind of fea Purflane that growesin great
plentie on the Venetian fhores. es
Bicce: f. A fpade; oras ; :
Biecer. ae 12e, delue , or open the ground with a
e,orBefche, ‘
Bien: m. wealth, fubflance, cheuifance, riches, pole fi-
» mens goods; a patrimonie ; alfo,a benefit,pleafiere,fanor,
_ good office,or good turne ; alfo,goodneffe, boneftie, ver-
“Tue, fiaceritie ; alfo,a good thing. oe
‘Biens au foleil. Land gs hou, case
fefions as lye wi es,


£00ds;or paf doves, Looke Soleil. :


can


BIE


. Biens vacans. Waifes,ftrayes,wrecks sa purfe,or trea-


Sire found ; any land, or thing, that aeuer bad owner ;
or hath beene loft,or abandoned, by the owner.
oom de bien. Honefl,and (among fouldiors) valiant
ople.
Ca fentfon bien. That is comely, feemely, decent,
orderly well done,euen as it fhould be.
C’eft du bien de vous. ‘This is of your courtefie or fu-


» nour fir.
Bien perdu bien connu: Prov. Goods loft good


knovone ; we difterne not the worth of things untill we

be deprined of them.

Les biens de fortune paflent comme la lune : Pro.

Fortunes goods are flitting like the Moone.

Vn bien acquiert l'autre : Prov. Oze good thing be-

ets another, ,

e bien commun on ne fait pas fouvent mon-
ceau: Prov. Men often grow not rich by publicke
treafiure.

Grand bien nevient pas en peud heure:Pro.Great

matters are net compat in a moment.

be) bien fanshaine : Prov. No good thing vngrud-

ged at.

Quand les biens viennent les corps faillent: Pro.

when goods encreafe the body decreafes ; moft men ere

they grow rich are ott.

Qui le bien voit, & le mal prend, fait folie en bon

efcient: Prov. He that difcernes the good,and chufès

the bad,merits a bable.

Dz gens de bien vient rout bien: Prov. Frem good

men comes all goodneffe.

Les gensde bien font toufiours bien, ont toufiours

bien, font toufiours bien: Prov.

Dieu donne hiens, & bœuf, mais ce n’eft pas par la

corne: Pro. er Bœuf. ©

On doit dire dubien le bien: Prov. Of good things
we muft gine good words.

Bien. adverb. well, good, right, content; fitly, aptiy,
commodioufly ; filly,thr oughly ; in good cafe, with good
reafonsas it fhould be.

Bien de par Dieu. Oz then ; to it 1 pray you ; in Gods
_ name be it. -

Bien 3 faire. Much to doe.

Bien au net. Exaétly, perfectly.

Bien que. Although, albeit that; fuppofe, or put the

cafe that,

Auffi bien ne faittes vous rien. For, or becaufe, you
~ doeno good init. GRab. 7

Et bien. well then,agreed,1 will then; alfo(interroga-

tinely) Will you ? What meane you? What [ay yous W

doe you purpofe to doe ?

Ou bien. Or elfe ; otherwife


+ Que bien que mal. Jad: ferent reafonabl fo,one


way or other ; 1 know not bow.
Eftre bien enfemble.To agree wel,to be good friends.
Illeur print bien que. They bad good bik hey might
thanke God,or.it fell out well for Vois
Celafentfonbien. That is ey feemely, decent,
orderly, well done,euen as it fhould be. i
Bien a crié la loup qui fa
A dr to fome purpofe that recouers what be com-
plaines for.

ien a en fa maifon qui de fes voifins eft aimé:Pro,
He lines weil at home that is beloued abroad.
Bien courroucé de aa pleure : Prov. He that is an-


ge throughly fheds few teares.


ien de fa place part qui fon ami y Jaiffe: Prov. He |
fitly leaues bis roome that leaues a friend it. —
K iy


ercfcoult: Pro. He


nn) OF
>


BIE BIG
Bien pouffé longuement chancelle: Prov. Looke much fifband is but very courfe meat.
Chanceller. En petite cau fouvent on trouve


bieure :
Qui bien aime chaftie: Prov. He that loues through- | Prov. Great worth is ofien found in things of. Jal


unifbes through that loues we bome apparance.
as opus ‘hee sande page Bice Biais. Bias.


Qui Qui bien ar ant oublie: Pro, Seche Aimer. Bife. 4 counterfeit iewell ; alfo,as Bifte.
Qui bien eft ne fe bouge: Prov. He thats well bad m. éc:f. Rafed, defaced,blottedor put out.
beft bold bim fo ; or, let not things fitly placed be re- | Bi rene m. À rafing, defacing blotting ov wiping out.
moued. Biffe: m. 4 foole ,affe doult rwoodcocke,coxcombe,pinny-
Qui ui bien fera bien trouvera: Prov. He that dees bammer ; alfo,as Rife; or one that feemes, or would
fall fpced well. Seeme wife,and yet is and ener will be,foolifh.
. Qu i bien gaigne,& bien efpargne deuient rantoft | Bifter. To deface,blot,rafe,ripe out.
e: Prov. He that gets mach,and {pares much, will if. A defacing, A rione blotting out ;
fear be rich, alfo, any thing, that though it locke faire, 15 ef little
Qui bien tire deux en a : Prov. Looke Tirer. worth,
Qui bien veut mourir bien viue : Prov. He that Biffeure: £ rafing, defacing,or blotting out,
would die well had necd to line well. Biforme: com. Double-férmed ; that hath,or is of, tro
Qui bien veut parler bien doit pourpenfer: Prov. | _ fewerall formes,ov fhapes.
Looke Pourpenfer. Rp :£. Biformitie, deuble forme, à duple or two-
Qui bien veut payer bien fe doibt obliger : Prov.
He that meanes to pay truly giues good fecuritie. Bifourché: :m. ée:f. Denble-forked ; divided into, or
Biendifance: f. Eloquence,well-(peaking. fire of, two (fèrked) parts.
Bien-en-allée : f. 4 farewell; @Parifien. | Bifre: m.as Bievre.
Bienfaict: m. A benefit, good turne,pleafire,kindneffe, | Biforcation: f. 4 biforcation; a forking 5 forked par-
auour. tition, dinifion,or forme,
ienfaiét n'eft iamais perdu: Pro. One neuer loo- | Bigame:m. Twice married who bath had two wines.
es by doing courtefies. Bigarré : m. ée: f. Diver{j wat a RENE of many
Bicnfaicteur. A benefactor; a beneficiall friend; one | . colours,of fundrie hues motley-like.
that doeth a good turne,or great pleafure. Oeil bigarré. Looke Ocil.
Bienheuré. RE 4 «Per A kind of cherries, which be halfe white,
Bienheurer. To make bappie, profperous, for alfe red.


Bienheureté :f. Blfednesbapoee Repro Parme: m. A variation or diuer fifjing, as in co-
rit ie, ours,
Pons oe E Happie fortunatprofperous, ee ent Dinerfly , of fiundvie colours, motley-
iffe- leffe
Bien-public : m. The Commonwealth; alfo,a faire title Biganer. To dinerfifie,varieyningleor make,of fundrie
| giuen toa foule rebellion of the Earle of Charrolois, | colowrs.
and other French Lords, againft Lewis the elewenth. Bigarrer fes propos. To difcourfe of divers and fun-
Biens. Looke Bien. drie matters at once; or, to run odly, and fantaftically,
Bienfeamment. Comey agreeably well-befecmingly, | fromone matter unto another.
with good correfpondencie. Pigarieue: fV'arietie;or diner fitie,as of] Sundry colours
Bienfeance: f. A comelineffe becomming, fecmelineffe, d together.
theses ;alfo,congruitiéscorrefpondencie. — Bigaraige: f. Motley colour. (y


Bienfeance de, Te » fit for as land ere. ao m. An affe,foole,pod ne: 3 or as Bigot.
:m, ante: f. Comely, feemely, agreeable, BigcaneprBigerre; com. Odde, humorous, feta afi
mel-bfieming, we 3 affo, congruous, or
, dent; befitting,or well fitting. ot Odly,bumoroufty, futtafiically.
Bienve cr. To welcome, receine g ; intertaine | Bigearrer. as Bigarrer.
~_ kindly, prie as Bigarreure ; alfo,odneffe of bumor,fin-
Blenvénement: :m. A welcome,or welcomming. ‘aflicalne(fe.
Bienvienner. To welcome; as Bienveigner. Bigerrerie: :f. A difference,or varictie of colours, fefbi- }
Bienvenuë: £.4 welcome; bence,Payer fa bienvenué. poe a a one fubieét; alfo, fantafticalneffe, or
_ Topay bis svelcom,as (thellers de at thei firft entrance, -odne(é, of humor.
À or admiffion, into a fcboole. Bigle: com. Senn fining, nig ashen oc Rie :
eer. ienvoulu: m. ué : f. well beloved we thnghh se nr is
- | | ceedi d à intingy sensing ase. i
e:f. 4 semer
Bi Fe Ab sp Vie, or es are
nocke.
Bigne: com. Cf fouted,pr or rump. fr
Bign S: m. “Haha ons PRE re
; ro or butter, and ie fn 3 bunnes, Lenten
oe — loaues: smade like {mall pancakes.
rl eS <
Smits ale basing te borne knoe,


à ercormers.
By APervincleyer Nest; (4Breton.
t. as Bigorneau. Bi


Original from


MEL ET gle | AA IHE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


dt ain


ne RS nes de ee de D di Qu es ii, à a, des à
© L 7. < : “ [Te Fe Let .


BA LC


BIN


Bigot. (Anold Norman word ( fignifying as much as,De
par Dieu ; or our, for Gods fake) made good French,
and fignifying)an bypocrite,or, one that feemeth much
le holy than he is ; alfo, a [èrupulous,or fuperflitions

et à


Bigotage:m.Hypocrifie,bolines only in fhew; alfà, feru-
pee: varie, Sisperftitious déuotion. an

Bigotation. as Bigotage,or Bigotifc.

Bigotie ; ov, Bigotife: f. Hypocrifie ; fuperfition, too
Much curiofitie,or fcruple of conference.

Bigotte, Chaufes à la bigotte. Clofé,or firait veniti-
ans tyed below the knee ; Priefts breeches.

wy tne m.¢e: f. Turned hypocrite, or, made full of

truple.

Bigotter. To make fuperfitions, to fill with bypocrifie ;

orto infect with too much [cruple of confcience.


Bigu as Bigarryge,
| Bihay. de bihay bias Romy crooking, obliqueljyaflope


¢
with a compaffc ; Looke Biais.

Bihayfer. To crooke ; 10 go by bias, fetch a compaffe,
land aflope, turne awry; alfo,to place bias, put com-

age, make aflope, fet avery.

Bihore. 4 word,or voice wherewith French carters ba
we on their horfes.

Bihoreau: m, A kind of little Heron, which ee
rocks,and billy places,and bath a peake of feathers fal-
line es on the binder part of bis bead. LS

Bijon :m. Liquidroxen ; tarre.

Bile: f choller,gall; anger,,fretfulneffe ; melancholy in-
termixed with choller.


Bileux : m.eufe: f. Angrie, chollericke, teaftie, full of |


Wl, full of rancor.
Bil aca ag


Billard pied billard. 4 (play foor.


Billardier: m.erc:f. Baker-legd ; that bath crooked
Legs,or goes imat the knees. ,
Billart:m. A hort and thicke truxchion, or cudgel ;
bence,the cudgell in the play at trap; and a billard,or
the flicke wherewith we touch the ball at billyards ;

alfo,a baker-legd fellow. À


Bille: £ Afmalt bowle, or billyard ball; alfo, a 4


oche of a tree to grafton; alfo, a ingot, wedge, or
tk 8


gad of mettall; alfù money, coine, chinkes ; (Barago-


uin) alfo, a kind of fea fifh,that bath a white linerun= |


ning along from her gills to her taile; otberwift,refem-

bling a Pearch,

Danfer en bille. To daunce verie lufiily.

Ce n’eft bille pareille. Thus is no euen match; the coin
* is net of like allay. \

Cela courrabille pareille. That fhall run the fame
© courfe, vndergo the fame hazard ; that fhall taft,or be


© partaker, of whatfoeuer betides the other.
Blouse dE Croffe barred.
Billeboquet : m. 4 cord,or line(bauing at either end,


and in the middle,a flicke faftened unto it) wherewith
Gardeners menfitre Le their beds, ré: alfo,
Pa op 68 line fromthe middle of a
fick hollowed at the one end,or beth, for the receining
thereof. KE
Biller. To play at Billiards ; alfo, to faften the rep
boat to Nooo stich runs pita rs the Pi sh of
the borfès that are to drawit. sg
Billeron. la Maille billeron; Looke Maille. —
Billet. 4 Jittle bill, note, or ticket (fucke vp ona poft,
5 ser abil fool affa tile bowie, fime
e:f, A billet ; owle, fime-
v than an ordinarie one ; al/oa pal toll,
3 à called of a little log sits hay on


a tree for a figne, ov to give warning, ther of.
Billettes nthe art oly Croffe hore Bone fleele,
Somewhat aboue the bead of a boare (peare, to kecpe it
From running too farre and therby the beaf from com
ming too neere bim that affailes bim.

Bille-vezées : £ Trafh;trifles,toyes,nifles,

Billion : m. A million of millions .

Billon: m. A twig, or flute of a fill yeares growth ; al-

_ fo,bafe, cried dovone or called in, ceyne, which either
bath no filuer in itor not fo much as it fhould hane;al-
fo,the mettal wherof bafe coyn is made; whence,Mon-

* noÿe noire # alfo tearmed,Monnoye de billon ; &
the filuer that bath abone a fixt part of Empirance, or
allay in its held no better than Billon.

Billonnage: m. 4 melting, or making of Billon ; al/o,
(more particularly)a hanging of one peece of coine for


another; or of one kind of coyne into another; an
TV


coyne.

Billonné:m.ée : f. Melted,or made into, Billon ; al,
changed,as a bad peece of coine for a good one,or,as a
good one into a bad one; altered, melted, and (in the
melting ) imbafed , as coyne (without warrant for
it.


Billonnement =m. as Billonnage. My
onner, To make of,or melt into, Billon; alfe, (more
particularly) to change a bad peece of coyne for a good
one,or a good one izto a bad one;to alter,melt,<>(in the
ae imbafè,the kings coyn without any warrant
07 it,

Billonneur : m.A4x ordinarie melter of coine,or mettal
into Billon; alfo,a changer of bad coyne for good,or of
good into bad;one that without anthoritie,and to make
a gaine to himfelfe, alters, or melts, and (in melting)
imbafes, coine,

Billos. Certaine impofts leuied vpon wines : @Breton.

Billot: m. A billet,blocke,or log(of wood; )al/oya wedge,
lingot, or lumpe(of mettall ;) alfo, as Piece à pom-
mette


Homme neuf,& de billot. A rude, or unfifbioned ; «
raw or unexperienced, fellow,
Lars 2€. The mar{h mallow, moorifh mallow white


Bimauve fauvage. Moufè mallow, wild mallow,
… Veruine mallow, cut mallor, Simons mallow,
Bimbeloté : m.ée :f, Furnifhed with paultrie ware,or
pedling finffe. |
Bimblotier : m. 4 paultrie Pedler; or, as Brimblo-
tier. :
Binage : m. as Binement. :
Binaire. nombre binaire, The aumber of nwo.
Binarchie. The ioyat rule,or equal authoritie, of two
Princes in one countrey. . Ae I Ege
Binart :m. 4 wry-neckt fellow. Neti tins Pak
Biné:m.ée:f. Digged laboured, or weeded, as avine;


3


mauthorifed altering , melting , or imbafing of


turned vp as tbe ground in a vineyard , the fecond |


lime, ” G


Binement : m. Ph ce grubbing æ of |
¢ invineyards as


weeeds,eoc; the fecond wor ds a.
foone as thevines baue branched, and put forth their
clu :


iner. To labour, or turne up, the ground ; to digge, or.
B grub Lie i NT time; (e=
cial May; when commonly the vines baue put
Bineur : m, À labourer,dligger,turner vp of the ground,
grubber vp of weeds,in vineyards. | =
Bingu. Troubled mnolefted vexed : Gafcon. =


Binoire. |


Po ae |


L


Lo


ES Ser dit ae a oe


BIS | BYE T


Binoire. as Bifnoire.


inot Bifhoire : f. grubbing ur ;
Bi gr :m, The fecond tilth, caring, or digging of forke,or grubbing axe; a forked,
#


or double tongued mattocke,or pick-axe,
Bifon : m. The Bifon ; a kind b-backt, rougb-ma


Binotement. as Binotage, ned,broad-faced,and great eyd, wild Oxe, that will
Binoter. To till,eare dig, land or vineyards, the fecond se be Fa as long as be ae fand, nor tamed afier
time, u taken,


Binotis : m. 4s Binotage.

Bios. God : € Gafc, qRab.

Bipartient. Parting,or diuiding into two,

Bipedal : male: f. Double footed ; alfo,two foot long,or
wide,


Biquoquet : m. The peake of a Ladies mourning bood.
v.m


Bifongne. as Bifon ; .4//6,a filthie knaue,or clone ; «
‘tasked bieaian, ba al arpaera ;
ifoüart : m. A pers Pedlar, who in a long packe,or
maund(which be carries, for the moft part open, and
(banging from bis necke) before bim)bath Almanacks,
Bookes of newes, or other trifling ware, to fell,
Bifque : £. A faulr,at Tennis.
Bifac : m. A wallet,
ifie :f. An Adder. 7
Manier en bifle. as Serpeger ; #bem a borfe mana-
esasan Adder goes, wasling > wagling , or glia


UJ
Biffefre. Fh lucke ; (fromBillexte, which is beld w=
Luckie.)


Biflexte : m. The Biféxt; the leape yeare ; or, one day
B added in foure yeare.
ifSines, Silken words, etearmes.
Billes Fe Binole. 1.
Biftarde : £ The great bird called, a Buftard.
Bistorie: f. À kind of crooked, fharpe-pointed,and dou
ble-edged launcet, ufed by Chirurgians in th opening


of Jores, oc.

Bifloné :m.éc: £. Crooked , booked , beughtie, a~
wrie .

Biftorin. as Biflorie.

Biftorte : f. Biflort, Britannica, Snakeweed, Pafhiens,
Oiflerloit.

os ge grande, Female Adderwort , or Snake-
weed.
Biftorte petite. Male Adderwort,or Oiflerloit,fmall
Snakeweed,


gee as Virer: @Gale,

Biaique: f, A bigh-going fea, or tempeft at fea, cau-
ir) y whirle-winds, and accompanied with guftes

rame,

Bis: m. bife : £. Browne, duskie, fivart,blackifb.
Pain bis. Rye bread,courfe bread, browne bread.
Pierre bile. Looke Pierre.
Roche bife. A hard and blewifhrocke,or quarrey, of


flone.
Ou à bis,ou à blanc. By booke or by crooke, one way
or another.

Bifacquier : m. 4 (erip-carvier, or wallet-bearer.

Bifagué. as Befagué.

Bifantin.as Befant: So teavmed of Byfantium,or Con-
ftantinople,where it was firft currant, as it is alfo at
this day in moft parts of Afia.

= : fas Guifarme. +R

ifa : m, A great great gran 7

Bi£blanc. wheaten,or ee

Bifcantine : f. Drinke made of poker Ket

Bifcapit. (among Exchequer men) a double imploiment
of one fumme, in an account, &c.

Biscaye: €. A vantage at Tenis.

Bifchard. 4 fawne,or bind-calfe.


Bifchet. as Biche. Biflortier : m. 4 osé sers or pefile of wood.

Bisclant. Squiating,looking askew. Bite : £ The bearbe called Beets ; Looke Bete.

Bifcle, as Bigle. Prendre du potage de la bite. To. take in fume oyle

Biscoter. To/wine. of man ; to de that a maid fhould not do.

Bifcuit : m. A bisket ; bisket bread, : Bites: f, The bits ; two great woodden pegs whereto the
S'embarquer fans bifcuit. To gee abroad without | cable is faftened when an anker islet full.


fall
_Bitume :m. Bitumen, beld by fème to bee a faft, and
clammie earth, lome, or clay, fomewhat refembling
pitch,and of the nature of brimflone; by others, (more
probably) a fat skum,or foame driuen by the wind,and
waues,on the bankes of the Paleftinian lake, Mare
Mortuum ; whence commetb onely the beft (for other
waters alfo yeeld Bitumen)tbough verie varely: Our or-
dinarie {hop Bitumen is but a compofition of Pitch,Pe-
triolum, and fome other fich like fimples, bowfoeuer |
Apotbecaries would make men beleeue it is the Pale-
que Bitumen(@Mathiolus,)
itume À ien. Apollonian kitumen (inferiour
to the Paleftinian) ws alfo, the feame of acertaine wa-
_ ter,thats neere vatothecitie Apollonia(now Valoni-
a)inEpirus,


Bituminer. To annoint, befmeare, ot mingle with Bitu-


OM a ait Bias à ET et |

, Eur L As panna ete if &
1h lammie. c auing as Bitumen. sd
bitumineux. Clauer gentle, Treacle Clauer,


Biver.


bisket ; to enter into an aétion without füfficient
nn : to undertake that which be wants dines er
abilitie,to performe, as ,
Manger avec vne faim de bifcuit.To eat very gree-


dib. -
Bifcutean : m, Smaller fine bisket bread.
Bise: £..4 North wind. - rr
Bife craverfe. À Nerth-wefl,ov North-eaft wind.
Bife:£. A delicate Italian fruit that refembles the Na~
eau. à
Biles(rhe feminine of Bis; ) LookeBis,
que. Abel becelng, or fain ; fica fope-
ae De mesa sin a a ron eae,
f Labo dela foffeferavalleraenbiféau. shal bee
made [cai fing. Re cris
Bd nd f Wrought, or fript with plate, as fome
E Plate (of gold, fluer , or copper,) wherewith
fact pape
he Bifext,or leape yeare ; which comes by
oure yeare,. 2


re
aes


7 =


greffon vefiyle.

faire bivet. Totake the end ofa low-burnt can-
out of | Befecksicent with a drop of talicw make it

a = ER Has _ flicke up edge of the candleflicks nofe.

 Bifheur. as Bincur. | RE EE Vol LA 3: À Faataficall trickes, odde parts umo


CRE we . . Original:from
HT EN) gle PATHÉ OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY =


‘BAL IAG


rows prankes; alfo, traf, miles; vriles, tapes.

Bizarre :com. bats bumorous,gid-
dieh Lfe conceited, barre braind ; alfoj-diuers,

or dinerfified in fafhion,vr in colour ; and bence ;
Habillement bizarre, A garment of motley, or of
fündrie colours, diftinguifhed by feucrall peeces.

Bizarrément. Odly, fantaftically ; of findrie fafbions,
of diners colours. ù

| Bizarrerie :f. Fantafticalneffe, toyifhneffe | bumorou/~
ne peg toy, aw odde pranke, a fantafti-
caktricke.

Bizarreure:f. Dinerfitie of colours, or fafhion in one
fübreët.


Bizart. as Bizarre. .
Bize. as Bife; The North wind; alfo; a kind of fnall
Tannie,or fifh like a Tunnie. :
Bizeau d'une pinfe defer. The floping point, end, or
tongue ofan leauer; Looke Bifeau. :
| Bizet: m. 4 kind of finall Stockedoue, or Queeft , re-
émbling a Partridec,but much worfe meat, 1: -
Bladier: m. 4 Marchant,or Ingroffer of corne.
Bladier:m.ere: f. 0/07 belonging to,corue.
rd: m.arde : f Pale, wanne, lew, bleake of ¢
cmef decayed bue.
Ocil blaffard. Looke Ocil,
»conr Somewhat palewanae,or decayed in


colour, )

| Blaicr. Seigneurblaier. ‘The Land-lord that may a-

merce all fuch forreiners,as turne their cattell into the

wall grounds, or vaines paftures, belonging unto bis

Lordjhip; which without bis permiffion (payed for)they
ought not tobaue done.

sep :com.  Palewanne, bleake, wbitifh, dead co-
ed. .

| Blaimeur:f. Palenefe, wanneffeybleakeneffe ; a dead,

' pair ria ret it


it. To wax pale bleake anne wbite.
Blaireau : m. 4 Bad griqueie
Blair. Droïé de baies Eds navet v0 fine ey


forreiners, that turne their cattell inte the vaines pa-

 ftures of his Manor, without bis leaue,and permifiion;
or as in Blayrie, x

æ Paisde blairic. 4 corne countrey ; a countrey aboun-
: ding in corne,or that bath great flore of corne growing


att, À

Blanc : m. Ablanke white, wbiteneffe, or white thing;
\ thevwbite, or marke of a paire of buts; a blanke ofpa~
pet; a blanke ina lotteries alfo,whitelime, or whiting
© for walls,érc ; alfo,the balfe of a Sol, a peece of money
\ whichwe call alfo,a blanke ; alfo, the whiter fide of a
skinne of parchment ; or, that Jide which cloue to the
- de chapon,perdris &c, The brawne of a ca
pres JERS TAL
lanc d'eau. The white water Lillie, water Rofe,

' white Ne: i GRA MO tented


Blanc d'E . Cerufe, or white Lead wherewith


women paint, a
» Blancdeplomb. The fame, > : ~ ate
anc dePouille. The fame. ais
) Grand ic. Is worth à Sol,or two ordinarie ones.
Allayé au blanc.Or allayé au blanc. Gold allayed
= ees line To arme with white, and compleat
| Oudbis,ouablanc. Byhokeer by crooke, by right
| or by wrong, one way or another, ©
49 Celuy qua point de blanc en l'oëil. The Dinel;


- ow


| * aff a cleane Gentleman; one that bath neuer aerolfe


£ LA =


to bleffe bim with,

Mettre à blanc. To fripinto bis fhirt ; to rifle of; or

turne out of, all. .

Mettre haut le blanc à la butte, Tobold a vendible

thing at abigh rate; alfo, to propound unto one amat-
. ter which is aboue bis reach;or capacitie.

Toucher au blanc.To ftrike the white; to bit thenaile

onthebead. ‘ le


ebead.
Blanc :m. Blanche : £ white ; alo, boarie.
. Blancbois, Box, Poplar, Afbe;Alder and other fuch
-trees,wbofe wood 1 no timber.’
Bois blanc. Priuet,Pimprint: @Lionnois,
Blancs yeux.gens aux blancs yeux. Cewards, das
rt mee white-lixered, qeale-mouthed
es.
Carte blanche. A blanke, See Carte.
Dimanche de blanches. Palmes-Sanday.
Efpée blanche. 4 raked.or vnfheathed(aô,à bloua-
leffesor peaceable, (word; ) whence; ,
Cela ne fe fait point alefpée blanche.rhat thing's
aot done without found bobs,or bloudwipes.
Fievres blanches. The Ages wherewith maidens,
that baue the greene fickeneffé,be troubled,
Fleurs Backes The whites(a feminine difeafe.)
Journée blanche. 4 Holy-day,or play-day. 1
Ligne blanche. The lower part of the bellie where.
the mufiles thereof doe end(a tearme of Anotomie.)
Menton blanc. (#heace) la vertu ne fut iamais à
menton blanc. Nexer bad white, or boavie chin,viz,
newer decayed,or grew old.
Monnoye blanche. white money ; coyne of braffe,or
copper Pliered ouer. Were
Nihil blanc. Seeke Nihil.
Oeuvre blanche. The making of all kind of yron
tooles,as wedges hedging bils patchets, orcwherwith
woodiscut. = ==
Pieds blancs. Ia les pieds blancs. He paffes eue.
where freely,or without paying ought, (from a cu-
they baue ia France, 10 take no toll for fach bor-
fès as baue foure white feet.) ‘
Celt le cheval aux quatre pieds blancs. Mayfrom
the fame veafon beare the fame fignification; yet is it
mo! vfed to exprelfe,a Companion that promifes much,
and performes nought ; ot fuch'a one as fails bis friend
at a pinch; (Looke Cheval.) :
» Pommeblanche. 4 paleapple. |
~ Solz,ou livres blancs..As before,in Monnoye blan-
* che, Silver Soussor two fhilling peeces of filuer.
Tunique blanche. One of th'eyes principal tunicles;
. comes from th'inner skitne of th’ eye lids, imbraces all
\« the eye,and bindes it unto the parts that bee aboutit. |
Blanc-doux. 4 white fiveeting ; (aa apple whereof ex-
"cellent cyder 15 made.) :
Blance : f white wheat, [quare eared wheat. :
anchatds: m. Az order of Frierswho goe ordinarily
ia white fheets and weare neither hats nor fhooes.
Blanchaftre : com, whitely; whitifp ; pale, wan, fome-
what white,inclining to white. |
Blanche: fa Blance ; Alfo,the Queene Dowager, fo
called of the people of France, becauft fhe ener mour-
ned in white; a Sion altered at the finerall of Hen-
rie the fecond by the late Queene Motber:al/o,wbiting,
or whiteliming = bad
» Des blanches. 4 kindof the fifcalled pleats.
= Blanche d'aigneaux. white lamme or white budge.
PT Saga
«The Sea grousd-Pine(a w


a


Original-fre
THE)GHIO:STATE


VERSES de
À » ER Fr
til L ML" | ”


BLA


BAL JA!


Blanche-putain. ‘The bearbe Ranke-goat, or flinking


Motherwort,
Blanche-pute. as Blanche-puce.
Blancho-qqueue. The ranenous Kite called, a Ring-


taile.

Blanchet : m. A blanket for a bed ; alfo, white wollen
cloth ; alfà,a peticote thereof; alfo, the apple called,
awhite fweeting.

Blanchet: m.ette : f. #bitifh ; or,a little white,

Blanchette: £ Fine white flower of wheat.

Blancheur : f. whiteneffe.

Blanchi : mie: f Blanched,whited whitened; alfo,for-
ted, or fhified,with cleane linnen.

Blanchitment. as Blanchiflage.

Blanchir. To blanch, white, whiten, make white ; alfo.
to whiten,or grow white ; alfo, to fort, fuite, or flift,
with cleane limnen.

Blanchiffage : m, Awhitnine ; « whiting or whitenli-

ming ; a pargetting white ; ‘lf blanching.

Blanchifseur :m. A white dauber, or white lamer ; al-

@ awbitener of clothes.

Blanchifleufe: f. 4 Laundreffe,or woman that efes to
whiten clothes,

Blancque: f. A blanke in rifling, or,im alotterie; and
bencd :


nce ;
Teu de la Blanque.A rifling,or loterie.
Blancs-manceauxsrbite cloakes ; an order of begging
Friers ; Looke Manteau.
: m, A whittaile; or bird of her bigneffe,
thats veric fat, and very good meat.
Blande: f. A Salamander ; called fo of ber flow, ov foft,


gate.

Blandi: m.ie: f. Blandifhed, flattered, footbed, fmeo-
thed,gloxed with,frwned on ; allured,inueagled with
aire words, ;

Blandices: f. Soothings, flattcrings, blandifhments; al-


ements jinticements,


| Bl r.To blandifh, flatter, Son Ki with, favone on,


ma + sp weather unte, pleaft,delight, or tickle the
affeétion with faire words ; alfo,to inueagle , allure,


intice,by gentle tearmes;or meanes.

Blandiffant.Soothing.finoothing,g with,pleafing,
flattering, fomning on; inueagling, inticing,
With faire words.


Blandiflement : m..4 blandifhment ; a foothing, finoo-
thing, tickling of the mind, and affection with tearmes
of flatterie ; a clawing a gloxing with ; aniaueagling,
alluring jnticing by faire words.

eee

flattering fj acke ; alfo, an allurer

ie grd are i 4

ureau : m. The white c in fome

sleundrell apple, part


Lancaues 490,4 coyne thats worth about
a penie Tour.

Bee A kind of the beft white wine of Langue.

Blanquette. The nameof a delicate white Summer

Bhphard & Blaphaftre. as Blaffard; & Blaffa-


Blan : ns rebukeable, reproous
we tobe ceniwed or found fu with, ge:


checke ; acenfure; a re.
redargution ; alfa, an im-


found or quoted by a Lord in the Si deliuered bi
Spb quoted by #ruey ed bim


Blaiiné : m, ée: f, Blamed, rebuked, chidden, taxed,
Soent,yeproued, cenfiured, condemned ; difallowed, dif.
commended,accufed, fond fault with,

Blafiner. To blame, rebuke,checke, taxe, chide,reproue
reprebend; cenfure ; accufe, difallow, difcommend,
condemne, find fault with.

Blafner l'adveu. A Lord to difallow of, wrangle ax
boxt,or,utterly to refifè as faultie,or defectine,the fur-
delinered bim by bis tenant,

Blafon: m, Armes,or,a.coat of Armes; alfo, the feutchi-

 on,or fhield wherein Armes are painted,or figured; al-
nar mo blazing of Armes ; alfo,prayfé, com-
Blafon funcbre. A fimerall Ovation,

ant: m.ante : f.Blazing Armes ; alfo prei
extolling,commending ; alfà (the DD cu
difpraifing detratling from,

Blasonné:m.ée : f. Blazed, as a coat,or feutchien of
Armes ; alfo, praifèd, extolled, commended ; alfo, (the

- contrarit) difpraifed, reproacbed detratted from.
Onner, To blaxe Armes ; alfo,to praife, extoll,com-
mend ; or , to publifh the prayfès , divulge the per-
Settions , proclaime the vertues of; alfo (the contra-
4 toreprooue, difpraife, derogate, or detraë from;
(fn which fence we alfoufe the word,blaze.)

Blafonneur : m.A Herauld; or,skilfull blazer of Arms;

pr reuiler,detratter, euill fpeaker, foule mouthed


afphemateur :m. A blafphemer ; a reniler of God; a
railer on goodneffe,
Blafphematoire : com. Blafpbematorie | blafpbe-


mous,
heine : m. Blafpemie; an opprobrious reuili
God,or che horrible execration er form A
seule ¢ oath, wherein Gods name is abufed,
Blafphemé:m.ée:f. Blafpbemed.
Blasphemer. To blafpbeme, curfe, reuile God, or bis
workes, (as they be bis.) oe
er. To foment,moyften,or bath gently with the band
a burt Lys about a borfe.)
Blatir. Te kuit,contradi,gather up,draw, or [hrinke in,


himjelfe.

Blattaire. Mothe-mulleyn(anbearbe.)

Blatte:f 4 certaine moath which gnawes both cloth,
and bookes ; alfo,a beetle; alfo, a kind of red wheat;
alfa filkevorme ; alfd,as Belette.

Blatte byfance: The fmall, fmooth, and long fhelt of
a certaine fifh;vfed in perfumes,and called in fhops,O-
nyx,&, vnguis odoratus.

Blattier : m. A marchant,or ingroffer of corne.

Blavée : £. Corne lard; or, land which bath corne grow
ingonit.

Blavelles.as Blaveoles,

Blaveoles : £ Blew bottles, Blew blawes, (orne flow-


- ers.
Blaves. as Blaveoles ; Or,wild Poppie.


Blavier : m.ée:f. Of, or belonging to corne, or corne


land.

: Sergent blavier. Ax Officer that watches, and looks
unto corne grounds vntill they be reaped or cut.
Blaureau. «s Blaireau. :
BlayerSigneutblaet. And bris Dri de


t Corne lands, corne groxnds, corne coun-
beryl 2 ‘come grownd,er corne coin alte
ding


)t .


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


| Some places, be turned, by fome priniledged perfons,in-

“7 10 commen corne grounds .

Pe! Droit de blayrie.Libertie,te turne bis cattell a gra-
: 0 sing À common corne grounds ; or, as in Blairie.


. a
x Blece-efprit. (For,Bleffe-cfprit) Soule-burting, [pirit-
| _ wounding. ; à.


Bleceure : £. as Blefure.
ab Bleche: com, Flaggie,ouer foft; puft up with an vn-


2, po funefe.


à Bled: m. (Any manner of) cornes and particularly (or
when tisvfed wishous fric al i
Bled barbu..4 kind of Panicke,tearmed by fome,Tur-
hie Hirfe,by others, out-landifh Panicke, or bearded
ys wheat ; alfo the ordinarie bearded wheat,

f Bled bernage. Me/liz,or moulture corne; Wbeat,Rie,
and Barley mingled ; alfo, corne that grew on a mans
owne land, or in bis owne foyle ; corne of that countrey,

or of a certaine countrey.
| Bled frime. Hor/i- flower, Oxe-wheat, Cow-wheat ;
i 4 Blacke-wbeat.
\ Bled d'Inde. as Bled de Turquie.
| Bled leger. Spelt,or Zea; acorne which makes light
and fauoric,but hot verie nourifhing, bread.
7 -Bledlocar. Saint Peters corne ; (a kind of wall Bar-


ley.)
Bled meftail. Meflin ; wheat, Rye, and Barley, min-


led Mars. March corne ; any corne thats vfually
fired in March; alfo,as Excourgeon,
mouture, Moulture corne ; or Me fli
Re. Bled noir. Blacke Ea, fen tee! , Oxe-wheat,
1 Bled poullart,& é.as Bled locar.
Bled rouge. Ordwarie red wheat; called by fome
~ Keatiflmen, Duck-wheat,and Normandie wheat,
Ne Bled Sarrafin.Freach wheat,Bucke-wheat, Bolymong
(a verie courfé graine ;) alfo,as Bled de Turquie.
Bled tremés. March corne, Summer corne ; fuch corne
r \ as is ripe within three monetbes after it is fowen.
Bled Dre ets.
Bled de Turquie.Turkie corne, Turkie wheat;(wher-
of there be diuers kinds, differing in colour.)
à Traite de bleds. An impofition of iy. Xe
‘ lings Tour. upon eucrie tunne of wheat (and ratably,
4 vpon all forts of graine)tranfported.
Manger fon bled en herbe. To turne bis cattell into
J bis corne before it | eared; Pe = corneon the
1 money before it beripe ; to (pend
ia vs vents they be due bis renenew Fr ture
4 in ; waftfiuly to confume , or fend packing, bis patri-


monie. |
Prendre Ne & le bled.Tofürprifè,or take
La


vnprouid
‘A mg bi w'eft le bled. How deere foeuer it
coft me, berdly foener 1 come by it, what price fo-


euer I giue for it.
En petit sp ani bon blé: Prov, Small
haue good corne growing in them.
 Æsphlipeat Prov. viz. Not
> whether come vp or no.
| Bledier ;m.ere: dep pee gee a
os) erre blediere diere. (orne t ares
| corner abowads therein.”


: Go gle |


pan ge blecque. 4n apple thats too ripe, or -


BAL iE BLO
feeding of cattell vpon corne lands, avaking with cat- | Bleme.cs Blefme. :
tell ower corne lands ; alfe, the feafon (from th Annun- | Blemy. Growne pale,wan,bleake,white,
ciation to th’end of Haruefi) wherein cattell may , in | Blepharoïde. Tunique ble. One of the eyes little tu-


aicles, whereby the waterie bumour is diftinguifhed

pfemtbe glaffie one. Mio
Blereau.as Blaireau. 4 any 5

cline com. Pale wanne,bleake, wbitifb,dead colou-


red.
Seloger fur le blefine. Secke Loger.
met : m.ette :f. Somewhat pale 54 little wan.
i: m, ie: f. Growne palewan,bleake,
Blefmer. To looke pale, grow wan, wax bleake, whitifh,
dead coloured.

Blefiniffement: m, Palene(fe, wannelfe, bleakeneffe ;
alfo,a looking,or waxing,pale,wan,bleake, >
Blefmiffeure : f. #s Blefmiflement.

Bleffable: com. oundable,

Bleflé: m.ée : €. Hurt, wounded ; vicerated ; whofe
flelh is cutor bruifd ; whofe skin is fretted off.
efSer. Towound,or hurt; (wbetber by a bloudwipe dry
blow, or bruift) to vicerate,or fret off,the skin.
Bleffer l'hnnoeur de. Todepraue,or detract from; to
blemifh the reputation of.

Tel tue qui ne penfe que bleffer: Prov. Some kill
fuch as they would but burt,
Bleffure:: f. A wound,or burt ; an (offenfiue or painfull)

ret cut, bruife, or skarre; alfo, a wounding, or
urting .
Blet: m. A blocke,doult, luske, fot, boydon, lobcocke,
Blete: f. A tarfe,or peat : ee
pp : The hearbe called Blite,and Blits; alfo,as Be-
cttc.
Blette blanche. The great,or ordinaric (wbite)Blite.
Blette d'Efpaigne. Spamifh Beets ; or th’ordinarie
Blites; (anhearbe that bath neither fauour, taf, nor


fre of qualities, :
lette grande. The great red Beet,or Blite,
Blette noire. 2s Blette rouge.
Blette rouge. Th’ordinarie red Blite.
ette. poire blette. As ouer-ripe peare ; a peare thats
rotten,or unfound at the heart.
leu: m. bleuë : f. Blew.
Bleüaftre : com. Blewifh, or fomewhat blew,
Bleiiet: m.Blew-bottle,Blew-blaw,Corne-flower ,Hurt-


fickle.
Bites. Beliftres ; Alfa, the bearbe called Bleets.
Bloc: m. A groffe, great, or generalitie ; the whole of; or
a heape of diuers wares budled together; alfa, a block,
or log.
En fs Summarily, by great,in the whole,
En bloc, &en tafche, One with another,tag and rag,
all me Rubbifh far dif be
ille : f. if, oaras, ragged ftones; a
fruffe whereof a walls(oï morter for one ule


de,
Bloccage: m. as Blocaille. ;
Bloccageux: m. eufe: f. Full of fhards; rubbifh,


ee,

Bloccaille. as Blocaille.

Blocc as Bloccageux.

Blocul :m. The chiefèft pole that vpboldeth a tent ; alfo,
alittle fortor block-houfe. 3

Blond: m.blonde:£ Light yellow, firaw coloured,
arms à im bavkes,or flags) bright tawnie, or deer-
coloured,


ndelet: m.ette :fYeZowifb;paleyellow, fomewhat
flaxen haired.
Blondir.To grow light yellow, flaxen, or firaw coloured, |


BL Vv
pren :mée : f Of a golden yellow.

low.
Blondoyer. as Blondir.


Blondurel. The Blaundrell apple.
Bloquaille. as Blocaille.


bargaine,


Bea .45 Blocul(inthe firft fence.)


oft as it is readie torot.
pins Bloc.


a daring Larke,or afiighted fowle; alfo, tobide, or
keepe, clofe.
Blotte. as Bloutre.
Do. To blot, flaine,blemifh,defile.
:m.ye: if Squat ; laid clofe ; kept clofe,
Blouiquetie. See Bouclette,


at Orleans.
Bloutre : f. 4 clod,or clot of earth.
qu :m.éc: f Cloddie ; fill of clods. ,
loutroer : m..4 Rowler ; the round woodden i
ment wherewith allyes are finoathed ; walkes ges:
andclods broken.
Bloutroir.as Bloutroer.
Bluard : m.arde :£. Gray,skie coloured blewifh.


fickle.
a. f. A little ftreake,or fpan x} of beat, in the aire,
when the feafon is verie bot ; and; more generally any
pint fharkle ofa flame.
ter. To parke,or fparkle ; to caft out, or yeeld forth
pertes fparkles.
¢. a6 Bluet.
pene :m. éc ; f, Boulted, Se foya wpe
downe.
Bluteau : m. 4 boulting cloth...
Bluter. To boult meale ; alfo,to fwingyp and 3 agi
4 Baker doth his boulting cloth, :
Bluteric: £. 4 boulting tub ;al/oya boulting..
uteur. A boulter of meale.
“A bon bluteur May propice: Pe A wooer fpecds
(oft times)the better for his wea


Bluttage sm. A boulting of mea ee > aed
ae = im. À aa af, «Printing ep and
… | dome.
as Bluté.: |
L .as Bluteau,
Ta rae ilister : 3 To boult,ërc. A
utteur. À boulter 0) meses ae Bin


uttis. A boulting uno crie
tt at ee


+


oyement : m.A making pr EN light yel~

uer.To fhut in,or block up; to befiege,befet or com-
pajjé on all fides; alfo, to conclude, or make wp a
poire bloffe..4x ouer mellow peare ;a pearefa


Bloti :m.ie : f. Squat,skowked, hidden; lying, or kept
clofe.
Blotir. To/quat, skowhe,or lye clofeto the ground, like


Blouse :f. A clofé Tennis court, or a Tennis court in a
hak bauing a bout on either Side to ferne on; fo called


Bluct: m. klew-blaw,Blew-bottle,Corne-flower, Hurt=


Le = ES


£ + Oxe de cat be dies in


for ait Æ
» | Mouche aux A brixxe gadbee Oxe flie. 10
Darr oot fm lot mp


BoC.


ender | immoderate (woy-good, luxurio

fie parrains em ape fucb'z one is
(as fumes) bbcralitie

BA? fe) alba pra finish s injolent, “


=|


“$|


or mn pce re |


Bobelin:n im. 4 patch,botch,peece, fet on a flnoc,or ga: |
Bobeline: f.dn old patched : 3
Bobeliner. To cobble, perch, bokeh es iad an olde
Bobelir


Ir: m. A cobler, botcher, patcher, mender of


Bobine: 4 ui askane, À:
ine : f. eee € mee man alfo,as ‘
tar dad ip somo mn 7a
ire : com. eunwe He Like an Oxe,
Bobulaires : f, Toyes, trafh; dotings, doltifh things,
age: m. A groue, thicket, or mall wood; a place
thats flored,or fet thicke with trees ; whence ;
Pais de debocage. À woed-land countrey. |
Bocager :muerc :f. Grouie, wooddie ; of, or belonpi
to Og as ag alfo, frequenting,or affcding
thickets,groues or woods, RTS
Pacigour, as Bocager ; Or, fill of thickets, groues,or | |
woods,

Bocagier: m.cre: f#ooddie, route; Coc; as |
Bocaf m.A Viel ; or any fic ig- bellied, long-nec d, ‘Ss
and finall-mouthed) vefell, oftarlb, or (the more pro te

Bee, of glaffe ; for water wine érc.
Boccabrevé :£. The name of a certaine apple,
caner.# Boucaner. © :
Boccafin: m. Boccafin ; or, a kind of fine buckeram, |
that hatha refemblance of taffata, and 1s much fed |
Boe, spt 3 salle phe fluffe Callimanco,


Boekel ti A wild Chefinnt.
Bocie: £. A lymbecke,or ftillitorie.
Boclus. Looke Bouclus,
Bocon. 4s Boucon.
Borane: :£.4 kind of great-eyed Cackerell fifh,the which
onber back many golden , and filuer-bued flveaks |
ruaning along from ber me tober taile ;alfo,a floud- |
£ate,or A
feces roi butte,or durre. |
Bod ry A À thicket ; a little wood.
:m. A young Bull.
zm, 4 Boifleau. aunt :
Boaficien asfpoiflelet..A little but. — : ses
pre & Boëtte; ; Looke Boifte; alfo, fmall, be HT


Bosouyer To limpe hault be lame.
Bocuf:m. % Ox ; a Beefe; alfo;beefe.

- Boeuf bran, ou rbrane, A kind of wild Oxe in Prom
uence,and Langued. ere and ad good
| for the fhambles.
Boeuf dedieu. AWren. q
Boe ok she seed Sea-calfe;alfo,a fen mon |


tbe lesa rene finde Bu}.
À ae a Sc soheref if x se
of the auf; and |


"2


therefore we |


alfoxthe hearbe Oxe-eye ; alfè the bearbe called fool)
3 Ae, ‘sf


BO


sade me white rae and white unfanorie
-P cade paire of bornes
enna ive 0 batik
Teftede ve ad, tobernoll ; cods-head,
grout outbead,logerbead ; one whofe wit is as little as bis
isgreat..


Dons de porc,& deboeuf. A A erofes bafe, rude,

vaciuile,or unmanerly,churle ;.a clunch,a ¢ rip.
Prendreyn parles cornes..70 wm ea

dangerous exploit.
Quiter vn bocuf pour prendte vn oeuf, To quit an
Oxe for an egge ; oras our fnnc~men, rather catch a

| ducke than feed an Oxe.
Tourner Ja charrue contre les boeufs. nfay,to fet
the cart before the horfès Looke Tourner.
Le boeuf las marche fouef: Prov, The wearie Oxe
goes ps ; men that are beaten to the prattife of the
world are calme, and moderate in their proceedings.
Le boeuf parla corne, & l'homme par la parole:
Prov. Se lient,’ vaderftood; ( for in forreine countries
Oxen are yoked by the bornes.)
Le boeufialé Ria trouver le vin fans chandelle :
Prov,Thefalt beefe-cater needs no candle to find bis
Liquorwithall ; or {alt beeft is your onely lantornein a
darke fèllar.
Legrand boeuf apprend à labourer au petit: Pro.
The old Oxe teaches the young to draw ; wee fay (with
fome fnall difference) theyoung cocke pol as he
the old beareth.
Les grandsboeufs ne font pas les grandes iour-
nées: = Pro.The greateft Oxen rid not mofiworke ; we
Say,the greateft crabs ave not all the Left meat.

. Au apenris ynoeuf vaut vn : Prov. dn egge is
as decre toa peer mansas an Oxe to a rich;or,a paore
man is as well content with an egge as withan Oxe.
Dieu donne biens & , mais ce n’eft p
la corne:Prov.God Lines things plentifülly and mi
out peril.
Il ne faut iouér au boeuf: : Prov. An Oxe io fer
no fife, play-felow,
Mieux vaut en paix. vn oeuf qu’ en guerre vn
bocuf: Prov, Seeke Oeuf.
Ona beau mener le boeuf à l'eau s'il n’ afoifPro.
In vaine is an Oxe led tothe water ifbe be not athirft;
we fay(with (ome difference of fence) 4 man ina) lead
pe AU tothe watcr,but cannot make bim drinkeun=


Ps “i as Koy a le lievre: Pro. A patient,


émet. RE


LL ™


moderatproceeding, effebis great matters.
ge A ea e bunch, top, tuft, or buske |
harap ey of bearbs ave Pratt
the rough,or Star of a greene chefinut,
€ ravel. See,


papa Emptie vacant : Rab, | is à at >


Boicheron: m. A wood-cleauer.


BA co are of kine. uber bal. si
er. To levp,or ouer things in
Boiffeur : ath aa ‘upyor flubberer ouer, of things


où cat . An ordinarie drinker of water.
bre “a TE Towill:.. eee
; Boileau,


Boies a drinkespone bib, ole quaffesiple sofucke


Boirefabride. A borfe to draw vp bis bit into bis
: Boire fume

Hohner To drinke all out, all-vpsto leave iuf no-
_ Boire fon mors.as Boire fa bride.


 reau:Pro.For th'one vfes not to drinke much, th'otber
_ will drinke no more than be necds.


… Aller & parler peut on,boire enfemble & manger


: Celuy de bon fens ne jouit, qui boit&nes en ref-


» becants


Boissmavedsal(oe wont flaffe,launce,or fpeare;


« Bois de baulme. The fweet wood of the Bellu tree.


à Ha sm iter 507 wood thats lie, bat


or vvood-felet.
Boic : £ A kind |
Dic “LE QE get ter fat ht fle Bois bw ico mit


: we delealleThe eat rofwood gr of timber(fo
‘ Bole apt


EE Sr


little mellowv,almofl ouerfèene(in drinke,)


or fivallow vp ; to receiue,or foke in ; alfo,to fimelt; or’
ventan ill fauour.


mouth with biston
l'ongle. Te leaue but one onely
drop in the cup


oy le vin comme Roy, boy l'eau comme Tau-


Affez boit qui a dueil: Prov. He hath drinke ynough
that bath forrow ynough ; or,as in Ducal,

‘A petite fontaine boit ona fonaife: Prov, In a
meane eflate moft eafè.


non : Pro.A man may vi vache conuerfè with a friend;
but mult not,if be meane to, him, feed withhim; |
the beltway to prefèrue ue tobe. ‘erie in-
ward with bim,

Apres compter il faut boire: Prov. The re

ended we muft drinke together; (a Dutch conclufion

Apres tout dueil boit on bien: Pro,(So elle À
ceedeth teene,)


jouit : Pro.He that in dyinking fecls no pleafire, bis
wits be firely out of mealirre.

Qui a fait la faute fila boive: Prov. Let him that
did amiffe be punifhed.

Qui bon Pachepte bon le boit : Pro. He that buyes
good wine drinks good wine.

Qui n’a laine bovie à la fontaine: Pro.Let bim that
hath no wealth drinke at the well,

Tel eft petit qui boit bien : Pro. Though he be little


Tel cé SRE autre boit: Pro,-Onecom-
mits the fault which another is blamed for.

Vne fois l'année l'on s'apprefte à boire: Pro.Once
in ayearea man prepares-bumfelfe to drinke; (viz.of
bis ovne wine,in v


mi isthe bead,or bornes of a déere.
0!


is d'alôe.tharomatical wood called LignGAloes.


Bois bedat, Looke Bedat,
Bet blanc.Prinet;(called fo at Lyons)alfoyae Blanc


Bois de brin.Roxnd,or vncleft-finall-vood (of what
euch)


leffe than, billet


LL the reftare lopped) for a future yeares incr
Boisde del du CE rca
ware become as black as ihe


s otic, and edicinablevootof
hat


on afd fal nd oe


B O I

Bois flotte. À float-boat; of wood,or timber, faftened
together, and pare down a ftreame vnte the place

ere it isto be fold or vfèd.
Bois flotté, The fame.
Bois fruictier, The branch of a tree, or plant, which
beareth fruit ; a fruit-bearing branch.
Bois de fultée.Branchleffe wood; naked, or powld,
trees, /
Boisgentil. The plant Mexercon, Germañe Oliue-

urge Dwar fe-Bay,

is de haute fuftaye. High trees, tall > great trees,
goodly woods ; properly, fuch as baue not beene cut,nor
lopped of at the leaft 30 yeres before ; Looke Fuftaye.
Bois Hicrofme, The name of a certaine tender and
delicate peare.
Le bois d'une lié. 4 bedftead.
Bois mort. All kind of dead, and drie wood in for-
refis ; firewood,
Bois moflé. as Bois de moulle; efpecially in the laft
fence.
Bois de moulle. Billets; logs; or log-wwood ; great fire-
wood of a certaine fixe ; or any wood that bath beene
affixed by a Mouleur.
Bois d'oeuvre. Great timber,or wood, fquared; and
readie for vfe,or worke.
Bois puant.Stinking beane-trefoile; (a fhrub.)
Bois de quartier. Quarters of timber ; or timber for

mareers. F a’

iS revenant, A copfe,or wood.
Bois fainét. Coetus Fall :
Bois de fap,ou de fapin.Deale planks, deale boords,
Bois de ferpe.#ood of ten yeres growth, or upwards.
Bois taillis. Cop/è-w0od,vnder-wood ; {uch wood as
is felled,or cut euery fèuen or eight yeares.
Bois dg touche. A bolt,groue, or thicke Tuft of high
trees(growing neere aboufe,e gracing the feat therof.)
Bois vedat.as Bois bedar; Looke Bedat.
Blanc bois. Box,willow, Poplar,Afpe, ¢ other [mat
ler trees whofe wood x not fit for timber-worke,
Gentil bois. wild line,wild flax,
Long bois.A pike,launce,or (peare.
Mort bois. willow, Thorne, Alder; Broome, Ginepar;
enerally,all trees that either beare no fruit, er no pro.


ble fruit.
Grand abbateur de bois.4 great bugbeare kill-cow,
fearre-crow.

. Tecognois bien de quel bois il fe chauffe. 1 know
well ynough what belps he vfèth what meanes he relies
on; 07,1 know well what fluffe there is in bim,
what matter he’s made of; what courfé hee fellowes,
what maner of lifebe leads,

Il eft du bois dont on le fait, Said of a'dull fellow, or
… of one that isno than he is made, or bath nothing
Faire de els fetches fait plus de quel bois
* Faire de es. I] ne us de
_ faire flefches. He is atthe laft caft,at bis wits end, at
his vtmoft ; be knowes no what courfé to take,
what meanes ta vft,what fhift to ;


| Fire de cou bois elches, 716 és thing en.


tertaine any thing that ferues bis turne,or makes for bis


Férehimiebois-seuldirs és and make a fland,


Faire vifage de bois à. 7: clap to,a doore a=
sada iad re a atc sioe


( es.
Pour fendre le boisil fit des rings bos mine
He made the mans ovene meanes tc, the infiruments


_


“ ” ra


B OI


of bis ruine. <

Mettre le doigt entre le bois, & l'efcorce.Tointrude

bimfelfé, or looke too far into, thebufineflés, or controm

uerfies,which are betwecne two neere fiends ; alfo,te

Set them at ods pr together by the eares,

L'oeil tendu aubois. warily, watchfully , circum.

fpetily ; aduifédly; as one that tends, beeds, or lookes

well to,bis charge,or bufineffe.

Vnoeil au bois l'autre à Ja ville.Seeke Oeil.

Porter bien fon bois. (A borfeman)to carrie or wield
* bis flaffe with a good grace. ~

porte bien fon bois. She is ofa comely, lately,

gallant carriage; or, fhee bath a tall, fraightor vp-

right bodie and as well fhe beares it. :

Porter des fueilles au bois. To carrie leaues to the

wood ; to powre water into the fea.

Retourner au champ du bois. To fall unte his for-

mer ill courfeyor pace ; 10 returne to bis old baunt,or


vomit,

La victoire fera comme il plaira au bois qui aura
bonne befte, He fhall win the vitiorie that can beft
beftirre bimfelfe,or lay about bim.

Bois laid,& inutile porte le frui@ pretieux: Prov.
(Meant of the vine) fo may a foule, and foolif mother
beare an excellent daughter.

Bois ont orcilles, & champs ocillets: Prov, Some
beare,and fee him, whom he rer qu ‘[eeth nots but
re ro eyes,and woods baue eares.ye wot; (QHey-
wi


Le bois acquiert leplain, Seeke Plain.
Tout bois vaut bufches: Prov. Ad wood is worth


logs. |
‘A confeil de fol cloche de bois:Prov.For woodden
confultations woodden bells.
Ii fait mauvais aller au bois quand les loups s'en-
tremangent: Prov. Tis ill gorg to the wood when
_ wolues(are fo bungrie, that they)eat one another.
La faim chafie les loupshors du bois : Prov. Ham
ger drives wolues out of the wood;or (as we fay)breaks
downe flone walls, ,
Pour neant yaau bois qui marrein ne ift :
Pro. To n0 be takes a bufineffe that vn-
derflands not the fubflance,effect,or end, of it.
Boife: f. A log,or great peece of wood; and (more parti
culaily) a brace, of timber.
Boiffé: m.éc: f. Hafted,or trimd with box.
Boifleau : m. The(French)bufbell; (and the 12 part of a
Septier) % fomewhat le[[e than our London pecke, e>
a balfe ; for a Boifleau of wheat weighes 20 pounds;
our pecke of wheat meale, 14. ; EE
Boiflal 'ozier. A weele,or weere of Oxier twits.
Boiflelet :m.A fmal! (French)bufhell ; or, the balfe ofa
Boifleau. ;
Boiflelier : m..4 maker,or feller of Boifleaux.
Boifliere : £4 bedge,thicket,or plot of Box trees.
Boiflon : fDrinke; any liquor wierewith our thirf is
quenched ; and particularly, {mall boufhold wine,
Boiffonnerie: € excefine drinking ; filling, quaf-


Bol, 4 box ; pss fr little casket ; 5,4


3 alfo,as ic.


un os, The boHow panne wherein a buc- |
lodged. ;
A launce with a blunt,or burre bead;


ites DOI smeton es bons onguens : Prov,
= Sweet ointments are in little boxes put, Ts
Boifte-


Original from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


L 2, :


“Te:
4,
\
>


B O L


Baile: she a ie

m4
Eocene aig
Baltes To rem i be Lame semper ect maimed ofa


Boificux: :m.eufe : £ Limping,cripple balting Jame of


a leg.
Met la venueduboifteux. ‘0 expetta matter
or , or long in comming,
er deuant les boifteux. See Clocher.
Boiftufanc, Limping palting,
Boite.as Boifte,
Ce vin eft en fa boite. This wine is drinkable,ia fea-
fon to be drunke, fit to be dravone.
| Boitement.4 uinping,or balting,
Boiter. To limpe,to ba
Boiteux.ss Boifteux.
Boitoufer. To limpe,balt ; be lame of a leg,
Boitte : f. 2s Boifte; &,4s Boite.
Boitte de foing. 4 bottle of bay ; (vam 5)
Bovin: m, A wine drinker ; one that drinks nothing but
wine,or wine for the mofl part.
Bol: m.7}’aftringent,and nedicineble ved earth, or mi-
nerall,called Bolearmenie ; ; alfo,as Bolus.
Bol Oriental; &,Bol Armenien Oriental. Oriental
patie pn the bel, and trueft kind of Bolearmenie,
niftred (with good effect) againjt all poifens, and in
: paf at diftafes;and more ved than the ordinarie ane,
which fhould rather bee tearmed Sinopianred earth
than Bolearmenie ; Looke Rubrique Sinopique.
Bolar: m. Akind of. Afpe-refembling tree; called thus
about Tours,
Bolarmene. Bolearmenie.
Bole d'Armenie. The fame.


Bolet :m. A tittle muflrome,or toadftoole ; as Boletc.
Bolete: £. A little toadfioale,o7 mu, fat creer
thebeflmet ofall others.


Bolicars : £ Alipor chap.

Boline : f. The Boline; sa ape vd ben ip ps ith
a fide wind,or goes necre a wind; whence; :
Venta labo tl A fide,or feant wind.

Boliner. To Jae by a wind, or clofé vpon a wind ;to lay
tacke aboord,

Boileau Bouleau.

Bollettes de Cypres. nuts,or (logs.

Bolouër :m.A bulwarke,

Bolus: m.A gobbet; morfell ynouth-full; as pie À
can let downe at once;alfo,clay whieh bath no minerall


fi
pare Bobans lia bregeingsn venting
Bombarde : f. A Bumbard,or murthering peece.
Boinbarder.To dihnge Bamba
Ve with Bumbards.
er. À Bumbardier, or gues. that ofeth to
“Zifebange murthering peeces and, mnre-generally, «-


The
Bowlin he af ambi ry Kd of


| Bombycine: f. The fecond, and worfe kind of the. Le


uant Manna,being alfo, commonly, fophifticated.


Ben: m.The goodne/fe,good,or beft of a thing;sbe height, s


vincipall part,or point,of a matter,


Robin det ’argent.The Frot mere of the


SN THE OHI Ese


BON


will ener bein the vights in difpute ria: pagans be


*, yeelded unto,
Fee bon avec. I fai& bon avecluy: He is a 1 good
Faebon pour companie)is worth the bauing;
our: Toanfiver,or giue bis word for ; al-
ft 10 play the game of.
Tenez moy bon Hold me play,keepe me tacke land
+0 me,coitinue with me.
Bon: m.Bonne: fGuod,honefl,vertuous, upright, fin-
| ~~ “A, sic share 3 tight; currant; bole-
y ;fauourable. gr acions,propitions,alfo,va-
din able durables fafient.
nnc femme.Atile commonly be-
re FREE woman inveuerence of their
age ; whereupon {ime.will meri anfiver to fitch as
thinke to grace themwmith that title, lene vas pas en-
cores au bafton.
Bon temps.Properitiesalfemerrimentsor,time pent
ia merriment,
Bailler bonne. Iluy l'a baillé bonne. te bath pla
ghed bim thr Débat tickled bim fo 2 der
paid him bome pe bath dealt extreabily wit nee; alfo,
be hath ginen him a notable gudgeoms \
Vous labaillez bonne. True Reger; now ox baue
bit it ; now you pay it bome ; Irronically, *
Eftré en fes bonnes. To be ina good mood, plaufible
bumor ,pleafant vaine; alfo,to be Ema difpohd.
Il Ja luy.garda bonne, He owed him a good tuyne;al-
fiber contrarie) be borehim a grudge, a long time af-
ter, for it.


Tenir bon.Te bold good, tocontinue faithfiill,or con-


flant in a matter.

Toueràbonne-veuë. To play fure play, land on fafe

tearmes, hazard little or nothing, know well ynough

Led _ does.

our àbon. Throughly, filly.

Trouver bon.To onu lapels of:

Adyocarmauvais voifin : Prov. A good Coun-
+ cellor an ill


Bonne befte s'efchauffe en mangeant: Prov: 4


good béaft catsapace sorzas we {ay,good at meat good
at worke,
Bon charron tourneen rue Prov. A shilfull
Boa state pales tect
onc arde qui ait on arder :
rer He is afifficient warder that can der own
odie.

Bon cocur ne peut mentir:Pro.An honeft heart ca-
nota wor thy beart wil mobsutter pr be th'author of Une
trutbes.

Bon: sdroiéta bon meftier d: aide: Prov. Good right
_ hath aced of great belpe;( fo much ado haue men(in this
uninf a Bost icducs Dé parc re beir owne.)


: Prov.Happie is that
Mnsiaies série ine fe.
Bonettle lievre donnlspest centfols:Pro.


SeekeLievre.
; Bon ele medecin qui (aie guaces Prov.te i


‘ IP. that can beale his ovone in,

Bone eee faba ri ce: Bros dang Potige.
Bon gina vale Set ar em eds
ill, a prouerbe of ours ; nee

: gran) ae PraGond
watch e-
per Pins Tes 4
mn mt is if?
t vids bimfel fe of a.
er ui fauvele denier: Prov. Well


Bonne limaille q


Lÿ | eae


.


i de 2. 2


‘
:
:
1


BON BON
Vn donneur de bonadies. One thats fent wp and
dovenc to carie falutations or complements salfo,a popu


és that balfepenie {pent that faues a penie,
Bon marché tire de me dela e: Prov. À


cheape commeditie picks a cuflômers purfe. Ler,or libevall, faluter of enery one be meets,

Bons mots n'efpargnent nul: Prov. 4 good mans | Bonadres, for Bonadies. ;
words are no way partiall ; good words pay home, Soo calme; faire fisll,or quiet, weather at fea,
Bonne mule mauvaife befte: Prov. A good buswife | Bo : com.Cabme, flill, quiet ; faire,

is commonly nofheepe. Bon-creftien. poire de b. A delicate winter Peare, in
Bons nageurs font à la fin noyez : Prov. Looke | — fhaperefembling our bafiard warden,


Bond: m, À bound,a rebound ; a bop,skip,leape, iumpe


from the earth.
Auoir le bond. 11 eur doucement le bond, we bad
the gentle thumpe.
Donner le bond à. wraflling to onerthrow,or gine
a fall unto.

aire vn faux bond; Ellea faié vn faux bond.she
bath got a crack; fhe bath plaid falfe, or trod her {hove


awry.

I m’a fai& vn faux bond.He bath dealt falfly or tre-
cheroufly,with me,

Perdre la volée pour le bond.To/oefe an opportuni
tie,by negleéting it,vpon a hope that it will returne.
Que de bond que de volée: Pro.By booke er crook,
by right or wrong;any way; by any meanes; no matter
how fo we baue it; 07,what by one means and another.

Bonde :f. 4 bung,or fiopple ; alfoya fluce,or floudgate;
and bence,alfo, the yate-flang, or beame thats pulled
up, when a mill is to be fetagate. —

Lafcher labondea. To gine libertie,or free paffage,
vatoa violent thing.

Bondelle. .4 kind of fifh thats not much unlike agreat
Smelt ; or,the leaft kind of the fifh Vmble, well known
by thofé of Geneua,in whofe lake it breeds,

ener. To reafon,argue,difpute ; alfo,to grumble.

Bondi: m.ie: f. Bounded, rebounded ; leaped, iumped,
ierted, skipped {iddenly,and fwifily upward.

r. To bound rebound ; to leape,iumpe,iert skip,rife


Nageur.

Bon pais mauvais chemin: Prova a fruitful ground
there 1 filthie going ; in the beft foyle the worft way.

Bonne parole bon lieu tient: Prov. Good fpeech
finds good entertainment ; wins great preferment,
Bon fang ne peut mentir : Prov. A worthy nature’
cannot conceale it felfe, Looke Mentir.

Bon vin bon vinaigre : Prov. Good wine (yeelds)

ood vinegar.
Bon vinmauvaifeteite: Pro. Strong wine makes a
weake braine,or makes a man apt to brabble; (forwe
Say of thofe that afier drinking fall to fwagger; their
wine begins toworke.)

“Abon chien bon os: Prov. 4 goad dog merits a
good bone; Looke Chien.*

‘A bon demandeur bon refufeur : Prov.A bold af
ker is bel? matched by a refolute denier.

‘A bon entendeur ne faut qu'une parole : Pro.The

wife under{tand a man by ong word.

‘A bon iour bon oeuvre,& bonnes paroles: Pro.

A good dey would be folemnixed with good works,and
words.

‘A bon vin il ne faut point d’enfeigne: Prov.Good
wine draws cuflomers without any belp of an iuy-bufh.
Apres bon vin bon cheval; Pro.Looke Cheval.
Aux bons mefchet il: Prov. The honefter man the
worfe lucke. >
De bon terroir bon yin: Prov. À good fiyleyeelds


good fruit. (fuddenly,and fwiftly) upward,

En bonne maiïfon l'on a toft aprefté:Pro.ls an or- | Bondifleinent : m. y ae, rebounding, leaping,
derly,or plentifull houfe all things are foone made rea~ sar pe mn à hipping upwards,

die; or; tavie for our victuals, Bondon :m, 4 wine :

Femme qui amauvais mary a bien fou. | Bondonné ph»: or lopped vp with a bung,
ventle coeur marry: Pro, Locke 3, FE


or
Bo: . To fhut,or flop up with a bung,or fropple.

ifd thas rt Saat Eagle, ni rele

altogether vpon fifh, frogs yats, and ferpents; fome call


ber, a Harrower,


Femme.
Tiw’eft fi bon qu’aufsibon nefoit: Prov. The be
man hath bis match ; tlypurefi bis Peere ; one may


enerie way as good as another,
Il nef f bon que femme n’aflotte : Prov. Thewi-


Sift man’s affotted by a woman. Bone : f.2s Borne: @Pic. =!
n'eft fibon qui ne faille: Pro. The beft men com. | Bon-enten-tu. À good conceit, readic indgement, ripe
mit faults; the wiféft.ervors. JS te a vnderflanding. ;

Le mauvais emporte le bon. Seeke Mauvais. Bon-Henry: The wild forrell called, Roman forvell,


Qui bon? achepte bonleboir ‘Pro. He that will | round forrell,and Tous forrell; alfo,the bearbe, good


go tothe price of,or take pains for,good things may en. Hi ood king Harvy,and Allgood.
| e good things, 7 oe i Bonhort Fou A taba ‘Turney, wherein ma-
~ Qui bons lopins mange bons lopins le fayvent: | _ ay runne together. bs sat
© Pro.Pronifion follows him that loues to fare well. Bonifié : m.ée: f Made good ; al/o,benefited inriched,
Qui bon maiftre ferrbon loyeren attend:Pro,He | _ made wealthie, <=
d emard, '3t0 do good vnto, or vpon; to


wealthie,
fifh called, a Bonitoc ; fèene moft
aumpf.


age. setae.
ABO. te SAE vig 7 ee


até : f. Gentleneffe, mildneffe , courtefie, bu-
tie , affabilitie ; good matwve; afo, fuecritie,
fümèffe , plaine dealing, openbeartedneffe.


Original from


int CO: gle Se FHEOHO STATE UNIVERSITY.


inf


V1


cd dy. PPS |: 1. Sell. - <uNE tie 4 a
yf .
BON BOR


Bonne. Borne. À

Bonne-g Sven ape the down-banging
taile of a French-bood;(whence belike our Boongrace.)

Bonnetnent ell, fitly aptly pandfomely conuensently,
orderly,to the purpofe.

Bonnes-daines. The bearbe Orage, or golden hearbe ;
alfo,Beets.

Bonnet : m. A bonnet,acap.
Bonnet ila cocarde, See Coquarde.
Bonnet à croppiere.a /quare cap;a three cornerdcap
Bonnet de fer. Az yron {cull or fallade.
Bonnet à Ja Marabaife. 4 flat cap. ‘
Bonnet de Preftre. Spindle-tree,Prick-wood,Prick-
timber; or as; À
Bonnet quarré. The wild cherrie which groweth on
the tree whereof Butchers make their pricks.
Bonnet à quatre braguettes,ou gouttieres.4(four-
cornered)/quave cap,
Bonnet verd. 4 fafhion of greene capwhich Cefsio-
narie bankrupts were, not long ago, ensoyned to weare
in publique + cea capa to be the better knowne
and anoyded.

- Du temps des hauts bonnets.1# old time when men
being rude and fillie,bad not the wit to apparell them-
fèlues bandfomely ; and hence ; ;

Langage du temps des bonnets, ou des hauts


bonnets. Ax old wines tale; or à flale , obfolete, er |


ouer-worne language ; a fa{hion of [peaking thats old,
and quite out of fafbion.
Latefte prés du bonnet. Avoir latefte prés, &c 5
To be bot baftie,chobberick ; alfo,to be ral futile,
cunning.
Prendre le bonnet. To commence Mafter of Arts,or
take a degree ; (hence) alfo,to take on him the goueri~
ment of Iumfelfe; to veaine all tutorly Iurifdiétion; to
refufe,or bane no need of, tutoring.
Rire fous le bonnet.To in the fleeue.
Bonneter. To put off bis capunto.
Bonnetier :m. 4 (apper,or Bomnet-maker; a knitter of
caps,a cap knitter,
Bonneton. A little cap,or bonnet.
Bonnette : f. The bonnet of a fayle.
Bonnette trainerefle.A dvabler; a peece added vn-
to the boanet when there is need of more faile.
Bonniere : f.A proportion, or meafure of land not much
differing fiom th’ Arpent.
Bon-lieu. The name of a Priorie in Burgundie.
Bons-enfans. (The name of) a mof ancient colledge in
th’ Vniuerfitie of Paris; firft called in all congregati-
ons,erbauing the firft,or bighefl,place in all a, 5 .
Boned Gr hehe MAS est
: panel . itie vertue,uprig 7%
pot * sbountie luberalitie ; alfo,valeur, proweffe,
à Mn pm à |" 1) ‘
ooie. The water Serpent Boas; which vfetb, to
kine,as long pres wre witch, and afterwards ‘hid


uoure them.


Boote. Bootes; a flow mouimg flarre,feated in the North
Pole,neere unto Charles waine,the which it followes.
poque. «s Bocque.

Oquet : m, Agroue,or finall thicket of trees.
; Borax,greene earth ; Looke Borrais.
Higme : ent, croaking of the guts;


Boolingue. as Boulingue.


: Go. gle


mur lded by running waters,
5 pu age Bay dom gre


fide,edge, brinke,brim, fore ,of a pit, of a bole, ofa ri-
uer,of a water of the feasalfo,th' end,conclufion,or laft
caft of a matter.
Bords. Ribbons; thicke boords nailed to th'outfide of
the floore-timbers of a ip.

rd bas, ou bas bord. The larboord, or left fide


ofa .
ie plat,or,plat bord. 14 4 fhip, is the edge of the
bridge, from the maine maft unto the per À upon
which the ges ordnance is placed. |
Grain fur bord. Scant meafure ; hard firiken mea-
fierce, of corne,or falt.
Oultre bord. Exceffiuely beyond meafure,
Il eftfur le bord de la fofle, He is a drooping old,de-
crepit creature ; be 1s alreadie at the pits brinke ; bee
hath alreadie one foot in bis graue.

‘Prendre bord. To pot su. te go afhore.
Bordage.s Bord; Aljo,a bafe,diudging, or feruile te-
nure ; villenage, ;

Droié de bordage. The drudgerie, or bafefernices,
referued by fome Lords vpon the letting of their cottd-
£¢5,0r final tenementsswhich cannot be emen, fold por
engaged by the poore flaues that hauetakenthem.
Borde: f.4 little houfe,lodging ov cottage of timber, flan-
ding alone im the fields, efpecially one thats built on
wheeles,e may be quickly remoued from field to field;
alfo(more generally) any {cattered boufe, lodge; er vil.
lage in the country; and(infome parts of France) any
melfnage » furme,or ferme-houfé; alfo,a flatke of pilled


mpe.
Borde : m.ée : f, Bordered garded welted; alfa, imbro-
dered; alfa,ftopped,or flayed ; whence ;
z ous — ordez à midy se left work at noon;
.(r4l:caly.) k
Bordeau ses brotbell,or bawdie-boufe; the Stewes.
Bordelage : m.Brothelliag,wenching,whoore-bunting.
Bordeler-To bunt whoores,to banat baudie boufes,
clier : m.4 wencher whoore-munger,whoore-bun-
ter baunter of baudie boufes ; alfo,as Bourdelier,
Bordeliere : f. A certaine frefh-water fifh, that refem-
bles a Breame,and hath neither teeth nor tongue.
Bordelois. The mame of a verie great grape.
Border. Te border,gard,welt ; alfo,to imbroder ; alfa,
to flay, oe off give ouer ; whence ;
, Border les avirons. To bold vp the oares , or to fir-
ceafe rowing. sbreefeticket sal
eau: m, A #ote,breefe ticket ; alfo,an accompts
a bill,or booke, of accompts, anes nbd


Borderie: f-A quantity of earable ground furnifhed with :


competent medow and pafture, and containing altoge-
ther, in moft parts of Poitou but two, andin fe
foure,Oxe-gates,or Oxe-gangs. :
Bordeur: m. 42 Imbroderer.
Autant pour le bordeur.So much for that ; ÿea mar
rie fir nove you haue hit it ; Or, ome good turne requires
another; or, would Iwere able to requiteyou fir ; all
irronically ; andthe laft the moft proper ; this phrase


(wherin there is an allufion to Derybeing
fitly vfed,as a wifh,by thofe, that could find in their
hearts to pay ha der in bis ovone money.

Bordeux: m.cuie : f. Full of, feruing for, or belonging


to,bemmes,edges brimmes.
Bordier : m.4-villaine,or cottager ; one that bolds by a
Seruile pafe,and drudging teaure ; alfo,a farmer.


Bordieux: m. Smell tenements , little cottages,cotes. |


jé. Looke Bourdonné.
Bo


; rd. é sf
Bordure:f.4 border,welt bemme,or gard ofa ages ;


tS | eet ee ak


BOR


and particularly, the turncouer, or fide betweene the
Sole and upper-leather of a corke fhooe.

Borée. The North-eaft wind.

Borgne : com. One eyed,or,that hath butone eye.
Vne chambre borgne. That bath but one window,
and is thereby with the darkeft.

Efguillette borgne. A point that bath but one tag.
Inteftin borgne. The blind gut; the firft of the three
great guts in the belly, féated on the right fide, a little
under the kidney; and fo full of turnings,&> foulds,that
it feemes endlefe.

Veine borgne. Looke Veine.

Te le vous envoyeray par le borgne. 1 will fend it
by lon Long the Carrrer; you fhall baue it when 1
know not what elfé to do with it,

Vn borgne eft Roy au pais des aveugles: Prov.He
that fees but little ouerrules them that {ee nothing .
Borgner. To winke with one eye, and looke with anda
ther ; as thoft, that Yvould diféerneathing through a

narrow hole ; or,as Borgnoyer.

Borgne : f. Awoman that bath but ene eye.
Esguillette borgnefic. as Efguillerreborgne,

Borgnet : mette: f. Halfé blind; almoft blind,or ba-
mag wellnigh loft the ufé of one eye.

Borgnoyer. To want an eye ; to looke,or fee but with
one eye’, towinke with,or fainehimfelfe blind of, one
eye ; alfo, to glow, glote,or loure.

Borgue. as Nafle; A weele, for fib.

Borlet. See Bourlet.

Bornage:m. The bounds,ov limits,of ; whence ;

Borhage de Hercules. The firaits of Giblaltarre,
Droi& de bornage.The royaltie or priuiledge of pla-
cing metres ae Limits laying out bounds for o-
ther mens lands. ?

Bornal de miel : m. A honycombe. …

Borne :f. 4 bound limit yneereymarch ; the end, or für-
theft compaffe ofathing.  *

Mäislà ne faut faire but ne borne. But there wee
mul not i, nor paufe ; thats no place to fettle in, flay
at or dwell on.

Au bout la borne: Prov. Tb'end iryes all; at length
we fhall fee what will be done.

Borné: m.ée :f. Bounded,limited ; apportioned ; pro-


Borner. To limit, bound,affigne marches, appoint meeres
unto; to apportion; flint , proportion ; to fort out a part


for ; to allot,or lay out a certaine portion,or proportion,
which is not to be exceeded.


Borneur: m, A limiter, bounder ; apportioner ; flinter,
froportroner.
pue miel. A bonie combe; or, beesneft full of
Je,
| Borrache. A Spanifh borachoc,or bottle of leather.
Borrais ;


rais,ou Borras : m, Borax,or greene earth;abard
3 and {hining mineral, or bumor. £ ‘in mes 5


white Borax ; found (as Mathiolus


portioned ; ited; whofe park or portion is appoimed |
[17/2


| There is alfo an artificial oneymade of Roche |
Re snd ther bing ha dé Goldene?


me tte : sit ai
is | Bofluér. To make bulch,crumpe,or crooked ; 10 finelsor


=. — 00 7 ——2e


BOS


of a darke greene colour) in br emynes.
Borrafque. as Bourafque. 4
Borret: m. 4 yeariag,or young beafithats about a yeare


old: GAuvergnois.

Borrette : f. ye fillie thats about a yeare old,

Borriere.vache borrier¢.A cow that hath a calfe rune
ning after ber,

Borrugat. The fea ffh called otherwife , Maigre,
Baionnois


Bortiere : £. (Corruptly,forP ortiere)the female Salmon
greater, and < wed of ved fpots thee the male, and ba-
uing the end of ber nether iaw booked, or bending
upwards whereas bis is firaight,

Bos. asBois : Pic.

Botc. The name of a drie fower apple; alfo, as Bois:


Pic. *

Bofcage. as Bocage.

Bofcal. A little wood,or foreft.

Bofialle. champ b. A peece of ground,or common(with=
out any boufe vpon it) wherein diners baue certaine,
and feuerall parts,

Bofne : £. # Berne.

¢, Bounded,limited,

Eee :m. A thicket,groue,or little wood.

Bofquillon:m.A wood-feller,billet~maker ed ge-men-
der ; a labouring man that fells wood, makes billets,
ec,and mends, or lookes unto, the bedges, or inclo~
Sires of a wood.

Bofsé d'une roué. The nane of awhecle.Seeke Moyeu,

Bofle : f. 4 bunch,or bumpe ; any round fwelling , vp-

rifing,or puifing vp sbence,a wen,botch,bile,or plague-

Sore.; alfo,abulch in the backe ; alfo, aknob, knot, or

knurve in a tree ; alfo,a billocke molebill finall bill,or

barrow of ground ; alfo,a bo[fe, or imboffing in worke-
manfhip; alfo,the ff putting out of a deeres bead for-

,merly caft; which our wood-men call, if it bee a red

deeres,the burlesor feale, and, if a fallow deeves, the
button ; (the which is alfa applied unto the other.)

Bofle de terre. as Truffe. ;

Sot en bofle,& plate peinture. À foole in print,affe

in iri 2 coxcombe,abfolute boydon,

La male boffe. A plague-fore, peftilent botch,conta~


bile.
Prercbbe: la bofse aS. Roc. To filtch, or ficale any
thing(how meane foener) that comes in bis way.
BofSé: m.ée : f, Swollen,rifen, bunchie, bulched,puffed
ue bulked,or bumped out. x
Bof ler. To dindge,or bruifé to make a dintin veffell of
mettall,or ina peece of plate.
Boflelure : £.4 bruife,dindge,pr dint,in a peece of plate,
or mettall.
Boffetier : m. A boffe-maker ; a flud-maker.
Boflette : f. A little bunch, or knob; idee little beape,
© rifingsor felling of earth ; alfo,a boffe,or bution fet on
a booke ; alfa, a fiud on any part of a borfes furniture.
Baits: &. High grounds ; or, little bills vaifed by the
ands of men, 4
Boflu : m.uë: f. Hulch backt,crump-fhouldered ; kmob- |
bie,knappi pe ufed vp,rijing vnewcmly,cr00~
UT ac le FSI


Steg! EL


~  puffe


Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


“


4 ss


B phen eae ioe ner Poi ds But.


Norm, 4//0,a luncheon,or (illfauored) big peece of.
Bot. Ilfuoredlÿ-round ; whence; ~
t. À ak rg or club foot.
de botaige. is from the vintbaf Oéto-
ber to tbe La lajt of Nouember.
Botanique: com.Hearball; ofsor belonging to bearbes,
orto skill in hearbs.


| Botanomantie: £ Dixination, or witchcraft by the


| Bot


vertue of hearbes.

Botargues: £ The bard rowes of the Murene, or of a
kind o if Mullet, falted and then dried,and eaten to pro-
uoke drinking.

Bote: f. 4 bat; alfiya faggot,a bundle; a bottle.

S'ils penfent ainfi ils bruflent leurs botes. Thepare
farre wide,or much too blame,if ce; or (as we fay) 1
finell them hither.

Tous les deux y Jaiffcrontles botes. They can nti-
ther of them [ape with lifé,they will both mifcarrie, or
die,in the place.

Boté. Booted ; See Borté.

Boteau. 4 bundle pr bottle,as of bay,drc.

Boteler. To botie, or bundle up ; to make into botles, or
bundles.

Boteleur: ni. 4 maker of botles,or of bundles.

Boter.To boot,pulf on boots,or put boots on;alfo,to prune,
or cut of the fisper fluous branches of a tree.

othoral: m.ale : f.#wbealie, poukie,pufhie.

Botine:f. A brskin,or Summer boot.

Botineur : m. A buskin-maker; alfè,one that continually
weares buots,or buskins; as a Monke,er any fuch crea-
ture, who being not fatisfied with wear ing themaline,
willneeds be buried in eee far :

c:f. Cadmia in ec Sy gathere
fh the the roofes of c ot or ouer rth fae


Boites :f FR veffell re yy call, a a htt ne
Bote.

Botté. Booted.
Gens bottez de foin, Silly clownes, rude fwaynes,
ignorant boores,bome-bred binds.

Botteler. as Boteler.

Botter. as Borer.

Botterol: m. Toad. (vieil mot.)

Bou. A boyling, or bubling.

Bouade:£.The worke of two oxen,or-vfe of a fnalée cart,
ducçertaine daies in Summer by tenants (that hold by \
Socage,or villenage) unta their landlords, for the labou-


Bau ving,and dr. TE ae ee.


Boubax. The name nap 4 ‘hind of Olines
Bouc:m. 4 male Goat,or > x Goa
pore called a Ramme;alfo


oer “WeflaincThe 4 ianyand
or beaft like a goat,called (in Latine) Ibex.


Fr


=) ee ASAE Hs


Couillon de bouc. See Couillon.


Efpine de bouc. Goats-thorne (whofe root yeelde À
5 ot |
e


se Wild bugloffe, wall bugloffe, faakes
Frs HE
c:The little SES ue da mpi,


fe
wild got,


Barbe de bouc. Goats-beard, Starre of.
Noone-tide, Goe-to-bed at noone ; mee bearbe.) +


| ru drie.


B OV


Tite les boucs: To loofe time, or ipend’s it fruit-


lefly.
Boucal: m. as Bocal ; aifo,a vent for the fre heat, of
a furnace.
ican: m.4 woodden gridiron, whereon the Cannibals
~ broile peeces of men,and other flefh.
Boucané: m.ée: f. Ridden bya goats alfo,rofied,broy-
led or fcorched on a woodden gridiron,
Boucaner. To doe like a goats to imitate the goat ; aff,
to broyle,or [cerch on a woodden gridiron. — :
ee m. ere : f. Old,ftale,paft date,out of vfe,out
of feafon.
Boucaffin. as Boccafin.
Bouccaiart : m.Plaine Chamlet;vmvater Chamlet;ov,as
Moncaiart, i
Bouchard. 4 kind of great-cared browne wheat.
Boucharde: f. 4 Mafons hammer,or picke, pointed at
both ends like a diamond.
Bouchafles: wild, or baftard,Cheflnuts.
Bouche: f. Amouth; alfo,a paffage, entrie, entrance,or
ouerture;into.
Bouches à feu. Spit-fires; Artillerie,Ordnance.
Bouche frefche. Looke Frez.
La bouche, & les mains. Homage,and fealties or,the |
ceremonies ufed in the doing thereof.
De broc en bouche. lmmediatly,fpeedily ,fuddainly,
out of hand jn a trice,while tis bot.
Avoir bouche à Court. Toeat and drinke fcotfree ;
to baue budge-a-Court, to be in ordinarie at Court,
Avoir la bouche fraiche. Looké Fraiche.

» Avoirla bouche à pleine main, A horfe to be nei-
ther too bard,nor too fenfible, of mouth ; thereby giuing
the hand a full reft.

Dao bonne bouche. To be fécret ; to keepe coun-

fi

Elle a la langue en la bouche non en la bourfe (of

\apratling bufirife) ber, tongue is exer at band 1 war-

rant you. :

Direde bouche: To tell, or utter expreffely, to make

efpeciall mention of in ipeech, to declare unto in plaine,

and open tearmes.

Faire labouche à.Toinfiruétsor give a man bis leffon,

beforehand,

Faire la petite bouche.To fimper sl ne faifoit point

la petite bouche. He va tbe Recon was loth

to utter it she (poke it openly,plaraly, freely yno

Ony doit se ek Ja bouche, & ouvrir eu ;

viz. When almes are to begiuen. . *

Gardet pour la bonne bouche.7o referue a thi

the beft for the laft bit; to keepe it long of pi

make vp bis mouth withall.

Gouverner bien la bouche. To be temperat in diet.

Large de bouche, & eftroiét de cein&tuge. That
promifes,or hii put unto it,will pat with

, little or nothi

* Moderer fa bouche, feed mode moderatly,to eat fober-
or no more then 0€ Dim
te de tr a en tenet bouthe To fpeake


wellor gine + 3


ood rene of one ; en male
to realise
Frog pa cutrse à ra be beante. See Cor-
Venir l'eau à la bouche. Cela luy fit venir l'eau à
py Ste ee


ca


ied fec: Prov. He that would lime
bat in SEEN


af ee


st x
E OHIO.S LATE-UNNÉRSERES


LR Se rt


BO V


‘


BOY


De la main à la bouche AY fouvent la foupe :

Prov. Betweene the hand a the morfell’s ms

Entre la bouche & le cueillier fouvent advient
rand deftourbier : Prov, Betweene the cup and the

lip (fe) we, with the Latine Poet) many mifchances

bappen.

Qui n'aargenten bourfe air du moins du miel en

bouche : Prov. Laoke Avoir,

Selon ta bourfe gouverne ta bouche: Pro.Gouerne

thy mouth by thy meanes.

Table fans fel, bouche fans falive: Prov. A table

without falt,and a mouth without fap; Looke Table.

Bouchéc : f. 4 morfell,or mouth-full of.

Bouchclette: € 4 little mouth.

Bouchement.See Boufchement.

Boucher : m. Auch ER -man.

Boucher. To flop; See Boufch

Boucherie : £. À Butchers fhambles, fiall,or fhop; alfo,a

butcherie, flaughter, difmembring, or renting afunder
of a lung creature.
Droict de boucherie. Looke Droiét,

Boucheron. See Boufcheron,

Bouchet: m. A kind of broth for a ficke bodic; alfo,the
Sweet drinke, Hydromel; or, a drinke made of water
fweetned with fugar and cinnamon or as;

Eau debouchet. A certaine compound water which
, _ with that of Corianders makes a kind of. se se

‘| Bouchette: £. A little mouth.

Bouchier: m. 4 Butcher,or flaughter-man.

Bouchimbarbe: £. Goats beard, 1ofephs flower,Starre

Laver Noone-tide, Goe-to-bed-at-noone ; (an
rbe.)

Bouchon: m. 4 flopple ; alfo,a wie of ftraw,erc3alfo,
the bufh of a tauerne,or alebo
Bouchons. The little knots which be in fine poll, or

from it in {pianing.
Bouchons de Chenilles. Clufters, or bunches of Ca-
Sere s
ouchon. cross bing with bis teesh dovine-
ward; or,couched por bis face; be ds shat des down
at the play called Hot-cockles.

|. Imedonnale hon d'une bouteille. Hegaue
kz = re 3; ead thiag not worth

Se mettre À l'ombre des bouchons. To get him in-
per NT er at ina Tap=
Fe.


Bou éc:f.
borfé pubes sean ant ead
ere To rub, wipe, or fife, asa borfe, with
5 38 A m. A little wifpe,or
Bouchonneux: :m.eufe :
tauerne-bufhes ; woollie


fraw;


bunches, clu-


ontarien &
7 = boucle. To reise; bold in ave, heepe


ET in snes


in the middle ; alfo,to finifh,end. tup.
U boucle fa femme à la beefed Ber-


Boucletie : €. A fall buckle.
Bouclier: m. A bucklen
Pa Barcelonnois. LA footmans targuet, or


del’ eftomac. The triangular griftle that
| growes to the bottome of the breaf-bone, and from the
middle we bn bris ouer the flomacke.
Levée de bo: eat flirre about a [mall mat-
ter ; buge bani tion fe a fleight aétion ; much adoc
about little or nothing.
Faire bouclier de. ‘To truftin the defence ; relie on


re Veena of; to faue; fhaddow, fbrowd, or fhelter


Po :£A buckling; alfe,a fwelling,or beari
Fu the ca er mé vale buf ffetring. : +
:m. Trencbes,or ditches.
Fons m. À ie eerie manif special fith a
‘one as is empoifoned ; and benc
Bailler le boucon. ro por
: — im. A poyfoner, one that gines an inueno-
Me


| Boucque. as Bouche. @Pic. whence;


Boucque du haut ventre. The ue or bole of the


flomacke,next under a breaft bone.
Bouse vam ROME tig
es al: £6 ale: £ 6 +e belonging toa pudding.
Boudrée. as Boni.


= f. Are 1 wires ; filthdung,orduve; bealing,


Boo def, 7 The finall flakes that flye from bot yren |

en bis be

Bouée: f.A Boy fer an anchor. ’ od

Bouér. begle,to mattar ; a ‘among Mintmen)C’
i les carreaux sa qare


Boue ef Tieinted Cammecht,R-berrew, pe petie
whinne, ground Furze.

Bouëte: f. as Bonnette.

Bouëtte: f. A little box ; alfo,as Browétee.

Bouéur: m. A feauinger ; one that carries away the
PP cain gon M of. ‘firects,in carts.

uéux: m.eufe: f. Durtic myrie, flymie, waren fil-

ee ii male ab dure


Bou cin oe by fivelinghy ont |
ment. Px, À ingly,ostfironting.
x: m, 4 wea eater,a Sd eee hé


ar are us by exceffine diet,or fivell exceeding-

be diets. «
Bo m. Any meat that (eaten greedily) fils the
at oa the cheekes to ‘ively se


meat. —


iffes i ei
arde Me 7. aici,
Ont aif fivelling with anger er,

na monfir
j x chee which we pus eup in
fwvollen,or fwelling pe +


| Bouflé: 1 of ef Puffed, blowne ;fwrollen vp, or out;


the
ee = [ Beet: fA pues igen:


Oricinat from
HE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


A
*
B O V B O V
a ome uft of wind ; al/o,a fhort,and violent fit. candle ufed in churches ; Looke Pointe.
ouffée de feu, feu, À flafh of fire; fuch a one as comes | Bougié. Seared with a wax-candle,
te bm of cease or poten it is fhotoff.. | Bougier. Tofeare with a wax-candle. e
ént:m.-.4 puffing; blawing ; fivelling vp, or AE 9 m. À Buggerer, a Sodomite.
out; a bourgeonning,a waxing big. oe: m. ée: £ Buggered, abufed by a Sodo-
Boufment. as Boufément.


Bouffer. To puffe,blow ; fwebupor firout aut; to bur-
i, 07 Wax big.

Bouter de courroux. To fre with anger ; to bei in
his fumes.

oe ad ig ig f “ ;
ouf: m, 1¢:f TER ed up,firoutingout.
Hareng boufh. À full-roed berring.
Ocil boufh. An extreamely fivolne eye that moanes
— difficultie, and bath loft it natwrall and linely co-


Boiindsm . Ge: £. Eaten greedily,or mit flan pf
up cheekes.
Bouffr. Ta puffor ‘bla p 3 to make to elo fro
Bouffe: 4/»
uffiflure: f 4 Povelling or puffing up,a routin out;
alfo,a kind of dropfie. ime veah a
on: m. A buffoon, ieafter, [ÿcophant, merrie foolé,
pe companion; one that lines by making ethers


Danfer les buffons. To daunce a morris.
Bouffonner. Te buffoonixe it; to play the foole,ieafier,
none bafely to get a lining by ieafis, or teafting.
Bouffonnerie: f. Bouffoonifine, ieafting.
Bouffonnefque. Buffoone-like.
Bouffonneur. 4s Boufton.
Boufron : m. A Cuttle-fifh.


Bug: m. The little,andvenomons ane fear ble Bouill


Bou coupé. A Tortoifé.
ghost iveling,firouting;pr flandingout in a fus
peece of worke: pri na fe a buc
belly, or out-leaning of awa chase
a little roome, or va built without the wall of a
. chamber.
Bouge: f. À budget, wallet, great pouch, male, or café
ather, feruing to carrie things in bebind aman on
Areas
Ila bien remply fes bouges. He hath gained exetf-
fiuely,be bath feathered bis neaft exceedingly.
poupe m. éc: f. Stirred,budged, remoued, parted
om
Bougeon: i ate or ges poe
Rouge Fe rre,b ge, fat remoue;part:
i bouge ? The words of a certaine game;


Eh tcbouge Proy. Let not bim budge


that finds bimfelfe well [eated.
Tel penfe voler qui ne ‘Glam : Prov. He


meanes to pie yet “ours moue arming; (faid of an o-
pen. > à which shoughae EE mikanes
attempts all matters.) \ x


2 oe
Bougeron. as Bougre.


| Bougetier. 4 budget-maker; ora maker of liste


den coffers crc. asin Bougette,

| Bougette : £ A little coffer,or trunke foi sucré
“wih leather, wberevwuh the women of old time carried
“their iewels.attires and trinkets at their faddle bowes,
when they rid into the countrey ; now gentlemen call fa,
Den ech tranke 3 end the box,or til of their cae
nets wherein shey keepe SOR GRIN 2 |


Boupie:f 4,


Bomeironact. To bugger ; to commit (berrible) Sode-


Bougnete: :f. The fimooth and long-tailed Ray, called
the For
Bougoir: mfg candice (of mettall) for a fixe,
or (final) wax-candi
Orleannois.


Bougonner. Tobungl.
onneur:m. A bungler.
np ire if ent etmeent te
ettie Whinne.


fe boas erte,Sodomie.
Bougrin: m. ine f. Sgen fe fr ‘buggerie ;
Mees


' Chauffes HMabo ine. Strait-venetians, without
pie. vi waits x
1 Bouerifque :com, Bugger scommitiin Sodomie.
Bouhou 1 Pour as Behousde ms ;
Bouhourdi premier & {econd. The firft and fecond
Sunday in Lent.
Bouillamment. Hotly, eagerly, fervently, with a boy


Boule: zm. anté : € Boyling, fealding bot.
Bouilli : m. Any broth,ar boyled meat.

Bouilli: m.ie:f. Boyled, fodden.

Bouillir. To boyle,or feeth ; alfo, to buble in feetbing.
on: m. Mullein, Wooll-blade, Long-wort, High-
perf aches Fare: -beard Bullocks Long-wort,Hares-
ard,

Bouillon blanc. Eafè wbite Mullcin, whereof there
be twa kinds, one with broad, the. other with narrow,
leaues,


Bouillon Lychnite. este Mullein,
Bouillon noir. Bafe b
Bouillon fauvage. wit den: bath leaues like
Sage, and yellow fbining flowers.
Bouillon:m. A boyling, bubling,or buble ; alfo,a broth,
or boyled meat ; alfo,durt,myre ; and,a pla IZ ,0r da-
ng ; alfooaten grows a kind of fmall drmke made of
Outs; 3 5 alfoa great and dpt a “es fluade ;
any great-headed,or fiudded payl
Bouillons. Puffes,ia a garment, rs à
Bouillon de fleurs, & fruiéts. À thicke bunch,or.clu-
: fler of fundrie leaues, fruits, 93 flowers, Seeming to


Boul altogether out of one
uillon de fumée. vn mp cloud of fimoake.


anse A té of blond.
Res € Boled, bubled firgeds alfo, |
Princes ae babe ith x
Bouillonnement: m. A baying bublinga fie ging,a
wee To boyle, buble, furge, feeth ouer allo, to


- feething ouer
ina garment.
B de eufe : £. Boyling, or bubling alfe,
O nneux : m. valli of pfs. 3


illu, as
Bouton er an arrow with a great, er bread,


Bouiotte: E-Apigeon-bolein a doue-cote.

Bouis: m. Box ; or the Box tree.
Bouis d'afne. The Box thorne rc Bs apes
tree, 8%


BO V


Bouis efpineux;ou piquant. The fame.
Grand bouïs. Great Box,or,the Box treet.

® Petit bouis. Dwar sé Box,gr ound Box.

Bouiffiere : f. A Box-plot 54 vy fae ground fet,or flo-
red, with Box.

Boukimbarbe. 2s Bouchimbarbe.

Boulanger. as Boulenger.

Boular: m. The little round neaft ofa Martin, Titmonfe,


or.

Boulay:m. 4 Birch tree.

Bouldure d'un moulin. The conduit, or fall-trough,
wherein the wheele goes.

Boule: f. 4 Bowle (to play with ; or to drinke in)
Boule veuë. A certaine play at Bowle-caftia €-
in if the Bowle be at any time out of fight , the cafler
loofes ; whence;
louër à boule veué. Todeale furelp, worke on fure
grounds ynake a warie bargaine, me ile with that for
which be fees good warrant.

Le coup valoit bien la boule. See Coup.
Tenir pied à boule. To apply bus bufineffe ; to bold
bard,or kcepe clofe to it,

Bouleau : m. Birche; alfo,a {mall Bowie ; and bence,
Les bouleaux d'un vis. The circles , or circling of a
Scrue.

Boulengé: m. ée: f. Baked, made intobread,

Boulenger. To bake make bread;or make into bread.

Boulengeric:£. A baking ; alfo, a bakeboufe,

Boulengier: m. 4 biker.

Pet de boulengier. 4 fart

Boulengiere : € À woman b re i alfo, as Boulen-
gerie; a bakehonfe.

Bouler. To bowie.

Boulerot: m. 4 little round,blackifh, and fennie Gud-
geon,that lines continually imu

Boulefche: f. À great fifb-net, called a Scene,or Seyne.

Boulet: m.4 bullet; 2i/o,asBolere; on
Boulet noir. 4 beanie poyfonous and blackifh ar of
the Excr eféence, called Agatic.

Arbalefte à boulet. 4 Steae-bow. |

Boulette: f. Aile ome

Boulettes de C es nuts;oÿ c
;ou,Bo por :m. A Buby
erfe : F.A fubuer fion,ouerturnezouerthr

5x rm. éc: £ Subuerted, gr ower-


Bauer eament :m.Anowerturning, fubuertingoner-
See ouerturne,or turne top fieturuie,to fub-
_ Wer tsto onerthrow.

Bouleverfeur: m. An ouerturatr, Pense; ouer-,

thrower,
Boulevert: : m, À Bubarke.

e-veuê. Séeke Boule.
Bot e,& Boulgette. as B

: £. Pap,or broth, for chi
Re bild


Las


BON.
mm op f. A top-fayle.


Boullaufe: f..4 Poute,or Ee |
Bouller. To cog, foift ; beguile, ‘octane pa 3 alfo, to |
pr tee |

Où! ni. Az Italian ij.d.flerl.
Boullén. as Boulon. es af
ee m.ée: f. ee ae mar 5 puffes.

ouloers d'vn vis. The circles,or cir RY
Bouloirs. #5 Bouloers, Se
Bouloire : f. A bowling alley.
Boulon. 4 long,big,and big-hended pe ofveved svbere- s
je. Carpenters ioyne great peeces of timber toge-
t


(v.m m)
Boulture:£.4 feetbing,a boyling,a babe
Bounce, as Borne.


Bouqu 5 ier.
Bouqué: m. as Bouquet.
d'Ange:f. Confèrne, or fuckct, of Lettice


Bouquer ih kiffe eer thumbe;to take ges
a tucke,or If, to flrike fayle, or pay c
Pos sepafiaghy fome PRET Pr
rm. A nofé; ges pofie of flavers,érc ; alfo, a
lock of woolls 5 alfo,a buckle-bone;(alfo,a great Prawne,
gNorm.) af 0,4 Re a = ;
anfle uquet. Ti annce, or
daunce (for theres much kffing i, i ela
‘Baillerle bouquet. See Bailler.
Elle a mis le bouquet fous I’ oreille. (Of a widow)
Shewould fine be had,woon, or married; (of a where)
2e fhe may (for money) be bad woon,or vfed ; (In France,
when they ride, or lead, out borfes, which they would
fell, they vfe to flicke pofies under their eares.) )
gies ee :m.ere:f, Of; or belonging to, nofegayes,
noftg,
Bougie; An bearbe-wifé; facb a one as ufès to
elor to
Bouquin:n m. A Kid; up. tbe baïrie bu{hor Pubes.
A(Muficall) Cornet.
Von ay uin. An old booke ; alfo, an old {chol-
\ ler sor,one that bath red ouer many old bookes.
Bouquin: sai £ Leacherous,lafcinious ; alfo,ranke,
ri
uiner. To grow bairie about the prinities ; alfo, to
» be aslafciuiows,or fineil as ranke, as a goat ; alto be.
bookifh,or,to read much in old bookes.
Boutache: f. 4 Borrachoc; or bottle(of leather) alfija
candle-cafe; rod engine (like a candle-cafè) where-
2 with fifh is caught.
Bourachon:m. 4 fiall Borrachoe ; a little candle-
cafe; alfo,a drunkard,or Toffe-bottle. |
Bouras:m. The towe of bempe; the courfe if part of any


ich like it | a
— + A fre eo hr f | ag


É aa re +
L jm eue £ Louing the mud, seat


Original from
THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


mn iA” =


ey OLV Ss


a Pilgvions flaffes alfo,buazed,or bummed.’ |.
Bour t: m. A buxxing, ov bumming, as of | :


B O V ‘4

| Bourbettt.4/i fihsthat aleogether line

| ae eager tbe serine

i Bourbetter, ‘To wallow in mud; to paddle,or pudder ;in
t À vd

Bourbeuxsm.eufe-€ Maddie, er fof muds fi


te \
Bourbier: m. A muddie place,a flough,or puddle full of


Drones rc.
Bourdonner. To buxxe,or bumme like a Drone,érc.
Bourdonnefque: com. Hamming, buxxing, Drone-


Bourdonneur: m. A bammer,or buzzer; alfo,one that


durt,and mud.
Bourblier. as Bourbelier. :
i Bourbonnois: m. oife: f. Of Bourbon.
‘ "Tarte Bourbonnoife. À deepe flough, bog, or quag-
mire; a (of illintertainement) for a bore.
Bourboulenc. The name of aVine.
| Bourcier.fefbourcier. as fief bourfal; (par la Couf-
| tume des Chartres.)
| Bourdaine:f. Acertaine low, and vpright-branched
ñ (French) bedge-tree, whofe wood is very weake,
iy light, bearing a bervie (of the bigneffe of a bam) firkt
ors. pale, then red, at length blackes exceedingly loned by
Ags. ;
_ } Bourdant: m. ante: f Ieafting,bour ding ; trifling toy-
Ds: ing ; foifting,cogging with, eulling of, wens
. Fruffant bourdant. Betweene ieaft and earneft.
Bourde: f. 4ieafi,fib,tale of a tub.
= Donner la bourde del’ Alouetee. Seeke Alouette.
| Bourdé: m.ée: f. Grauelledas acart,oc.
| Bourdelage: m. 4 Tenure in the dominion of Nevers,
ie whereby the tenant is bound to pay unto bis Landlord
an yedrely rent in money, corne, and féathers,or in any
two of them ; which if be omit three yeares together,
à er sa bis eflate; In Bourbonnois it is as Taille
celle :


Boutdelais. A certaine Vine,or grape that yeelds verie |.


foure wine; and therefore is it vfically fet about arbors,
; more for the fhadow,then for the fruit jt yeelds.
_ | Bourdelafier. Full of ieafts.or of tales.
+ ourdelier. Let out, or held in Bourdelage ; alfo, bol-
< ding by,or fubieét vnto.it.
à Seigneur bourdelier. ‘The Lord unto whom Bour-


x delage is due. :
Bourder. To toy, trifle, dally ; bourd,or ieaft with ; alfo,
Ÿ to cog foif,gulLfel a bargaine,gine a gudgeonvntosal-
fo,to quip,gird; moche, feof at.
- Bourdereau. #5 Bordereau.


Bourdes: £. Sybs, fibs,rappers,lyes ; toyes to mocke apes ;
tales to gull affes with ; alfo, fcoffes, ieafts, gibes, cuts,
quips ; and bence;

Ce font les pires bourdes que les vrayes: Pro. The
Bt trueft ieafts found worft in gusltie eares. L
| Bourdeur: m. A macker;ieafler ; cogger;lyer, foifier,
= gullerofpeople. =

Bourdican: m. A begging frier.

Travailler en bourdican. To trudge vp and downe,

totrot to and fro,to toyle like a borfe,neuer toreft.
Bourdin: m. ‘The fhell-fifh called à Limpia, or Lempet.
Bourdon: m.4 Drone,or Dorre-bee; i


~~) *


=~ or buxxing of bees; alfo, the drone of a Bagpipe; alfo
pe the big end of a club,érc ; alfo,a Pilgrims 3alfo,a
| walking flaffe bauing a fword, oc; within it 5, (fome-
times) alfo,a Pike,or Speare. ; |


Le bourdon d'un moulin à vent. .4 wind-mill


:* ‘ en faux bourdon ; See Faux-bordon.
Demeure à bourdon planté. A fixed dwelling, 4
fétledrefidence in a place. ,
mnafles: £. A fashion of great bollew launces


| A 9 £. Furnifhedwith, or made like to


+ > a, ~~


Bourdonniere:. The gudgeon thats in the top of the


Bourelet. as Bourler.
Bourellé:m. ée:£ Tormented, tortured, extreamely


ve.

Bourellemént:m. A torture, torment,cruell racking ;
Bourellément. off cruelly, with much torment.
Boureller. To torture,torment,vex horribly,


Bourellerie: f. # Bourellement,or Bourrelerie.
Bouret. Akind of fhel-fifh.  - |


Bourg : m. 4 Bourough,or great Towne (withom wals,


ther. ]

Bourgade: f A village, bamlet, finall borough.

Bourgage: m. A sommelier bonronshfop 3 the inha-
[4


——— m. A Spanifh coyne worth about xvii) d.


Bourgamaiftre: m. .4 Mayor, or Burgamafter ; the


neal m. A citizen, townef-man, burguer, bur-
(4


_ upon reall actions.


_flate, or condition, of a burguer, or burge


Ts is Se 7 y


playes on a Bagpipe.
barve,or bindge-band,of a gate.


extreame vexing.


aces
De en ©. Wandering,like a vogue, from
boron bourough ; or,from one good bei


bitants of houfes in lands belonging to a towne,or bou-
rough ; alfo,an eftate, or tenure in Burgage, beld either
of the king (as our Borough Englifh) or of other Lords
of the Borough, and fubiect to no other then the cufto-
marie and accuftomed reats,or feruices thereof.


principal Magiftrate, or Officer, in a citie, or good
towne. D ;


; alfo,a freeman,in any place.
i geois d Amphitrite. 4 fifh; a freeman of the
ea.

Bourgeois du Comtede Nevers. His freed men;
who payed unto bim an yearely rent of xij d. Tourn.
andin regard of their freedome under bim, were torc-
nounce all other lords. :

Le Bourgeois d'un Navire. The owner of a fhip.
Bourgeois du Roy. The kings burgelfe, or freeman ;
a lay and true-borne, yeoman , neither gentleman,
clerke,nor baflard mxft be be) at firft ofa féruile, now
of a free, condition ; yet fubieët vnto all proceedings
of Iuftice, though with fome mens 3 for, m many
parts of France,be muft not be impleaded in any Court
but the Kings ; and elferwbere (in inferior courts) onely


Francs bourgeois . Free Burgeffes ; thofe that pay
no yearely fines for their freedome, se fo many ordina-
rie amerciaments of courts as otbers ; though they doe
Some other feruices and yeeld other contributions, as 0-
thers unto their lords. *
‘Selon la ville les bourgeois: Prov. Such tone fuch
townefmen.


Bourgeois: m.ife: £. Burguerly,citixen-like ; belonging


toacitizen, burgelfe, burguer.

Coution « SE iris fecuritié, or fecuritie of

rich,and re citizens.

Pain eois. Crible bread; bread thats betweene

a cenit | ; efi a
rf. A burguerfhip, or tat ee |

és alfo, bur- |
“guers,


BOY


guers,burce([es,freemen,townefinen,citixens;or a crue,
or the fe f = rs thereof; alfo, at boreughfhip ;
andthe liberties, freedome, or priuiledges belonging to
 towne,or borough.

coifie d’avenage. A certaine quantitie of
Oats leuied to the kings ef thofe, who are made free
of the towne of Mchun fur Eure ia Berry.
Droi& de bourgeoifie. Freedome ; alfoan yearely
dutie,or fine of xij d. Paris: payed unto the king by free
burge(fes ; who in Lieu thereof may refife to anfwer in
any court, but his, any perfonall attion, or complaint
whatfoeuer ; except st be for an offence committed at
that prefent,or three months before their freedome ob-
tained. (This Dutie is alfo called, Devoir de bour-
geoifie.)
Droiét de bourgeoifie de la Baffée fous Lille. An
yearelyrent, or dutie of iiij d, payed by euerie free-


CT
Droié de bourgcoifie dela Chaftre en Berry. A
certain yeer ely fumme,and a henne,payed by euery free-
manvuto the lord of that place.
Droit de bourgeoifie de Sedan. is xx d. 4 yeare ;
and when he is made free (if be be the fonne of a free-
man)ij s. vj d; or (if a forreiner) v s. payed unte the
Duke of Busllon.
L'entrée de la bourgeoifie de Calais. A dutie of
xxv francs, payed by euery one that is made a bur-
Seflesor freeman,of Calis.
urgeon: m, The young bud, fprig,or putting out. ef a

Vises alfa pimple in the ri - oC
Bourgeon de laine. A Jacke of wooll.
Bourgeons. writlings,or critlings; the finalleft, and
moft untimely apples or peares ; tearmed fo by the
Normane Fruiterers.

Bourgeonné : m. é¢: f. Budded,burgeonned 3 put,
(bring, fprouted out.

Bourgeonnement: m. 4 fpringing, budding, putting
out.

Bourgeonner. To bud, (pring, or fprout out ; to burge
on, put,or fhoot out. : :

Bowgedtieuts m. cule: f Full of buds ; richly fet
with pimples.


et: m. A round floole.
Bourgrain : m. Buckeram,
Bourgefpine: f. Buck-thorne, Way-thorne, laxatiue
Ramme. ,
Bourguignon: m. A Burgonian, one of Burcundie ;
ay 1 name of a Vine whereof there bee diners


rguignon blanc. The moffinitfll of allmbite


Vines,
id cinquain. as Foirard.
on noir, 4s Neraut.


:£ A Burganet, Hufkin, or Spanifh


arlet. He braines,or,fuch as bane


ds then beads; and ( more partic


GC | etre of


B Oo Vv | d'y à …


Bournal: m. A bonny-combe.


Bournois. as Bournal ; or,a Bee-neaf}, or Bee-hine, fill LR


of bonny-combes.

Bourrabaquin: m. A great caroufing glaffe, f-{hioned
Like a Cannon,Horne, or in fome ot ranticke manner ;
(fometimes) alfo ya Bourrachoe. ’

Bourrache. as c.

pe a A Roifton Crow,
achon: m. A ti wafer, ip-canne;
alfo,a little evade " sat ce
e:f A > or forme; alfa, the c or
ruffling of a bind by elon és a fe oe
<üng of a bare by a greyhound before be beare her.

C. Puffed vp, ffrouting out, with flocks rc.
Bourraquin. as Bourrabaquin ; ora Bourvachoe. -
Bourras: m.#s Borrais; alfa, filke-rafh; alfo, groffe, or

courfecanuas.


Bourraffer. To baftinade,beat,bolamme,bethwacke.


,_ the toffing, or mux- |


Bourre : £, Flockes,or lockes of ‘wooll,baire,erc, feruing |


to fluffe Jaddles, bals, and fuch like things; alfo, the


dovene,or hairie coat wherewith divers bearbes, fruits, |


and s are conered ; alfo (leffe properly) any fuch
trafb, as chaffe, fhales, buskes, rc ; alfo “ih vfhally)
the couering,clotbing,or backe-part,of a man.
de foye. Towe of filke, or the courfeft file
comes of the balls which tbe wormes haue pierced.
Raifins qui font encores en bourre. Grapes that
- areas yet in the bloffome, or, fo young as they bane no


: Fairebourre voler. To play much at Tennis (the ball
being meant by bourre, wherewith it is fluffed) alfo,to
uft muchor fpend much at, any cofily game, paftime, or
exercife,

Bourte. 4 Ducke. qNorm.

Bourré: m. ée:f. Stuffed,or flopped with baire, flockes,
crc; alfo,beatcn,thumped,cudgelled ; alfo,fopped.
urreau: m. An executioner; a hangman,


 Bourrée: f. 4 bauia,or fag got,of twigs ; a bundle of any


uch like fluffe.
Boonels fal ée: f. Tortured, tormented; executed #
extreamely vexed, 4
rreler:To torture,torment ; execute ;vex extreame-
ly; See Bourreller.
urrelerie:f. A torturing,tormenting; executing; th”


office of a bangman ; alfoyan extreame vexation.
Boone dpe sat mg
Bourrelier : m. 4 maker of hor fe-collars. :
Bourrelier: m. ere: f.Tormenting,torturing executing
with crueltie ; vexing extreamely,
+ Totorture, terment, execute cruelly ; vex
extreamely. |
- Ibourrelle la befongne. (Said of « bungling artifr-
_ cer) be fpoyles both worke and fluffe.
Bourrer. To fiuffe with flocks,and baire ; alfo, to beat,or


to flop


art of the clue, or ball of
“ER. à


| FN
ages 5) ee ee


5 BC ! 54 £ ly,
Preepings,or vaprofitable;and boufe-def


À


ry, !
Ily ers en faflufte. Al isnot well with


Ilyade
«bin; famerphat’s amiffe in the matter.


554 | Digitized » Go. gle a2
ie TF a-<- Paw ~


Pr» ARE EE 7 Ce mm


\ Original from
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


d, Chaffesveed, Cotton. |!


c


:m.A kind of tombrell,or dung-cart ; alfo,
5 D is for a bor{e; and bence;
b et. Words wherewith the Millers,
ec. im France driue forward their Affes.
Bourroche: f. Bourrage.
Bone m. ué: f. Flockie, hairies rugged, bigh-nap-
ped.
Vin bourru . New fiveet der; fuch as is not yet
fit after vintage ; or, new, thicke, vnfined (white)


Bovis Moyne bourry.æs Moyne beur.

Boas. chevres, por ieee pennes,for goats.

Bourfal: m. A younger brother. _

Bourfal: m. ale: £ Of a younger brother, whence;

Fief bourfal. The inheritance, or portion of mberi-
tance,belonging to a younger brother.

Bourfalement. Tenir b. B Poa the title of youngerfbip ;

different from that of the elder brother,wha is to do bo-
maze vato the Lord for the whole inheritance.

Bourfavit : m. A prick-purfe,or purfe for a prickes alfa,
a kind of | bis! leatherne purfe, worne by many right be-
fore their codpeeces.

Bourfaul: m. The Cane withie,or,Cane Willow.

Bourfaut: m. A little purfe.

B +m. Younger brethren.

Bourfe: f. A purfe; alfo, a bag, fatcbell, pouches alfo,a
cafe ; any thing made of leather to put, or keepe tooles,
or other implements in; 3 alfo,a ballocke, or,the outward
skin wherem the cod is | contained ; ; alfo,a purfe-net; al~
fo, the place of a Pentioner in 4 Colledge (we callit a
Schellerfhip,or Fellowfbip;) or in the Chancerieor Ex-
chequer ; alfosthe Penfionit [elfe ; fo tearmed,becaufe
“ is commonly delinered in a Purfè vnto the partie

bat hath it.
Sows de berger.Shepbeards purfe,poore mans Par-

' obec 09 Pickpurfe,Coofeweed.

Bourfe Couftumiere. 4 or cuflomarie te-
pia meets apurchefe made by. jf yeoman, or cuftomarie
FD de Curé. as Bourfe de Loge

Bourie defliée. Readie money; or, money disburfedgr
payed downe for a thing.

Bourfe de Pafteur, as à Bourke de banger

Clameur de bourfe. Az aétion brought for the reco-
uerie of an aliened inheritance, ‘ Norm.


Demarche de bourfe. The fame
Rouge bourfe. 4 Robin red breaf; (called fo in Sa-


ue élan lo baie.


en divers lieux: Pro. Le
Belle hofteffe c’eft un mal pour la bourfe: Pro. A


fre bofteffe brings in a foule reckoning.
"Le petit fe conte la bourfe: Prov. wee Sas light


make heanie purfes.
Seg en
—- Pro. ma Lu ETS


gets. ua, Misti,


POV. .«


BO V


Quin’ BR UE du moins du miel eri
_ bouche: Pro. Looke Argent.
Selon ta bourfe gouverne tabouche: Prov, 264
fre thy appetite by thy abilitie.


Bourfé: m. Ge: f. Purfid, impurfeds inclofed, or fout À


St 2 pur{è;bulchingsor bearing out,as a full purfes


Boulet. 4 little Merde fivelling, fucb a rifs
sor after nettling
Bourke ect. A Mie D Compas,pr all.
Bourfer. To purfè, impurfe s'inclofe, or fhut vp, as in a
purfe;alfosto gather wake bulch,or béare out,as a(full)
purfe; to bunt,or leane a bunt in a fayles


A little purfe; bag,pouche.
Bourfet de + i= reine.
et de hune. The top-fa ale ‘of a fri a Pip.
i eteux: m. eufe : tf ocean > belonging toa
b 5 full of purfis.
Bout te: f. À little purfe.
aye! delafemence: The feed veffels ; as Pa-
tons la a bounties ak A hauke,taken ont of the pi
be filly mp ea peers 4 2 FA as


ourfeux. as Bourfereux.
Bourficouter. To make a purfe,gathering,or collebtion.
Bourfier:m. 4 Pensioner or,one that hath an yearely
Penfion in a Colledge ; or out of the fees comming in by
a Court of Iuflice; (and fuch are the Kings Secreta-
ries,and Clerkes of’ the Chancerie,whofe intertainment
is pone them out of the profit made by the Great
Sea
Bourfiller. To contribute euery one bis pennie ; to make
a purfe,or lay their monyes together as Mummers,crc,
ufetodoe; alfo, to put bisband into bis purfe, or take
fomewhat out of bis purfè.
Bourfillon : m. A little purfe.
Bourfin. Acertaine little rope that fernes to fetch in the


fprit-fayle.
Bourfon: m. A little purfe; cafe; bag.
Bourfoufflaile : f. indie pri e,idle vanitie.
aires reef m. ée: £, Swolne,puffed, or blowne vp,as
with wind.
Bourfouffler. Te fvell with wind,to puffesor blowup.
Bourfouffleute: £.4 fivelling of the guts, or of any otber
os by windinelfe ; any fivelling, puffing, or blowing


out im, À Buxxard, or bauld kyte. Savoyard,
Boufat. as Boufant.
Boufcheinent : m. 4 oping eReppel iftation..


Said busw @ Clicket is ewer wag- | Boufcher. To fiop,ob/tr t tp ; alfsto hobdhwi

ô fume is not En 1 sel : Les fruits fe HP tails when the eme of
à part. To keepe houfe,or make a houf?- atree ave clofed (or nipped) by cold Phare prit

Farebourte pa any communitie of. goods,er of comes of them. A

mn others. Boufcheron. 4 bill-man; alfo,a fag zot- maker à

us les: | re il s'en foncfiysde fa bone. Boufchon: m. 4 flopple; See Bouchon.  -;

Ser onnier. mt. | Boufé de vache: f. Fons ginSa pe Re G

Venir entre la bourfe & les | , | _ Cow-fhard,

foreftall come betweene and home. Seeke V: Boufée:f. The fame

Abbé & conventcen’ef qu'un; mais Ja boule ef Boufet. atic boule: Ali dit flow a parie


Boul spa Horsriod ins.
wind i |
le: Ehret Boufin) daubing, or fluffe. to
arin se with À
Boufiller : m. one M ab ag:

To daube;alfo,to r flubber a ouer.
ee ie ad mvvldertng,(abjlanct shacleawe
* to the out free-flone, in a eee
i , from the flone it be |

M


pigitized by Go: gle


J Par to ina fo)
THE CANGSIATE HATS RSATY


= Like tb


L


BOV


. B O V


Boufinier.pierres boufinieres. Soft,and moulderi
or melting away in water,or by weatber ; ( for thofe
properties of the Boufin.)

Béuffade: £. The rot, or plague, among fheepe. qLan-


gued.

Boufle : f. The bunch of « Cammels backe ; or(generally)
as Boffe.

Bouffin : m. A bit,cantill mammeckeynorfell. Gal.

Bouflole:f. 4 Pilets Dyall, Compafft or Quadrant.

Bouflu. as Boflu.

Bouft: m. À tombe, fepulchre, graue ; a place wherein
a dead bodic bath beene buried,or burned.

Bouftargues. as Botargues.

Bout: m. The end,bead,point,top,or tip,the extreame,or
vtmoft,part (in the length) of a thing ; hence, the chape
of a fcabberd ; the bead of an arrow,érc.

Les bouts des coftez. Stitches in the fides.

Bafton à deux bouts. 4 Quarter-flaffe ; or, a Lope-
flaffeywherewith Low-countrey men leape duches.
Vne corde à trois bouts. 4 threefold rope.

Bout cy bout là.Bungarly,difor deredly,fleuenly;bere
a peece,and there a patch.

‘A chaque bout de champ. Still, ewermore, euerie
where,in each place,at all times.

Du bout des levres feulement.Sleightly;nicely,dain-
tily; from the teeth outward,onely with the tip,edge,or


outfide,of the lips.
Toni réa On euery fide, at euery turning, enerie
where.


Weft au bout de fa corde. He can doe no more pe can
goe no further ; be may put up bis pipes, goe fhake bu
eares.
Ils font au bout delaroye. They are at their wits
end, at their laft belpes ; they baue [pent their pouder;
they baue no more tofay.
Gaigner le haut bout. To take,or (et bimfelfe in, the
higheft place of a table; alfo, (in contentions, or trials)
to get the upper hand, carry away the beft prixe, win
the fpurres.
Il ne peut au bout de l'an nouër les deux bouts de
fa fervierte enfemble, Hee lines very barely; bath
nought but oo: hand to mouth ; cannot fpare a dogge
abonc,at the yeaves end.
Recerchons le bout de noftre fufée. Let us returne
te our matter, «
Ine regarde plus loing que le bout de fon nez. He
is a carelelfe,idle,lazie Zl unpronident fellow.
Setenir fur le bon bout. To fland upon bis good
parts,bebauior,or birth. :
Se tenir fur lehaut bout-To fland upon bis pantofles,
or on high tearmes. À
Au bout la borne: Pro. At length we {hall refolue,or
fettle,vpon fomewbat.
D Sr pe le drap : Prov. Seeke
Aulne.
Boutade:f, 4 farting ; a fuddaine, violent, and vnex-
petted paffion,or ftirring ; alfo,asBoutce.
e. droit de boutage. A certaine dutie,or fee,
" exahed bythe Lard of Bree (a member of Bourges)
| for the wine retayled within bis iuvifdittion,
| Boutant:m. 4Buttreffeor fhore-pof.
Boutant: ee ge po 2
forward; alfo,budding,or putting forth.
Arcboutant. Looke Arc. - \


Bo de rrp med
‘ul: m. À Monkeor Frier,thats but a noviceor


ae Orders ; called fo by the common peo-


ple.
Travailler enboute-cul. & Travailler en Bourdi-
can ; Looke Bourdican.

Boutée:f. A put,pufb,thruf; a iert, brunt; fhocke;vio-
lent attempt veber fly s allo, a putting, [paatingy


“A boutées:as par boutées; alfo,by beaps,or troupes.
Par boutées. By fits,or pufhes ; not all at ence ; eft-
gs id and then.
Par plufieurs boutées. Many and fundry times onc
sr Le à 3 by diners efforts made one in the necke
the other.
Boute-feu : m. 4 Boutefeu;awilfüll,or veluntarie firer
Fra) alfo, a firebrand of fédition , a kindier of
ife and contention; one that loues to fet,and fee, men
together by the eares.
Boutefoire. 4 certaine fhitten yew-game.
Boute-hors: m. The play called,Thruft out the harlot ;
(wher ein the weakefl ener come to the worft.)
Bon boute-hors.4 good wit,conceit,und¢rtanding;
ora good vtterance,a ready se. que quicke deliuerie.
ille : £..4 bottle ; alfo,a buble raifed on the water,
bya ag of vaine,erc.
Tien eft plus afforté qu’ un coquin de fa bouteille.
He is more fond of it then a beg gar 1s of bis difh,
Im'a bailléle bouchon d'une bouteille. See Bou-


Ils’enyvrede fa propre bouteille. He à too farre in
with bis owne good parts ; or,be abufes them to bis
gear fhame, and confifion.
erre loing de foy n° apporte que flafcons & bou-
teilles:Pro.Grounds lying a farre off,breed nonght but
flaggons and bottles; (viz. extraordinarie expences.)
ie: f. Acupboord, or table, to fet bottles on;
alfo,a cupboord,or boufe,to keepe bottles in.
2 ner 0 :£ 4 wade buble.
Bouteillier: m. A butler; al/o,a bottleman
the bottles ; alfo,a bottle-maker. per
Grand boutcillier.The great Butler of France;an he-
nourable Officer, but out of date, eucr fince Charles
the feuenths time. .
Bouteilliere:f. 4 je inor fivelling ofsthe lower
art of the bellie,by reafon of much water, or waterifh
gathered together init.


Boutement: m. A thrufling.putting,pufhing forward.
Boutement des feu. 4 wabsions fits of houfes.
Bouter. To thruft,put, force,p ard ; alfo, to bane
a fivong breath (a faulconers tearme) alfo, to bud, or
put forth, as a tree in the Spring ; alfo, to roote, as a
Swine.
Bouter capàla mer. To, caf about tofea-ward ; a
fo tomake towards the maine. -
uter de loo. To lay tackeaboord.
Bouter felle. To fxddle ; to clap afaddle on a borfes
bac


Bouter au vent. ‘To beare roomeward; or, to fill the
‘ayles with wind.

outer ventdevant. Togoe too neere the wind.
Bouter vent en penne. To bring a {hip vpom the


gute = d


FT HS me ce 4


Si boute eel feur relle vente, ‘The thing is fold as i
Piha ‘bought, et goe ps it came; or (more elfe)
. no matter, th ynough,let be bow't will, come on’t


what can.
Bouterolle : f. The chape of a fheath,or {cabberd.


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


BOV
Boute-felle. (rhe word for berfemen to prepare them-
Selues) to borfe. : À


Boute-vent des Alchymiftes ; a hole,or vent,in the top
of their furnaces. ; 1


à ie acheter Re
outicle. as Boutique; al/o,awell,or lepe,
Bouticlier : m. 4 puheehersiesibe that


Ps \
Boutiffle: f. 4 buble of water,&re.
Boutignan. The name of a kind of Oline.
Boutilier. 4s Boutcillier.
Boutine sf. The nanell.
Boutique : f. 4 fhop. à
Courtant de boutique. 4 Prentice, or fhop-boy.
La grands boutique. The Law; or, the proffion
thereof; or the Hall (as ours at me ) wherein
it is practifed , (called fo, belike, becaufe many things
~ may be bad in it for money.) :
PRE elle de la boutique. Seeke Madamoi-
elle.
ui fçaic l'art ferre la boutique. prouerbe taxing
odes fqucamifhuefe of pa Artifis, wbo,for
the moft part, conceale from the world their excellent


b toa
LA


ifts.
Quine fait l'art ferre la boutique: Prov.(Impera-
= let bim that hath no skill (hut vp bis fhop ; (fe
vafit, and unfafe a thing it is for a man to deale in a
trade which he knoweth not;) or,as im Art.
Qui tient boutique doit parler à chafcun: Prov.
Shopheepers muft be courteous ; or, fuchas haue ware
to ell muft haue words at will.
Boutis: m. The rooting of a wild Bore; alfe,asBoutc-
ment. a2
: Boutoir : m. 4 Farriers re : ,
. Bouton: m, A button; alfoya bud of a Vine, érc; alfo,
_ alockeof wall. iw ‘fi
Bouton de feu.An aëtuall cantere beaded like a but-
toa.
Boutons à queuë, Long buttons ; fuch as are laid on
clokes ec.
Bouton de verolle. À pockue botch ; or a high,and e+
minent pimple, burfling out in any part of a bodie infe-
éted with the pockes.
Cautere à bouton. See Cautere. :
Serrer le bouton a.To refraine pepe fhort sor beare
a hard band ouer. ’ nt
Boutonneé: m. ée : f. Buttoned ; budded; cauterixed;
Set thicke with pimples,or pockie botches. —
Boutonnement: m. A buttoning ; a budding ; 4 cau-


terrine. ‘

Boutonnes To bug, (pring, br fprout out; alfo, to but
ton,or clafbes alfo,te cauterrxesor feare with anaëluall
cauter: SLT:

Boutonnerie: f. A buttoning, or clapping; alfo,a bud-
diner prete ela cauterizing: 4% MAN :

Boutonnet: m. Rupture-wort,Burfiwort; (an bearbe.)

Boutonneur : m. A Buttoner; or an infirument where-


Pigit zed " Go. gle


BRA


Botivelt: m: A young Bull,or Bull-calfe.
Bouvi. qui fent le bouvi. Smelling Like an Ox.
muir: in. A Cow-heard, a Neat-beard; a keeper of
Xe7te
Bouvicre: f. 4 finall,reund,bright-coloured,littie-mou-
thed, and teotble[fe, fifb, of the river Seine feldome
catén,becaufe very bitter.
uvillon. 4s Bouveau.
Bouvine:f. 44 ps of Oxen; Neat,Oxen: ~
A bowell,gut,inteftine ; See Boyau:
ge she ee rs Box. =
s ce. Box-thorne, prickly Box, Affes-Box,
pet Box. den Frs
Bouys cfpineux. The fame.
Bouys poignant. Kacchull, Knecholme, Pettigree, |
Bou is Bonde Comedy |
ZC. as c; "LE
Bouzine:f. Arufticall Trumpet, or wind-infirument,
made of pitebed barke. :
Boyau : m. A bowell,gut ;entrall,intefline. -
Oyau avallé. Burfting, or burfineffe; (the bowels be-
ing fallen downe into the cods.) cue
Boyau culier, ou cuillier. The right gut, or arfe-gut
fone of the three principal guts.):
yau gafté. The burt of the draught gut (a difeafe |,
among Oxen.)
Gras boyau. as Boyau culier ; In beafis called, the |
Inche-pinne,or Inne-pinne.)
Le long boyau. The long gut ; the third gut from the
Ventricle; the thin, or fmall gut, wherein the Chylus
waxing thicker, beginneth to reft; alfo, the name of a
fertile plaine in the Iflé of France.
La Maifon de Monfieur boyau. Said of a boxfe
thats flated before and thatched bebind,
Ilaynaulne de boyaulx vuides pour feftoyer fes
parens. He bath a monfirous flomacke, a terrible appe-
tite, a bungrie gut of bis owite.
Boye: m. An Executioner,a Hangman.
BozZel: m. A thicke,or great boultell (commonly) in, or
neere unto,the Bafis of a pillar,
zine: f.as Bouzine.
Braailler. as Braire ; to bray like an Affe.
Bracal. See Braffal.
Bracats: m. Bra(fes,or Vambraffes;armor for the armes.
Brace: £4 meafure of fiue foot ; or,as Brafte.
Bracelet: m. Abracelet; alfo,the wrift of the arme:
Bracelets. Short linkes,and buttons, fet to either fide
phd upfetor port,of a bitt ; or,the watering chaine of
a ott.
Brachet: m. A kind of little bound. as
Brachial: m. ale: £ Ofor belonging to, an arme.
Brachialement. with maine force of armes ; with all
the frength be bath.
Brachieux. as Brachial.
Braconnier: m. A bunter. |.
Bracque. The name ofa field neere Paris, wherein the
fcbollers of the Vaiuer fitie ufe to folace thefelues.qRab.


re- | Bracqué. Laoke Braqué. * |
with buttons are pulled througb their ouer-frait boles. | Brad : £ Slow concottion; orja painfull,and but
Boutonniere: f. à batton-bole | diféeftion,of meat. : ner
Boutouër: m. The (rout of a wild Swine. BeagarchuardestGongeclian, onto rar pert
ts. À great bottle ; or,as Oudre. (v.m.) or dapper;alfa,braggard,bragging, brag cadochio-like.
ice. An afbler,or binding flone (in building.) Bragardement. Gayly, gallantly, flauntingly,vainely;
on. Looke Bouton. ss alo pertly, af, brageardlysbraggingly,vasmingly, è
Bouttute: £. The flip of an bearbe ; the fprigof aplant; | Bragarder. Tobraue, or flaunt it ; to weare gayaitire,
a ting out,in either. . | _ togoe gay; alfo,to brag,vaunt,fmagger,
Bouvaux. The name of a kind of figs. meta || Bragardile: rave paf ung proue
Bouveau: m. Abullockes a little Bill 2 sa sbragging,vaunting ipaggeringe Tw Que
y x Brag-
°


Origi fia top
THEOHIO SR EURE ee


2 ae


5 [ee = a ee


BRA


Bragmarder. To draw,or imploy,bis wbineyard; to lea-

coer.

agp :£ Ahind of Mortaife,or ioyning of peeces to-
et


ragues.Short(and clofè)linmen breeches worne next
unto the thighes.
Braguer. To flaunt,braue; brag,or iet it. A
Braguerie: f. Wanton tricking, lafcinions brauerie, or
pranking ; alfo, flaunting ; bragging,fwaggering- : :
Braguefques: f. Large venitians hauing codpeeces,and
gathered,or full of fluffe,at the knees.
Braguette: f. A codpeece.
Bonnet à quatre braguettes. 4 /quare, or foure-
cornered ,cap.
Bragueur. as Bragard.
Brahiers. as Brayers ; Linnen breeches.
Brailler. 2s Braire. To bray like an Afe,érc.
Il ne perdra point l'auoine à faute de brailler. He
will aot loofe any commoditie for want of words,
Brain: m. The branch of a tree.
Braire : m. An Affe-like braying ; a roaring,rude yelling,
loud balling, unmeafureable crying out. L
Braire.To bray like an Affe; to bawle,yellscry out loudly;
rudely, unmeafiureably.
Braire avec les afnes. 70 follow the fafbion,bow rude
foeuer it be.
Braife: f.A burning coale; quicke fire of coales; or bot
imbers ; alfo, a kind of inflamed felling, full of red-


neffe.

Saulter dela pails & à ietter dedans ee 3 ony
From ill to wore; from the frying-pan into the fire.

Braifier: m. A fine-coale; se coales.

Braifillonner. Te rf or feethvpon quicke coales, or
imbers ; or,as Brafillonner.

Braifiner. as Bramer; to roare:

Braiflet. as Graïffet ; the greene toad.

Brame: f. 4 Breame,
Brame de mer. The fea Breame (called fo at Paris,
where it is ordinarie) alfo, the Guilt-bead,or Golden-
nie (and diners other fifhes of that kind are alfo called
fo by the inhabitants of the (eacoafts.) — ;

Bramé: m. ée : fBraycd,reated,yelled,cried out with a

- barfh voice. .

Benen To bray, roare, yell, or crie out with a harfh


voice.
rue The branne of wheat; alfo, as Bren; a


tur

Brande ludas. Freckles im the face.

Faire de!’ Afne pour avoir du bran. To play the
foole,or make an alfe of bimfelfe,in bope of. gainesor vi-


* Farine du Diable n’eft que bran: Prov. Looke Fa-


rine.
| Toufiours truye fonge bran: Pro. The filthie glutton
3 £
fill dreames of bis belly. à SET
>. ‘Truye aime mieux bran
= loues draffe better then delica a |


an APE es
zm. A cuttleaff or courtelax. : ;
be fides of.


croff-barre ofabilt,


| set SN LG. à


{ 7
:


ts


Digitied by Go gle “al


fes: Prov. The Sow


Brandilloire:£ The ame.


die né À «7 mt. ti,


BR A


Brancas:m.as Brancal. :

peat Bearded red bre *
ranchage: m. Branchinelle; thicknes,or flere ef bran- | |
ches oh, branches, boughes ; alfo, Linage; er the
branch of a Pettigree, rc; as Branche.

Branchages. as Branchieres.

Branche: £. Tbe branch,or bough of a tree ; alfo,the gill
of a fifb; alfo,the cheeke of a bit ; alfo,a collaterall de-
grees Side of kinred ; Linage ; orya branch,or line, of
a Pettigree.
Branche d'augiues. ive.
poche hiene 3 Pris er

ranc ne. Brank-urfin, Beares-foot, Bearcs-
claw,Beares-breech (an pat a
Droiét de branche de Cyprés. Looke Cyprés.
Il fe tient feulement à I eftoc fans s amufer aux
branches. He holds bim onely to the fubfiance,with-
out re(pedting circumflances.
Vole bas de peur des branches. Fe low,orbe flopt
by the branches; beare a low faile, or bee run
water; a middle,or moderate courfe w little (ubieci-un-
to enuious croffings. )

Br e: m. as me à

Brancher. To fit vpon a branch ; to light vpon a bough;
to take a tree; to take flandina tree, as a bauke; to
asc a phefant. r

rancher vn larron.7o twitch atheefe-vp at a bough,
to bang bim vp at a tree.
Tant que tige faict fouche elle ne branche iamais.
As long as there are any beïres of an elder Prince of the
bloud,the younger cannot inberit the crowne.

Branchet. Efpervier branchet. 4 brancher, or young
bauke,nevoly come out of the neaft.

Branchette: f. A little branch.

Branchier: m. ere: f. Hawnting,or living among,bran-
ches; pearching,or fitting,on boughes; alfo,of,or belon-
ging to,a branch,or bough.

* Efpervier branchier. .4 brancher, or young bauke,

« newly come of the neafl. 4,
ranchiere: £ A Paffage-toll,or through-toll;f calle
Rs oe ne fis figne ca A Gilead

ont } tree or other.

Beaachietes. The out-places, or parts of the bigh

' way,wherein the faid logs,or billets,haue beene, a long

time, bung vp. |

Branchillon. A little branch. : |

Branchu: m.ué: f.Branchie,branched ful of branches.


or bougbes. :
Branchué: f. A kind of (mall red Cray-fifh, which bred
without a {hell of it own,/eifes on ome other,and there-
in continues,getting at lengtha refemblance of tbe fifh
ith id unto.
Branchure : f. A branch.
Brand. asBranc.
Brandes: f. Heathie grounds.


a en Branding, at, four


OPA de mou von wpe beac , viz.

É:m.ée: f, Brandled, tottered, wagged, fa
¢.fwagged 5 fo, gtsftei 0 ee -

JenienCr ant foray ing, fragging, |


ng tottering vpand done safe, « glifening,er
csi brandle,poag foake,fiving,totter 3 alfa, to:


ale A foin.


_ Bran-


Original from


WHE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.


BRA
Brandir: To caft; or burle with great ae violence ;


to make a thin: or quauer, by the force it is cal
with; alfa,to ifh ; to fbine,or glifler with a gentle
i ‘oft mowing.


Brandon: m. A torch, firebrand,great creffet,lanterne,

or light fet vp; alfo, the bufh of a Tauerne, or Ale-

; alfo,a ftaffe tapped with ftraw,and pitched down

by 4 Landlord into bis tenants ground,in figne of an av-

reflyor (eifiere for feruices omitted or bis rent vapayed.
randon doré; The Sunne.


Brandonné: m.ée:f Stucke downe, as a fleffe of


fraw,on land,in figne of an arreffsor [eifure, or feifed,
as land by that ceremonies :

Brandonner. a land by pitching dewne into it a
ftaffe topped with ftraw ; as before in Brandon. |

Brane. bœuf brane. A kind of wild and vnreclaime-
able Ox ia the countries of Languedoc, Provence ;
fit onely for the Shambles.

Branlage: m. A kind of toll,or tax.

Branler. See Branfler.

Branquar.# Brancar ; alfa, the edge of the decke of a


Beanque vrfine. Brankurfin,Beares-brecch,Beares foot,

Beares claw (an bearbe.) j
vrfine fauvage. Wild Acanthus , wild

Beares-breech. | E

Branqueté : m. ée : f. Rifled,ranfacked ; opprefied.

Branqueter. 2s Branfquetter.

Branque refine . Brank-urfin, Beares-breech (an

arbe,


)
Branfcat: m. Spoyle,ranage ranfacking ; oppreffion, ex-


tr wrong. 4 ive

Beanflant: m- ante: £ Brandling ; ing, fvinging ;
tottering ; aogging, wagging ; reeling, flag gering ; wa-
wer'ing. s
Chariot branflant. Looke Chariot.

Branfle: m. A totter, fiving, w iéondre «fate, oo,
or fhocke; a ftivring,an uncertain and inconflant moti-
on ; alfo,a brandling,@rc ; as in Branflement; alfo, a
brawle, or daunce, wherein. many (men, aad women)
holding, by the bands fometimes in a ring, and other-
whiles at length moue all together.

Leb: contrainét. The fhaking of the fheets.

Lebranfle dela corde. 4 fwingin a balter ; or, the

A rer la men take with a good will.) ~.
er de grand branfle. To moue apace, to goe very


fica enbranfle fi. Tis doubtfull,or vacertaine whe-

ther yea or no; the matter bangs in fufpence,or is yet in

the ballance. TK |

Sonner les cloches en brañfle. To ring out the bels.
Branflé: m.


éc:f. Brandled; tottered; en, fine: |
Ay gate ane 3h a Wanerea ;


often ficredor moued from fide 10 fide 5 af, trembled,


Bcnilrniies m.A brandling, tree ee
| ging ; flogging, wagging ; reeling, flaggering ;


ring ; often and vacertaine mouing from fide to fideyal- |


,2 trembling.
anflement des dents. Loofene(fe of the teeth.


Branfler. To brandle; totter ; [bake, Swing ; flog,wag, :


reele S < 3s nod j é
DURS or inconhenty, fom idea idee 1
Beanifler au manché. Tobe lo(@ ia the betuejéh hep),

swauer,fhake,or finch,upona triall;to want


ps. fake
G or grow faint-bearted, in a time, or at the |
paint of Cedi eeflehac teen eh ween’ |


-Petitbras.


BRA


hath moft need of it.

Branfler la pique. To frig, te wrigle it.

Branfler la ae To fhake the bead, in figne of con-
tempt,{corne mockerie,or difcontentment.
Latefteluy Greate, Said of one that is much afraid;
and of one whofé bead by drinking is become too beanie
for bis bodie.

L'Armée branfle. The army begins ge to loft,
ground; begins to totter,or to full into diforder.


Branfloire: com. Airy thing that fhakes.fhogs,er Firings
>


a man vp and downe ; any thing that makes bimree
totter,or flagger ; alfo,a brandhng, rc ; as in Branfle-
ment; ;


Branfloire Sexibetis Afafhion of tottering ufed by


S{choole-boyes, upon one forme layed (with the feet vp-
nr MA anther 2:


Branfquetter. To rifle, rauage, ranfacke ; to fpoyle,or


take’ in a towne by violence;to oppreffe,wrong ,or grate
vpon,extreamely.


Braque: m. rrp Soorv-tagled fetting dog ; ordina-


rily potted, or partie-coloure


Braqué. Bent, leuelled,or planted,as Artillerie,againft


a place ; alfo,braked,as bempe.


Braquemar. ou,Braquemard. 4 woodknifé, hangar,


whineyard.


Braquer (l'artillerie) contre. To lewell; bend ; or plant


(artillerie) agami.

Braquer du chambre. To brake hempe.

Braquer vn chariot. To turne,fet,or bend,a chariot
on the right or left band.


Bras: m. Aa arme, of the bodie ; of a riner,of the feazal-


fosthe foreleg of a horfe.

Bras (plural.) The two finallropes that paffe rater

the pA of the Bolt-fprit yard, and fèrne to hale in the

fayle; our mariners name them,Clahnes:

Bras de l'antenne. The Tyes ; the tackling that bolds,

and the fayle-yard.

Le bras feculier. Secular authoritie,lay iurifäiétion ;

ciuill magiflracie,or the cinile magiftrate.

Les bras d'un Scorpion. The cleyes, or caves, of a

Scorpion, rc.

Chaire àbras. A chaire with elbowes.

Grand bras. The whole arme,and hand.

Homme de bras. 47 artificer, labourer, handicrafts

man; one ed bis lining by the labour of bis bands.
' upper part of the arme from the elbow

tothe ke hs


Vallet à bras. Looke Vallee.
Brasa bras. Arme in arme ; louingly, er equally, to-


‘A tour de bras.


another.


Canonizé gros comme le bras. Camunized as fire |


as a club. (Ironically.)


: Ilierte la pierre, & cache le bras. He doés the moft
- ‘mifebie Rand would be leaftfeene init.
Bras à la poi&trine, i en gefine: Prov. Theft
the }


ts,being burt,multbauereft ; the one ira fcar fe;
pre fs afer


_ ‘A l'or lefeu fort, aurfort bras la Iuiéte: Prov. The |
_ worth of gold is tried by fire,the Strength of an arme by


M iy Argent |


ether.

Ee Le croifez. Idly, lazily, flouthfilly, negligently, |
~ cave ;
Br Sas & bras deflous. Freely,affettionatl,with
; friar orne br cements el fi LA ie

Throughly, 5 with marie |.
Sr re ga sp
- Se laïffer aller fous les bras d'autruy. Torehe upon |


BRA BRA


ii 2 on on alfo,a fond boafting, cauating,


Argent receu le bras nes 3 Prov. He that cr À


for worke beforeband,lames bis workeman ; or Jb bracsing of
but lamelydone.  - Brava FA bom ear ve ring pike,or quarrell,
Brafer. Te skue, or chamfret, viz. to flope the edge of a a boaftfull affront ; a glerious ow of calla or da-


fine as Mao dt windowes cc, for the gaining


light
id argent ; C'eft, la repafler vn peu fur la

raife
Bear: m. A burning coale, quicke fire of coales ; bot


Brafllé. :m.ée: £ Ro ied, broyled, or baled with a
quicke fire; alfe,broyled,or beated much.
Brafiller. To roft, broyle,or whale on gods coales,or bot
embers ; alfo,to broyle,or beat muc

Brafillonner: To broyle,or bole with a very quicke fire;
aif to broyle extreamely, burne out, or be on a light


De lene (alfo) in a branerie.
Brave: m, The reward, or prize for bim that bath done
polos, or games
Heres com, Braue. 4 PU (in appar-
rell ;) alfo,proud.flately,loftie; braggar d ; magni Pal
HS 5 alfi;valiant, bar die, flout,couragieus, that
carrie no coales,
res lebrave. To fland on tearmes,or vpon bis pan-
tofles ;to rend of bis owne worth ; to preferre bimfelfe
es ers.
Bravement. Brauely, gallantly, finely, gaily ; fumptu-
re #4 gorgeoufly; ice LC: alfo, RS ms
lofty sa i out calecnthy aire ga le de


creetly.
Braver. To braue,abufe,affvont, fivagger with.

Se braver. To brane fi or play the Gallant ; alfo, as
an le ue

averie: f. Brauerie,gallantne(fe,gorgecufneffe,er co

line[fe in apparrell ; LE SES M — f
Braveux: m. He that gives the prixe to the beft doers in


Braflage: m. The fee which the Mafters of the Mint
baue out of euery fort of money coyned ; as out of euery
marc (or eight ounces) of gold xxv s. Tourn.and vpon
euery marc of Douzains vj s. vj d. Tour. vut of which
they allow a certain proportion,in refpect of euery fort,
unto the Grauers, Monyers,and other workmen; which
proportion of theirs wa Hi tearmed Braflage.

Brafsal: m. An Archers braceletyor bracer; alfoya vam-


fen, or peece of armour for the arme; alfo, the vvood- an exercife.
den cuffe,or bracer worne by Balloone-players. Bray +m. Ship-pitch,or a kind thereof; alfo,Mantt.
Braffart. as Braflal. esl m.ante:f. Braying,yellingyor crying, like an
Braffat. The fame. e; gy in a RS


c= ag A fadome, or arme-full ; or meafiere of fine
oot.


Brafle de foi tob t
Pande bral ot pce toyed kee ream |


bread) a loafe as big as one can
Brafle: m. éc:f. Brewed; al/o,deuifed, plotted, contri-


:m.A (Rep prie crying Affe.
Bra apes et A clofe linnen brecke, TS
rayes) alfo,a truffe,a fwatbell or halfe-flop of linnen,
a" pores füuch as are burft; alfo,a clout fra a


Reaves 43 ep clofé)breecbes,drawers,or vuder-
bofe, of linnen,e>c,worne for cleanlineffe,&rc.next va-
‘ the skin; alfo,Bavnacles fir a borfés nofe.

Braye à chauffe. 4 kind of fifb-net, made fomerbat
like à brecke, or flop.
Braye de cocu. 4 Cow per Paigle.
Fe Le Rrayes in onde.


False The fraps that hang downe on either
Latch of a horfis furnitur
Brayé:m.ée:f. Brayed, siomded, mals kneaded as
b; braked,as bempe ; grauen,as a Jp.
t:m. 4 braying, pounding, bruifing ; bra-
ing s allo, an Affe-like braying, yellings or crying
outs alfo,a grauing, or pitching of a {bip..
Braye: m..«s Braye. ;
Le brayer d'une Chevre. The Vader infor:


le brayer d sa | cifeau. The Brayle, or.  panmell of


Baye. To qe er = ooh alfe, to knead deugh with

a flaffe; alfo,to bray,yell,or crie,like an affes

ie eb dun. 705 cor dreffe flax. ue
mene. To grane, fiches or dd a


Braflée f. A fadome, an arme-füll,as much as one can
bold within,or carrie in,bis armes.

Braflelet: m. A bracelet, wreft-band,or bracer ; sas an
ara ahaa ap to the elbow; al-
fo,the wri

Braffer. To brew, or make beere; alfo,to plot, contrine,


Ine feavoir pas quel brouét fe braffoit, avec yn
autre. He knew little, what privat match was in ma-
~ king,what fecret bargaine was a beating what anedde


pranke was a for ith another.
Brafferie:f f.A ja. 28 alfo,a contrining.
a m. A Brewer; alfo, a plotter, contriner, de-


Braffic: . À Brafier ; al) ;afo,a cudgell
“the |


Braffique ie fi
iflaken Sa Aer other


ayette. My 42% trips,


1 tera chemife: To eccimmedate the firtbee
legs (paffing the fure-skirt bebind, andthe

ire that it be not ccmberfcme. ay

rr ay- ;


Original from


BRE


im. The parts,or feathers, about 4 hawkes fun
it by our plane the brayle in a fhort-
wingd and, Ul in a long-wingd, bauke.
Breant. The bird called,a Siskin,
Brebiail : m.sheepe ; Ewes.
Brebiaille :f.The fame.
Brebiette:f, 4 little fheepe,or ewe.
a ge Er or toufiours femble ieunette: Pro.
tle (beepe feemes euer Jong
Brebis : f. A fhcepe ; prop Sit es
Brebis de rebut: 42 a Lar difeafed fheepe, thats not
rel keeping; wee call isch a one; a drape, or cul-


| Loue dé brebis(le nezcen terre, follomes) Toit
{ hearts ; courage my Lads ; (anwronicall, ov fperef


hrafe à of encouragement Pv
rebis contées mange bien lelo Pro.rhe wolf
cept ons


eats couated,as well as vitconnted,
vato a beaflly fellow,that refpelts nothing but the slut:
ting of bis filthy appetite.)

Bre is trop apprivoiféc detrop d’agneaux ft tet+
tée: Prov. An ouer-kind man,or woman get more fol-
lowers, than it flands with bis café, or ber boneftie to


keepe. .
Oubrebis font laine eft: Prov. where fheepe are
trey labrebis eft vieille le loup la
uis rebis e le loup la mange
ri eg A wolfe can eat a jar fhee bee
Deux mangent bien irnebtebis: Prov. Two
' ten ui Jheepe with cafe.
. Enla peau de brebis ce quetu veux y efcris : Pro.
ee will ima Jheepes skin; (fheepe
e
Emre Bones & Tarafcon ne paift ne brebis,


one RER
In'e fonde brebig onde: Pro.
ii 15 not ener in feafows
baue fime time allowed thèm to thrine in set
fleeces, a length, be worth clipping.
Pendant que les chiens s’entregrondent le loup
devore la rebis : Prov. Church-mens contention is
the dinels barueft.
- Qui fe fait
* that will needs be fheepe the wolfe deuours ; bee that


ae a ss Mol carries ss a fheepe foil be flee~


opportunitie neg-


pi
see soll deaf: piers rm


ag sa ric


Brecht f. tres on TH UMA
‘breaches ; or bauinga breach made in it.
Breche dent: mise one that mc de
ners teeth; or,as Brefcheden “ff
Brechet: m. The brisket. à
dent cer Med net “à


apres 2 sok né Ve


NS


i TSE


Digitized. by Go: gle


Bredouillement : m. 4 fusltering, or maffling ; an ill


Silly people muft


is le loup le mange: Prov: Thofe |
Brelngue of; apie raf ape worth about cght pence


Tans À cr PS PTE fe «brebis entre au bois :

; ssi nos ey
the ta cb me bereby .
pre ras their seepage OT gogo!


| Bremme: £ #5 Brame; 4 Breamegs > ~~)


Breché : m. ée:f. Breached; Bd bras, i of |


BRE


Bredoutle:t :f A y. at +. IPS tables.


Eftre en bredouille.To betipled,or tipfie. ©.
Ma petite bredouille. My prettie on my little
. kuaue(a tearme vfed much by the aurfes of France.)


fauoured
Bredouile. Toma, rape er ver or prom


imper feétly.

Seba m. La bee, A breefe, mite, fhort writing, alf>,
as Brief; a write.
Droiét de Brefs. Certaine pecuniarie duties paid un-
to the K'ngs Rec eiuers,or faimors in the Ports of Brit-

- taine, ewer fince the pere 1566, when they were gran-

_ bed by a prowifionall Arreft of the Parliament theve,in

_ tegard(as it feemes) ofthe Kings writs, licencing the

’ poe a of veffels: < of thofe Parts ;bence ;
añnée. Is for veffels of the burthen of fine
Tunnes and under ; which pay vij.s.vj.dTour,  -
Bref de conduiéte & de nie Is giuen for vef-
Sels that be of birtben fiom witieco mineteent Tunnes;


Thefé pay so.s.Tour.

Bref de: viQuaillès H fr ve that Le from fiue to

pond Tunnes burthen ; thefe yeeld 17.30 6. =
© Tour. |


Tous briefs. Mufi be bad for fuch veffels as be " 19
Tunnes, or upwards ; and for them, 110,s a

Bref. see Brief; Short,erc.

Brefve: £ . Looke Breve,

Bregmatis: Os bregimatis.(Lazine AR vfèd sui :
iF French Anato, mls : ) Looke Os. :

Brehaigne: f. 4 bartenwoman,or female; La (Adie-
élinely)barren,flerill.

Brei: m. #5 Bret{The fowlers engine.) >
Breil de forcft. A thicke growne wood, or comer de
forreft, gere will beafis ofeto lurkes 8
Breits. a Bray.

Brelafé. Looke é
B . im. a fe gaming tplingor # any fuch dif
aa er vot egies
landier: m, 4a im darie haunter of gamingsor tip=
“ alfo,the mafter, or keeper of {uch an vn-
godly ouf.
. as Brelingue,


Bicller, Fo ba baie; sto catch bids y bang al
totwinkle,or glit oe ;
Brelles. ¢. ry or, ciuetyand fivetbes nop à À
Richie: Malla brélués, Hes eyes ave se: 3 See ‘Bet.
uc, )
Béguane, Ita enfant.ne bremant, aber
EE CN lac à
Bh? SR parte lions nel


Bee as r.
Bren Eman man decree re sate |


mr < Waa S PS ie
Bones mie ahs nr Ru 4


Brel the ame vo dde cl


red.
rs RE Breché.
| Broohedene Anirronical à fen to Pree;


: m. The weit Brafill; af, beef lo
bang by the fire till it become reds


Origine fan


THE OHIO STAT EUAIMERS EY


BRE


Brefillé: m.ée: f. Made red,as,or with, Braflewood,
Boeuf brefillé. as in Br ; Martlemas beefe,
Brefin : m.The hooke of a craneand,jn a fhip,the canne-


Breffaudes: f. The crifpie mammocks that remaine of
tried bo


gs grefe.
Breflaux. A kind of fine cakes,or wafers ; or,as Pain de
Btn as Broifle;A brufh,alfo,a thinne leafe,or cake,


45 of wax,Crc.

Brefferon: m. The Sow-thifile,

Breffille des yeux: f. The twinkling of the eyes.

Brefliller. To twinkle with the eyes.

Bret : m. A little engine (made of two flickes ioyned to-
gether) wherewith fovlers catch fall birds,the whilft
they wonder at an Owle,thats fet of purpofeto amaxe
Bett alfo,as Bray.

ret Ehret partie, beet. To flammer, flut,or fpeake


Bretande GE.

Bretauder. To curtall ; See Bertauder.

Breteler. To brabble,chide,brawle, fcowld, berate.

Breteleur: m. A brabler, el brawler or wrangler;
Brom ions or vaine talker

es d'une hotte. ae, arms,or handles of a basket,

me maund ; (In France they are commonly made of a
peeceofa girth.)

Breteque.as Bretefque.

Bretesche. The fame.

Bretefque. A publicke place ina towne , wherein out-
cries and proclamations are ordinarily made; alfo, a
prier portall of defence, ia the rétére;er al, ofa


ecthiecque: The fame.

Breton. A Britaa ; An Inhabitant of Britanie.
Breton Bretonnant, ‘the low Britan, who fpeakes
balfe welfb,balfe Saxon,all pot
Breton rs ou Gallot. bigh Byitan , who

peakes Frenci wet verie corrupt ut
etonnant. Speaks yee
were jae, 3 ‘oe


nt Bretonnant ose wee 7
tonnér. ae a ,
rot Lei 2 ball, ide


Bre der Notched jodeted aged tot,

ala.

Bréttefsé: m. ée:f. Imbattled; adarned,garniftcdso
fianifhed with battlements.

B e:f. The battlements of awall. > es


+f, An indenting,
Breil: der peece tale: Toner Per


‘tetas % La he es Ld
Brevade: :f, as Brevet. Prt te Re eee
Breve: f. The metal wii see tie | deliuered


vnlo a C naker,to be wrought ; called
ee ts fed


Ha ina, aunilmnade! usée


à Ses
morale. Fe vas Ho 4 saat


Digit Co ae


BR I


Breveter. To abreuiate, epitomize, reduce into breefes,
B or breuiates, Jobo
reviaire:m, A Breniarie,or Malle breni-
arie, fummarie, compendiows abri! mare
C'eft aly Rs de pecviaiees Tis Foly fuffe 1 tell you;
eft aubour de!
left au bout de ton breviaire. He is at aplunge, or
sbe bath no more to fay; (from ignorant Pri fis,
that can fay no more than they find in their Sernice


Il eft clerciufques aux dents, il a mangé fon bre-
Viaire. He makes a fhcw of learning, but mdecd bath
none in bim ; or,as in Clerc.
Breuil: m, 4 thicke growne forreft.wood,or groue haun-
ted by great wild bealis.
=m. An engine of two flicks(gonerned by a fnall
cord) wherewith Fowlers catch little birds.
Breufle : £..4 difh, val py or bawlepfTinne.
Breufteé : for Broufté; Broofed,or knapped of.
Breuvage.# Bruvage.
Breuvoer : eo or;any liquid fluffe,thars fit to be
made into drinke.


Breziller. To twinkle,or glitter; as the Sunne beames
ina boat fèafôn.
Bribe: x Apeece,lumpe,or cantill of bread ginen unto a


In ref vie que de coquins quand ils ont aflemblé
leurs bribes: Prov. There is no life(no mirth) te that


ph company of beg gers, bauing laied their scrips tege-


Briber. To beg bis bread ; alfa, to rauine, deuoure, eate
edily; (fromthe found made by the ligs of a borfe
teats prouender:)

Bribeur: m. À begger,afcrap-craner ; one that begsvi-
uals from doove to dore ; alfo, a greedie denourer, a
rauenous feeder.

apo roe es oraifons. To mumble up bis prayers, like


Bribotions. Prayers mumbled vp ; or, as Brebori-
«ons,
oa rendreaubric. To take at aduantage ; to catch
of an unaduifed word, and make thereof’ 4 con-
a alfo, to gine a dead lift, or fore blow at the


Brichet : mn. The brisket or breaft-peece.

Bricole: f.4 bricke wall; a fide-firoake at Tennis(wher-
in the ball gocs not right forward, but hits one of the
walls of the Court and thence bounds toward the ad.
uerfe partie) alfo, a kind of engine wherewith, in old
» time,they beat downe walls; alfo,as Bricolle.

Il m'a ioué d'une bricole. He bath played mee fare
or fonte, play ; offered me hard.or ode meafir es * dealt

- sora on: 2 with mes alfo, be bath decei-


is dg ap To fier frikea boll fidewayes ; to gixeit a
Be al a bate 3) alley as Bricolkr; aff, te


Brico +f, as Bricoles Alfo, a kind of tle fr wild
Bricoller. To toffe,or firike a ball fidewayess to gine it a


bricke wall, at Tennis ; (Hence ) alfo, alfo, toveele, flagger,
or make inde sand, to be violentlycar-
ried ouerthwart, or. 3alfo; to lurne fort (as
a Swallow, dr ‘ i hye ate leacher,
| Bricot :m. The y EX à or little tree; amp
© flicking ub,pr tree.
re Bri-


| _-Droitde briefs. Looke Bref.
| Brief:m. brieue: £. Breef, fhort, fuccint, compendi-


BRI
Bricoteau. A quoyte of flone (v.m
Bridaveaux Cote. rente crack-
nels of fine flower, fagar, falt, and yoalkes of egs, in-
corporated together with water, and white wine,
Bride: £, Abridle; alfo, a border, or carkanet of gold,
and pearle for a womans bead , (in the binder part
whereof tis clofed ;) alfo, a kind of drinking veffell.
Bride de Chapeau. A flay,for a hat; a firing put vn-
der the bat-band. pa
Bride à ocilleres. Looke Ocillere,
Bride de Soulier : 4 ir Souliersà bride.
Brides à veaux. Fopperies ; gulleries ; groffé tricks,or
byes ; unlikely tales, or things; alfo, balters alo as
- Bridaueaux. ‘
Souliers à bride,ou à brides. Sandals ; or woodden
pattins held unto the foot by one,or more firings (tear-
med brides) which faftened on both fides of their fale,
thence runne, and rayne,ouer thinflup. =
‘A bride avallée: 45 faft as be candvimesas faftsor as
much, as be can. :
Abandonné fur la bride.Hanging upon the hand;(a
Horfèmans phrafe.
Fort en bride. Stout , headjtrong , flubborne; furly;


vnruly. |
Lafcher la bride à. To carrie a gentler band upon;
toafforde more ftape,o giue more libertie, unto.
Ie vous en mets la bride fur le col, 1 give you full
power ouer it ; 1 abandone it wholy vnto you.
Tenir en bride. Tore firaine, to bold in. a
Bridé: m.ée :£ Bridled ; bitted; refrained , vuled,
moderated, beld under, kept in order.
Brider. To bridle, bit;reftraine, moderate, rule, beld-
under , heepe inorder,
Brider l’afne, ou,fon cheual par la queuë. To goe
. the wrong way to worke, to doe a thing by contra-
ries,
Brider la mule a, To waite on,attend the leafivre
or doe bafe offices for. EN nas IM Vint
Se Bride de ferment. Looke, Serment,
Bridon: m. À fiaffle, ’
Bridoye : 4 goofe=bridler; (a nickname for a Law-
yer_“@Rab .


| Bricf:m. A writ, or breefes a fhort mandamus, iniun-


Gtion ; commiffion &c.

Brief de ludgement ; # Didton de ludgement.

Brief d'obligation & de debt... The fir? copie , note,

or ftedule of an obligation, deliuered in paper-untoa
~ creditor by the notarie that drew it, “à


ul


ous, length, 0 continuance,

Le plus brief eft le meilleur : Pro. The fhorter the

better(im bad things.) 112

ne be fort sis aswurd te famme of

‘A brief parler. To be fhort ; in awon fumme o,

ak is ; not to trouble you with many words, not to bold

sed eg NS SF. LS
¢ brief Sbortly,anon,forthwi incontinently,by and

by, within pr /4 ere it be ;


. En brief. Brief, forty, ic né}, compendioufly,


in few words.
* Briemart : m. Poore folkes drinke made of branne,lea-


uen, and water.


Briere. «s Bru :
| Belevement ofa cindy compendia


: a narrow
sf Bremitie,
OUfMESs


in a little


Jhortnes, faccinéines, compendi-


Digit zed by Go. gle


Ren = id


|
a


B R I
Brifaut : m. A baftie deuourer, a fa eater, a rauenous
feeder,a greedie glutton. vise
Brifeau. # Brifaut. vei


Bufée :f. Amorfell, bit, faatch, mouthfull ( eaten gree-


ily.) à
Brifer. To deuoure , eate baflily, feed rauenoufly , or
like a bungrie glutton, +
- Brifeur. as Brifaur. .
Briftaux :m. Rawenous feeders, baftie deuourers.
iffeur: m. as Brifaut.
Brigade: f. A troope, crue,or companie.
Brigader. To accompany, or affociate, one another ; t0
troope, or keepe compañie, together.
Brigaille: m: 4 noteable fmcl-fmocke, or muttonmun=
ar, a cunning folicitor of awench, 4
Brigand :m. A footman armed, or feruing, with a bri-
gandine(In old time when thefe kind of fouldiors mar-
ched, they held all to be good prife that they could pur-
loyne from the people ; and thereupon this word now
Signifes ) alfè, a theefe, purfemtaker , high-way rob-
er


Brigandage : m. À robbing, theeuery, purfe-taking, |


bootehaling, vniuft pillage.
Brigande : f. as Brigade (v.m.)
eo :m. A yong, or {mall thcefe;a filcher, a
ilferer.
Bécandet. Torob, to take a purse; to theene it by the
bighwny filde.
Brigandereau. as Brigandeau. }
Briganderie : f. A theeuiag; pur(é-taking; robberie by
the highway.
Brigandin.# Brigantin. +. t à
Brigandine :f. A Brigandine ;a fafhion of (ancient )
armor,confifting of many iointed,and skale-like,plates,
. very plyant unto, and eafie for,the bodie ; (fome, leffe
_ properly, confound it with (Haubergeon) a coate, or
irt, eyes
Brigant. as Brigand. : :
Brigantin: m. 4 low, long, and (wift Sea-ve/fell; big-
er then the fregat, and leffe then a foift, and baning
fome 120r 13 oaresona fide : we call it alfo, a Brigan-
tine.
Brignon : m. The name of an excellent plum, whereof
de be two kinds, a bigger and a leffe,
Brigue: f. Acanuas, priuate{uite, under-band labou-
ring for an office, ec ; (bence) alfo, debate, conten-
tion, altercation , litigions wrangling about any mat-


ter. -

Brigue de Metz. Apeece of coyne worth 10 pence

Tourn. ‘ ;
Brigué :m. ée:f. canuafed, or laboured for, under=.

band ; alfo quarvelled contended, wrangled about. ~
Briguer. To canuas, make private fuite,


under=, |


band , for an office, ec; alfo, to quarrell, contend, |


wrangle about matters; alfo, to fharke, or take purfes
by the bigh-way fide. ot

Briguerie :f. À priuate canuafing, fecret labouring,un-
devhand fing for an office rc ; alfè a litigious deba-
ting,worangling,or contending for matters; alfo,a fhar-
king;robbing, purfe-taking


Briguet : m, 4 mungrell ; whence (ao) a man. thats


bly borne but of one fide. Ge,
Sines: :m, pees ea, labours,or vnderhand
sy for the ue je ann Lens
canuafer for an office, Oc ; alo, 4 quarrelfome ; con-
teatious, or ligitious, perfon ; alfo, as Brigand, |
Brihat: m. af that Pl loud ti


Bril: m. A glitter s fparkle twinkle > ‘or glittering ee :


Originalarom:


THE OHIO STE UNIMBR Sines see


a a at Che


BR I


Brillant. les brillants des femmes. The iewels which
they wearein their baire; and their gliftering petti-
coats of changeable colours.

Brillant. Glittering, (parkling twinkling, fhining.

Brillement: A glittering, parking, twinkling, as of the
flars ; alfo,a batfowliag.

Briller. To géister,twiakle, fparkleyas a flarvejor like a

aod diamond ; alfo,as Breller,to batfowle,

riller apres. Grecdily to couet,or lufi after.
Les chiens brillent bien.Saéd of luftie,or well-met-
led bounds rhich nimbly caft about, or (as in French)
Sont legiers à Ja quefte.

Brillonner. as Briller,

Brimbalatoire. See Brimballatoire.

Brimbalé: m.ée: fTumbled headlong; throwne down
topfie-turuie; alfo, fhaken, fwagegd, quagged.

Brimbaler. To tumble downe beadlong, to fall downe
topfie-turuie ; alfo, to fhake, fwag, or quag, as agreat
dug, or th'unfound flefh of a foggie perfon,

Faire brimbaler les cloches. To Jèt the bells a-


gate,
Brimbales :f. The bells worne by cart, or carriers,bor=


fès.

Brimballatoire: com. Swagging,wagging, fhaking, or
quaking, ill-fauouredly pr loathfomely,

Brimballer. # Brimbaler,

Brimballotier. See Brimblotier. ;

Brimbeur: m. 4 paultrie pedler. :
a de brimbeur. À mantle,or cloke of rug, or
courfe frixe. 4

Brimblotier: m. A paulirie pedler ; one that hath
nought but trafh to fell; alfo,a fpangle-maker.

Brimborions.æ Breborions ; al/o,the kaackesjagges,
mi 12 » bawhles, wherewith fooles CAPS OC are garni=


Il dit fes brimborions ; (for Breviaire) He /ayes o-
ner his whole Pfalter ; or, be mumbles to bimfelfe bis
fond, and fuperflitiouf,deuotions.
Brimboter.To mumble,putter,mutter,grumble,or bab-
ble vnto yy te
Brin: m. A (little) flip,or fpriggof an bearbe, érc ; alfo,a
corne of falt ;and more generally, any finall fubflance,
deale,or bit of a thing. x eS
Bois de brin. Round or vncleft wood.
Brin à brin. by peece-meale or by little and little.
Uneft vn bail re cftonné. He is not a iot, not a
_ whit not at all,
Brindelles de b.


Bringue: m. 4 drinking 10.
. | Bri ! . To fie.
1 Brin arilles. wide noféthrils : €Rab.
| Bri éc: f. A common backney, a wench thats
tn fv
ic


oche : f, A brake for hempe ; alfo,avowle, or bunne,
bag bread: er CAT
; es oler. To glide,or flideyon theyce.
| pee : € Brionie
_ tie; SeeBryonic. = -
ae = a gigs ata
_ Laverne brique.To labour iavaine; or,to loofe both
Briquer. ie ok cc 3 t0 worke,build,or forti.
_. fie with bricks. ;
Briquerie: £4.
.  ismade. RS. {¥3 .
Briquet: m,  Briguet; Alfojayong bare.


a ‘ 2,7. Digitized.by (0% gle


aftoni
eh Pie frigs, or twigs , of a bee-


|; white vine, wild nep, tetter ber~


brick killa bonfer place wberin brick,


B RÉ TR


Bene EBrick-worke laying of bricks;aljo,a brick |
Briquetier J 3° rab He :
riquettes : f Nifles,trifles,lit
Briqueux sm. cule: f. Brickie; fl
rickes.  —
Briquier. A brick-maker ; bricke-feller.
Bris m. A bracke, breach,or great leake,in a foip.
Droiét de bris. 7h’ Admiraltie of a fea coaft; which
iues a man all wrackes,or fbipwracks.
aïller bris contre Robert, Je luy bailleray bris
&c.1 will call bim Facke if be call me Gill; 1 will gine
bim altogether as good as be brings. -
Courir au bris. To run to wracke, to bee in danger of


és,
of bricks; fit fur


acke.
le feray tel bris de roy que tu as merité.1 will make |
that fhipwracke of thy reputation,or efiate, which thy
lewdneffe deferues. |
Brifable : com. Burfiable,breakeable,brayable. -
Brifans: m.Tbe foamie breaking of the fea againf rocks,


or ban FE
Brifant : m. ante: f. Breaking,burfingsbeating, bray-
ing into peeces.
Quartiers bri
the vaine.
Brifche:f. A bufh made of lime twigs,and a flale bung at
it to draw birds vate it,
Sear To pr
ise :f. A peece of ground, thats new broke vp for til.
us jaan hath line long vatilled.) wait
Brif€ : m.ée: f. Broken,bur(; brayed, beaten in peeces;
alfo,rent,or torne off; alfo bruifed or crufbed extream~"
ly; (in Blafon, oppre(fed,or charged with ; ) alfo,inter-
rupted; alfo.infringed,or violated.
Chaire brifée. A foulding chaire,
Saifine brifée. Th occupation,and vfé,-of an inberi-
tance taken by the tenant, notwithflanding the fei-
five thereofmade by the Lord. P
Somme brifée.A broken fumme with odde moneysor,
a whole fumme with ouerplus,
Vis brifée. A fiaire that bath foure or fine fleps wp-
vight, then turnes, and bath as many forward another
3 0r,a firaight flaire with balfe paces.
Brisée : f. A breach, brack, rupture’ alfo,a flep, track,


. The quarters of the Moone, in


or footing. -

Brif£es.Boughes rent by hunters from trees and left in

the view of a deerc,or cat ouerthwart the way wher-

in he is likely to paffe , herby to binder bis running,and

to recouer him the better ; Our wood-men cak them,

Blinkes.

Reprenons nos brifées. Let us returme unto our for-

mer way,bufinelfe difcourfe,erc.

Retournons par nos brifées. The fame, ;

Ie ne vay plus fur vos brifées. J trace you nomore,1 |

your footing no longer; er, 1 am no longer your

competitor concurrent,corrinall. rs
Brife-grain, Corne-breaking graine-crufbing.
Brife-gueret. Te AO Vp-tearing.
Brifeinent : m. A breaking,braying, beating te peeces; | _

| ph on ant cfs fre changer bring à

violating,infringing; an intermupling.

— Bridge-breaking (of a river) all downe-
aking. PAT ARS

Brifer. To burfl,breake ; bray ; beatin peeces ; alfo, 10
© plucke, vendo teare off er ps asie crufhyorbraife
| extreamely ; alfo, wupt, or breake off; alfo,to vi-


olate or à RTE er D
a Brifer pag S Ipenfe brifer le —
ee : ts.


2


Original from


sees ete OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


BRO
dents. He D


thinks to
Brife-tour. va
Brie: nf Aig €; ut) Pins fhi-


off any
Beifeur : :m. + + gr ; brayer,beater impeeces;
t 5 4 pluc ; a violat imger.
Bal garer off, paplacker ep; a er an infringer


ae cece £. Breaking, braying, crufhing, bur-


io eus. The tuskes tufbes,or dogs teeth,


Robes (Rab.) as Brifcoer,
cures: f. Broken peeces.


Brifure: f. Abnesch burps  breaking,or beating in pee~ |


ces 5 alfa, a plucking,renting,tearing off, or up ; al/o,
an extreame crufh, bruifè,crufhingsor bruifing ; aoa
broken peece of; alfo, an addition, in armorie , for the
diftinétion of brothers; as, a Labell , balfe Moone,

Mullet,erc.

Brit. prendre au b. Looke Bric.

Britanique :£ Brittanmca, Biflort Suakeweed, NA
ons, Oiflerloite ; (an bearbe.)

Brive: £, A bridge. (v.m.)
Britafcher. l'ay oui britafcher d'une telle chofe. 1
baue heard (ome fuch muttering.

pr os A bracke,breach, or leake,in a hip, ec; Looke


Brize, for Bize, The North wind : Rab.
. a Brifer,
we m.A fleane,great flagon, tankard,or pot ; bolding
Debroc en bout. )) twelue Parifian pintes.
mar cha ler ar incontinently, while


out :m, Satin friptor purfledswith gold
im. À quip, Gird,er cut; a ie,
sa Brocar sand ai s Brocart.


, fout, feoff,
ed at;
met, ,eut,or icafled at; cof


Brocarder. To quip, cut, capi paulbtaniibe thummes;
ieaft at ; flout ymocke, coffe, deride, or dois
Brocarderie : f. A cutting , quipping, nipping ;ieafling
at; flouting, mocking, feofine, mr fe » gibing at.
ocar tm. A quipper, fcoffer,mecker, flouter,de-
rider, giber,or ieafter at,
2m, A two-yeare-old Deere ; which if be bee a
red Deere we call a brocket ; if a fallow,a Pricket; al~
So, kind of fwift flag which bath but one {mall anch
grep lemme of bis borne ; alfo, as Bro-


Brocatel: mT w or thin “hd cat amet


ag om Dune: es
hant fur le cout. 0


* » or dif
ene : )
on fa tive
roches.The piles(i Ce
or tufhes of a para ae me


roche de mer. The Spit-fifh.
Couper broche à. To preuent, or sil: doccèe


of.

x. nee CL
or fell it, by pot.

Brom cet rated ees ae

Brocher. To broach,to se cri fs,


Fois des efperons, To fpurre bim , to


The outward bus Unut.
ee ard buske ofa greene wai


BRO
firike bim with jpurres ; alfo,to fpurre bim bard aime
to flicke him owl [purring. A

Brochereux :m. Little Prcherels.

Brochet: m. A Pike(fifh ;) alfo,a faucet, or quill for a
wine veffell,

a de mer. The fea Pike,the Cod-fifh ; alfo,the
Spit file ; ie uet de mer.
iettent les gardons pour tirer des brochets.
They forgoe an ezge to gaine an Oxe; or, finall , for
great ynatters,
Brocheton: m, 4 Pickerell,or fimall Pike(of the length
Bie ‘feot,or under.)
m4 à En bois, &c; À pricke, or pee of wood,


Fr d'argent. A little see of filuer.

Brochoir: m. 4 (Farriers) fhooing bammer.

Brode: m. Breth,pottage,brue.

Brode: ere fwart,or Sunne-burntwench.
Pain de brode. Browne bread,

Brode.langage brode. 4 loofe, laskie, finaering,
pines an effeminate sanguage,or fecch.
nm ns ‘brodéde de, Iuflinians

€ ent bri merde, 14 Infii

tutes ; Cala becanfe of the filthie pombe
made on them )

Brodequin : m. À buskin,
Les brodequins. Buskins,or bootes (filled with boat
oyle,&rc,) whereinto the legs being put are extreamely
tormented,

Broder. To imbroder.

Brodes..A cloke,or mantle,of leather.

Brodeur.# Bordeur.

Brodeure, as Bordure.

Brodier : m. The arfe,bumme,taile : Norm.

Broifle. 4 brufh ; Looke Brofle.

Brommart : m.arte :f. Drowfie,

Bronchet. as Bruncher.

Es mens ex mufcle b. One of the foure mufcles which
open the Larinx, ~

Brondes: f.Greene benghes,or branches,of trees;brow~
xing for cattell ; or browxe-wood.

Bronze: m. Braffe.

Bronzé:m, ée:£ Brafon, braffie, made of, or conered
with,braffe.

Bronzer. rien € to make of, or couer with, braffe.

B f. Little bufhes of thornes ; alfo little bun-
dles of twigs, or ickes fafhioned like bauens, or fagots;
alfo,little loofe ftickes remainin, | pape place where fa-
gots,or bauens bane beene laded,or layed,

Brolfailledic: m. eule+ € Full of little bufhes, or
loofe flickes.

Brofsant. Threeding a wood, vufbing through it; al/o,


Brofest re A ,4 bufbie ground or thornie groue;
alfa, the be a buis ofa ce ave-colous
~ ved heath. 2 fm Sark alfo,
a brufh of wire ; alfè,a flax-co
Brofler. Tothreed a wood, runne forcer
pale a thickets ; alfo,to ) brufh,or make cleane with a
tear fe 10 combe,or betchell flax, rc.
“ox ae aux Tournois, To manage
a a ga


Brofiectcs sf mde Pr beath whereof bead-brufhes are
Brot. as Broc ; A flagon,or great tankard.


Vn brot de vigne. The bud of a vine.
LE LL. tien é


Original from


THE OHIO STATESEMVERSHET f=


\


q
.
5
.


!


BRO


é me FN fon brow. Te chaw the cud, ne

rouailles : f. wafbings of difhes; allo, guts, and gar-

bage of fowle ; ay ee ar trafh. 3

Brouaz:m. as Bro

Broudier. as Brodier.

Broue: f. Alittle white clowde.

Brouée : f. 4 mift, ov fog; alfa, as Brouhaha; or Bou-
tade; a bluffermg or violent paffion, or perturbation.

Brouër : m. a¢ Bronée ( in the fir{t fence.)

Brouët : m. Potage, or broth ; alfo, any liquor,podge,or
fauce, of thethickneffe, or confifience of that whereof
Our pruine-tarts are made.

Bec ibrouét. A little peart, andpratling girle. °

Il nefçavoit pas le brouét qui fe brafloit auec vn
autre, (Powreman) be knew not that be was bought
and fould by others; or, what croffe match was in
hand under-band with others.

Brouécter.To fêt a wheelebarrow a=gate ; to labor with,
er carrie things in, a whee lebarrow,

Brouétte :f. Awheelebarrow; alfo,a tacke-nayle,

Brouétteur: m. One that workes with a wheelebar-
row,

Broufter. To faurt, or faifter with the nofé, like aborfe.

Brouhaha : m. 4 blufler; burry, burlyburly.

Brouhoux : m. Stormes, bluflers ; burlyburlies.

Brouil : m. as Brou.

Brouillar: m. 4 cold mift, or fog.

Brouillard :m. arde : f. Confounding, iumbling, difor-
dering, fhuf fling, or budling matters in an unquict, or
ilfauored, manner.

Papiers brouillars. Blotting,or waft papers ; looft pa-
pers, wherein we write things carelefly;or at randome,

Brouillas :m. 4 mift, or fog.

Brouillaffer. as Brouiller (extremement:}

Brouillaffeur : m. # Brouilleur(in the bighef degree.)

Brouillé:m. eé :f. umbled , confounded , il-fbuffled,

difarderly budled, burryed, troubled; marred in the
mingling,

Oeil brouillé. 4m eye wherein,by fome fret wound
or inflammation,all the humors are mingled,and ium-
bled together ; which cauféth the ball, or aple, to ap-
peare of divers colours, Wig

Oeufs brouillez.#boft fubfiance is mingled er beam
ten together with a little vargis, and fovfed, eyther
for fauce, or as an Omelét. : :
rouiller. To iumble, treuble, diforder , confound,
marre by mingling together ; to budle, tumble, x
things il-fauoredly ; 10 make a troublefome botchpotch;
tomake a burry, or great burliburly.

Brouiller Jes cartes. To diforder, co marre

“buine fess af, to keepea foule coyleya filthy fire.

Ilne fait que iller. (Of one that playes on an In-

Strument) be dath but fumble, or flubber ouer the leffon


wo


be playes. ‘ |
= Brouilleric: f A Prag ho he


re iumbling, ‘things to-
| deb fer ov mngter of tins tgetber «beuble
Some, Leet ih bec one that by ouerdoing marres


Brouillon. as Brouilleur ; 4/0, one that broaks in eue-
ry thing, whereby bemay get but « pennie. ==
Broüiné sm.cé:f, Blajied, er burat witbmifis.
Broüir. To rumble, rufile, blufier; alfo, to bumme,
Broii t. as, Bruicment; al/o, a humming.
Broufcr. To brouxeknap;nible off, leanes, buds ee.
PR if. A thornie, Life, or brycrie , ground,
t, or grone. À
Brouffin: m. A bunch;or tuurre,in a tree.
Ut: m..4 brouzing , nibling, knapping off of buds,
frs Jeanes 30¢;alfo,brouxe-woodor a fprig,tendrel,
4c ; a yong beathssefleote, fit to be brouxed on,
Qui fuit le brouft. À finel-feaft, or trencher-frierd;
5% that daily bauntes other mens well furnifhed ta-


Broufter. as Brouter.

Brout. as Brouft,

Broute:f. The roote of the box-tree, feafoned, and fit
for vie.

Broutement :m, A brouxing.

Brouter.To bronze; to knap, or nible off the (brigssbuds,
rs ec. of plants ; alfo, as Brouëter.

Ou la Chevre eft liée faut qu'elle broute: Pro.
Looke Chevre, .

Er eer :m. A bars alfo, as Brouëtteur.
routeur : m. eure: f. Brouzing ;nibling, knappi
yey arn sung smibling, kuapping of
routeure : f, 4 browzing.

Broutilles : f. Beggars feraps.

Broutique: f. A monkey. ( v.m.)
routonner.# Bouronner ; to bud.

Brouy: m. ie:f, Burned , parched ; withered by ex-
treame beat.

ser en LS To parch, burae, wither with féorching .

at


€.
Broyé zm. cé :f. Pounded,brayed,beaten finall, broken
FS into little peeces, fi
royement :m. A braying, pounding, beating fmall, +
Broyer Topound, bray, beate fall tatake a litle
éces. ini De D AE LR
roycr de l'eau en vn mortier: To loo/é labour.
Broyeur:m. A brayer,pounder, beater of things vatill |
th ey be broken. . :
Bru:f. A daughter in Law 34 fonnes wife.
Bruant : m.A certaine little beautifulland dul-fighted
_ bird; enemy toborfes, whofe neighing be counterfeits ; À
fome call him, a yellow-bammer, or yowlring.
Ranchers m. The craw-bone , or merrie thought, of a |


ird.
Bruel : m. The Brayle, or Pannell of a banke.
Brucil. The fame. LE perle eng
Bruge-efpine : f. Buck-thorne, way-thorne , laxatine
- vamme, , D MA |
ye To bellow, yell, voare, make a hideous noife.
Brug fin offer gene, fn
0 time. à EU : >< :
Éd + PSE 5 oe

icment :m rumbling,ri sbluftering i 5 clatte- à tee


FILIO Raye
ee oy


Original from


HE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


“BRYV


Bruinement : m. A baling or buries or |
Ass ouer,
Bruinet. 7


or fet a boarie g
Bruineux: m. aie: :£ € Fall of bot blajting wis x
Bruire. To rumble ; ruflle ; ; later


ming noife ; alfo,as ‘Brugier, et


Comme l'on bruit. Asthe bruitis, sem re-
« portssas the talke goes.


te
Bruit:m.:A bruit; a great found, or noifes javianbileg;
clamor; cracking, creaking3alfo, a: numour; common
tale, publike voice, fume, reputationreport, thetalke
of people,the [peech abroad.


hath the credit, the" other. moc pi rsh ‘one 2 arte
-credit,thother thes the paines
Qui a bruit de fe eut as” matin ins iufques
au foir : Prov. He that is thoug pe
lye abed tillnaone.
Brule- ie. See Saufliadecigos::
Brulure +f Blight , Brant-corne;(an bearbe.)
| Brumal : m: ale : f. winterie ; winteralike ; Not:
x» ‘therne; Fri on, or like to, the Jrrtefr: Winter-


Bruman: ane fonne in laws; the busband ofadaigh-
ter.
Brumba: gere bay,or darke bay.
Brume . > Trip the yeare ; alptbe mide
peal ifo,winter.
The name of a kind of vine.
Brun: m. brune : +f. Bromae,daskie, firart; afore or


Ban de ee Aig


gr flaming.


:f 4 er wench,a louely


eme
time. se ne


Bauneat Clos bruneau. The Gimme A om


Brunet : m.ette : f. A cia —…
Fille brunette eft de ‘nature gaye , & netre:
Prov, A nut-browne girle is neat, and bith, by na-
ture.


Brunette
final! bird , lke an Omfel s al, fine blacke cath ;
whences
Aufsi tlewlned amourettesfoubs bureau quefous
brunettes: Prov. Loue playes bis pranks as well in
Cotes as Courts.

Bryn fauve: com. Deére-coleured ; or of a darke ion-


tawni
sam Teb.dyn Cerf. ‘The burnifhing ofa Stag


Bruni :niierf Buraifhed, fied, palifued af
B (nedededgmde browne. — + we re
runie : fe as 2

Brunir. To burni Fa fier jo aaa
| __{cure,make browne. Ne

Biunifleure : £ À bérmifbing,or retness a farbi-
fled neatneffeyor pel fhed bri

ir: m. À fhing b on icke’ ora bur=


mt aboli: 234


vf. À nut-browae girle; alfo, à kind of


inne it bot msg, | si m. ante: Wa a J fray 3 fe


orafhsito. ||
fousd' ver ld cory barf mae inv bin |


L'un a le bruit, l'autre lave lalaine: Prov.oTh'one |


ARE MONT | ‘ae
| iat €.


‘nie © te, fürbifhing ; qi enn Raggi rat nl je yn efperuier


pag Corne-burning, graine-fring.

B gue. Tongue-fcorching , tongue-inflaming.
Bruflement: m. À burning, firing, inflaming ; fcor-
ching, shin» J Seaulding; e being on pen a confit-


ming
Brufler. To burne, fire, bone: finge, feauld, feorch;
to beon fire; to confume with fire.
“edly sal par pe fie bouts. Diforde-
| to confume bis fubfiance; to {pend hee
\ cares aot how, nor what; alfo, (contearily iw leffe
SRE AN miley PME Ma ig


eur bottes s'ils penfenc ainf: They
are in a foule errour , forget thËnfèlues too much ;
à ré +4 runne into a great inconuenience , by thir
ne fo.
Se brufler à la chandelle ; &; Il fevienbruflerà
Ja chandelle; Looke Chandelle.
Detrop prez fe chauffe qui fe brufle: Bon wee
marmes bimfelfe too neere that burnes bimfelfe.
Telfe cuide chauffer qui fe brufle : Prov. Some
thinking bat to warme, doe burne, themfelues.
Brufleur sm, 4 burner, fyrer , inflamer , {eorcher,
fcalder.
Habillé comme vn brufleur de Maifons. Dreffed
like a tattered,and defperat,rogue.
5 | es f. A burning; or burat place; alfo, as Bru-
ure,
Brufque:com. Briske,lively, quicke; alfo, rafh, baire=
pee: alfo, wild, fierce, rude, barbarous,


ufque. A Swift meafure , or fuft timein
Muficke.
dr brufque. wineofa quicke , [harpe , or finart


Brufquement. , Guelyz va adily; ferce-

ue na nl on
rufquet : m. ette : recipes = Va

Vin brufquet. Very /inall,and pt at:

Brut. argent brut. Fey geo rough finer es
comes out of the
Caverne brutes Are, cage, aff deme.
Diamond brut . 4 Diamond that nener was cut,

vor is newly taken out of the rocke ; a. rong Dia=


Brutal: male: EBeaff; wild, rude fauage brut


Brutalement. Biel, bel wily radely fauage-
Boule mines def lt
Beall 3 filthineffe.
= han pe prete (ae
nt of an excellen
pene


Prov. bal, and bee teil meer pre gud
48 Brual ; AP, raf , techies beede-
= x © Qui


Original fake <
THE.OHIO.S TATÉMMMERSITY
ET a 4)


BY B


L brutif. One that falters, ;
an.


Bruti 4 j ud 3 A .
sr tno


Bruvage : m. Drinke,beuerage.

Bruy.as Brouy.

Bruyan : & Bruyant :m, À yellow bammer; or, as
Bruant.

Bruyant :m.ante:f. Kwmbling, rufiling, blufiering ;
alfo,roaring skreaking,yelling.

Faifan bruyant. The great lache Moore-cocke ; or,
as Coq de Pois.

Bruyement. as Bruiment.

Bruyere: f. Heath , ling, batber , whereof brufhes
bee made (in which fence tis commonly Pluralt;)
alfa, a heath , or beatbie ground; alfo, the great
Æcyprian Tamariske , the fruit whereof refembles
Galls.


Bruyere fauvage. The leffe,and fruitleffe Tamariske
of Egypt.

Bruyercux : m. eufe : f. Full of beath , ling, or ba-
ther,

Bruyné. Looke Bruiné.

Bryonie: f. Brionie, white vine, wild nep, tetter ber-
vit.
Bryonic noire. The wild vine,blacke Brionie,our La-
dies fealc.


Bryonic fauvage. The fame.
pepentier: m. ere: f. Of or belonging to,Brionie; and
ence ;
Vigne bryonniere. as Bryonic.
u. as Beu,


Apres bu dodo : Prov, After liquor laxineffe.
Buanderie : f. A Laundrie ; a pren to wafb bucks in.
Buandiere : f. A Laundreffe,or buck-wafber. — ~
Bubailer. To gape,to yawne,

Bubbe.as Bube.
Bube: £. A pufh, wheale, blifler, waterie bud, bunch, or
bumpe.

Bube fauvage. A malignant féabbie pufhyin quality

refembling D ins le)which makes Le ‘thal

at length eats,and frets it extreamely.
Buberiges. Dogs leekes ; or, the bearbe that bears the
\_ purple flarrie Facint. ?
_ Bubelette: £ 4 little red bunch, or pimple on the


. Nofeore.
Buber f.A little wheale, pufh,or blifier.
si i: aac i gi a plague-fore;
ch-fore,winche, fé,
DE lerutduafe (aletod les ler tels
worne tomake,or keepe,the bodie firaight ; See B


orBufte. |
Bucail. The courfe mill, or graine, called French


eur : m. ATrumpettr, =
Buccine:f, 4 Cornet, or Trumpet for the warres ; alfo,
‘the borne of a cowbeardsor fwineheard; alfo,the flelt-
Lead boaft of, the good things you enioy;
Bice. 4certsine wine vefell,contzining abou balfe
apipe ;0r,as Bulle, 7
Buche de bois.


:


called venus-fhell.
| RE bonne eine fans tromps ne buccine : Pro.
:_ wnleffe youmieane that greatn font, or too much | B


A logge, backe focke, or great. billets


+. 4 <5 Pa
- 3-2


BYE “aE


See Bufche. a
Droi& de buche. Looke Droi&, x
Bucheron: m. A wood-cleawer , or ler, one
rd makes fagots , bauens , er billets , in woods fer
ave. e


Bucheronner. To cleaue,or cut downe, weed; to make L


rm little
uchettes : £ Sprigs,twigs, little flicks.

Buchicr : m, Yi Li gee Ph woed-pile.
Buchs. The name of a Gaféon countrey (not ferr
Bourdeaux,ad)füll of Rofen—Pine-trees ;whence ;

Chandelles de Buchs. Candles of Rofen, vfed by the


poorer inbabitants both of that countrey, & of Armig-
nac.


Bucine.as Buccine.

Buclandere: £. A kind of Dutch boat, or barke.

Bucolic: m.ique : f. Heardman-like ; of, or belonging
to,a beard/man,or a beard of neat. '

Bucoliquement. Heardman-like,

Bucquer.as Buquer ; 4/0, to butte,or inrre.

Buée tf dye wherewith clothes are feowred; alfo,a buck |

clothes.
Buer. Towafh a bucke ; tofcower with lye.
a A buffet, blow, cuffe, boxe, or wbirret on the

eare,erc.

Buftelin : m, ine: £. Buffe-like; of, ev belonging to, a
B


uffle.

. To puffe or blow bard; alfo,to fpurt,or pout wa-
ter on.

Buffet: m, 4 court-cupboord , or bigb-flandi
boord ; alfo,a cupboord of plate ; (Hence) re 1
plate as will furnifh ac ds.

Buffeté: m. ée : f. wrought rough , or fhagge , like
Buffe ; alfo, buffeted , or well cuffed ; alfo, deaded,
as wine that bath taken wind , or bath beene mingled

B eg water, sie re lke fi

eter, To make rough , or fhagge, like buffe ; alfo, te |
sy cuffe; aff to marre a ve[[ell of wine by often
tafling it before it be breached; or, to fill it vp with
pig after much wine bath beene flollen, or taken,
out of it. bs ne i
de vin. Such Carmen, or Boatmen, &c, as
J'eale wine out of the veffels they baue in charge, and
PS ened fill them vp with water, ~.
onl :m. The fifh called a Lumpe,or Paddle,or fea-


Owle.
Buffle:m. The buffe, buffle, bugle, or wildoxe ; alfo,
the skin,or oh We See Beufle.
Bufflée :f. as Buffe.(v.m.)
Baffler. Te re à
OY. 45 B 1] 5 or Beffro .
Bir bane : ré (a tearme dy
. The barke of a Barbarie tree ; (a tearme
-Simplifs) 2
: m. Bugle, middle Confound, middle Comfrey;
an bearbe.) i LE
Qui a du bugle, & du Sanicle, fait au Chirurgien
la nique: Prov. Soexcellent are thofé bearbes in the


lofle fauvage . wilde Bugloffe ; eer


Original from .


THE GHiO STATE UNIVERSITY:


77 bc di: tete ii


Bvt


E there bee divers kinds ; as, Alkanct,or Orkanet ; and
| fase Bug ou Snakes Bao Pipe Buco,
or w. . op.
Bugra de, ou, Bugtane:£ Ref-barow, Cammocke,

pre ground Furze.
Bugrate, x Bugrande,
Bugrunde. Thefame.  :
Bute: f, A water-pot,o pitcher.
Buire: £, An ople glaffe,violl,or cruxe.
Buiretre: £ A cruet,or little vioH.
Buifare: m.4 Bugxard,or Bald-kite.
Buifive: f. A litile pipe ; a conduit pipe ; a water


jpe.
Buitare. as Buifart ; Alfo,the veffell called (otberrife)
Poinfon ; Looke Poinfon.
Buiffine : £ & Buifinez
Buiflon: m. 4 bufh; thorne brier ; alfo,a groue, concert,
ao ad ground,
Buiffon à connils, A(pritzat) warren for conies,neere
unto,and for the pronifion ofa mans boufe,
Meuré de buiflon. A blacke-berrie ; or bramble
berrie. ;
| Rofe debuiflon. The dozges Roft, wild Rofé, bryer
Labefte a là fon buiffon. There the beaft vfeth to
lodge,or lative.
Tirer le ferpent du buiffon. Looke Serpent.
Amour de Seigneur eft ombre de buiflon :Prov.
> ‘The love of a great mans either momentarie, or dan-
gerous. :
En petiebuiffon trouve on grand lievre: Prov. 4
. little bodie(ofi)barbours « greatheart ; and a {mall
; bead much wit.
In’y a fipetic
The leaft bufh bath it fhadow. -
Buiffonnages: m, Bufbes ; or, bifhie grounds, bufhie


plots. places.
Buiffonnailles: £ Bufbes; thornie
Buiffonné : m.ée: f B
foes; 2Y6,lodged in,retired sato,or withdrawn among,
bufbes,or bufbie laces.
| BuifSonner. To dog, watch, or lye in wait for , (alfo,to
lodge)among bufhes. SANS
Buifsonnet : m. A little bufh ; thorne; grone , thic-


s+


ket. \
Buiffonneux: m, eufe: f. Bufhie, thornie , fill of | »


bufbes.
Buiffonnier : m.ere :£. Ofor belonging to bufhes; fre-
gheaer es 5 liming,or lurking among
» bufhes ; and hence. |

Faire Ÿ efchole buiffonniere. To play the tru-

ant , or feeke birdes nefis when bee bee at


Buiffonniere:£ 4 bufbie groue, plot, or ground; a


thicket of bufhes sthorues,
Bulbe sms A kag bulbed,or onion, 700t;


al-

root that is vound,and bath ,

bn emma babe ae
particularly) the {callion.


ulbe fauvage. Dogs-bane ; Corne-lecke , wild or |:


medow Saffron.
= Bulbe vomitif. The root of the muskie Grape-flow-
“ers fome alfe call fo, Narciflus, or the white Daffa-
dill, others, the rufh Daffadill (Though the bulbed
Yoots of all Daffadils might as well bee called fo; for


all of them prouoke vomit.)
Bulle mule: Selb rund bee on


’


Digitized CO: gle


Lt : © wag’
Bule ++ à bliffer; or bubble. | tr B
Buler.æ Bugler ; Alfo,the Pope to write, grantor fend
4 Bull ; te execute,or excotmmunicate,by Bull, :
Buletin. # Bulletin, ©
ra : com, Of or belonging to a Bull; or, as Bul-
es


Bullage: m. The fealing of cloath ; the marking thereof
Bulle: f.4 Bull; a writ, Commiffion,or letter fealed with


Bullé: m. é¢: £ Sealed with lead, as a Bull ; flam-


iffon quine porte ombre: Prov.


fie ice who file |


. B VL -


: with afeale of lead. ’


1


lead, and fent from the Pope; any fucb Papall, and


leadendipatch.


> ped, as the leaden feale of a Bull ; alfo;that hath obtai-
ned the rh Bull for fome particular adyancement,
or priniledge to bimfelfe.

Bulleteau :m. À boulter,or boulting cloth.

Bulleter.2s Bluter.(v.m.)

na m. Abill, ticket, cocket; a billet ina Lot-

erie, - : 1
Bulletins =m. (Among the Gray Friers ave) fuch as

- baue beene reformed by the Popes Bulls,

Bullette : f. as Bulletin. ; ,
Bullettes. such bubbles, or bobs of glalfe as women
weare for Pendants at their eares. 94

— m. A writer,or a wiaker of Bulls; or as Bus
ifte, À

Bullonner. To runne,boyle,or burft, out in great abou-
dance ; (an old word.)

Bullot. 4 certaine greatyellow,and Loi ch

Buon :m. The beake ofan Ewer, or pot; the mouth of
acruet,violl dc ; alfo, alittle oyle pot.

Buprefte. The venomous blacke fle called, a long-leg,
or wag-leg.

Buquet. To kvacke,or to rap,at a doore.

Bur: m. 2s Bureau.

Bur : m.Bure :f. Browne,ruffet, darke coloured.

Burail: m. as Burat; Silke-rafh.

Burail croifé. Sitke fay.
Buss) fimple de Flanders , & vni. Silke Mocca-


Burat: m, Silke-rafh; or any kind of fiuffe thats balfe
pis balfé worfted.
urat bafin, Silke Bombafie.

Burat crefpu. Silke Curle or (urle. Ps
Burate : f That whichremainesina churne after the
befl butter is taken out ; which firained through alin-
nen cloatb,and well falted and wrought vatill it grow
© werie thicke,ss kept in earthen pots for the vfé of the

meynie ; alfo,as Burat.

Burbarin: An allufion to Buftarin: Rab.
Bure:£ as Bureau; (is the firft fence.) “4
Bureau:m. 4 thicke and couïfe cleth,ofa browne vuj— |
fetpr darke mingled,colonr ; alfo, the table thats with= |
ina court of Auditor of Audience (belike, becaufe tis
= ufually couered with a carpet of that cloth) alfe, the

Court it felfe ; alfo, the bearingsor decifionof canfès in

(fkch a) Conrt,whence’s 3

Ventre de bureau. One that feeds grefely. 4

Le prochain bureau. The next = bearing. + .

Mettre fur le bureau.To fall a talking cf or to bring

- upon the flages | à

Mentre le proces fur le bureau. To bring the fuit un-

toahearing. - : :

- Auf bien {oncamourettesfous bureau que fous
… brunettes: Prov. Lone trickes ave played (loues rites


A sce, ét dent eat |
MES ose N ¥


HE | Ven- 1


Oridinaltas


À &


THE:GHIO-STATE-OMIMRRSIT Yes
. TE he. io >


>. a os A à wr: —— = ~ 27


B VS B'V',T


Ventre de velours robbe y age" Prov. 4 vel-
uct belly clads mer
bac ralfetar darke browne,as the


reau.
Burellé d'argent & d'azur ; (9e blaxe it thus) be bears
[0 many Le pu argent and azur. 1
Buret : m.The purple-fifh : {Langucd.
— f. Alittle cruet, Sol, or ar bottle for oylepr vi-


Buretté: : me :f. (Inflead of Beluté) boulted,

Burez: m. as Buret.

Burgan :m.A welke,wink/e, periwinkle; or, a generall
tearme for mof of thofe firaile-like fhell-fifbes.
rapa m. The Captaine | or Gouernour of a for-
trefle

Burguefpi ine. as Bourgucfpine.

Burin: m. 4 | grauing flucke,or yron.

a i m.ce:£. Carued,ingranen,intailed ; alfo, pier
ce

Buriner. To carue,graue, intayle ; alfo,to pierce.

Burineur : m. 4 caruer,grauer, intailer.

she :m.4 yong duckling newly crept out ofthefhel:


Bula mate vi rs reins |


Bufle a deci: A drie-fat, or | og (and bogs-bead.
like) veel wherein Reifins e put, po se |


Butz Bufe ; 07, as Bufte(in the firft fence.)

Buftarin : À great lubber , thicke druggel; cowardly
luske,daftardly flaberd ullion,

Bufte: m. as Buc; 07,4 buft; the long, finall (or
pointed) and bard-quilted belly of a deublet ; aljo,
wbole ,07 bodie of a man from bus face to bis mid-
die; alfoya tombe,or fépulchre.

ofer: m, vngros b. A luske , loggerbead, lowt,


Buftuaire: com, Burnt , as a dead bodie; or, cra-
uing, pins ing, thefacrifice of mens ads:


But: "A butpr marke; (and particularly, the; |
thats in the middefi PikCascateabetn rie
Burd ee Ofer 3 purpose, end,

ut à but. Of equal e on like tearmes, at euen
press ar hs fes Soddes ato cl ;
Mais]a ne fautfaire but, & borne. But there wee
ride eta mead Shas D MU) à, or fettle


Bure: m.ée: f. Touched at,or by,thend of.
T ay buté avne pierre. 1 bane knockt, bit, firwck my
foot againfia flone.

Buter. To touch at th'one end; de abut, or ioyne “vue by
thend ; alfo,to put or thruft,aw:

Buteux. Of, or belonging 10,4 rie ; ; full of buts.

Butin : mA bootie,prey; or fpoile, taken.

Butinant. Bootehalme,preying making fpoyle of.

bir 5 :m, A boote-ba ling, preying on , making

0}
Butiner. To pr gee! ms make fpoyle of, to bootcbale


No

Butler. e as Hurler; Al, 10 icaft with; or flout at:
@Rab,

Burlefque: com, Jeafling,or in ieaft, not férious; alfo,
mocking, flouting.

Burne: £.The folitarie place,or corner wherein an Owle
‘fits inthe day time.

Burnie: main-burnie. ward gard cuflodie. (v.m.)

Buron: m. 4 poore cottage.

Burre.a: Beurre. Butter.

Burré. Buttered,

Burter. To batter,

Burrier: m.4 feller of butter ; alfoya great cater of but-
ter; a butter-box.

Burriere :f. 4 butter-wift; a wench that fels,or eats,


much butter. it,to liue,or game
Burfauli: m. Cane-withie,with the yellowifh barke, | Butineur. sre en ll one that lives
Bufard :m, A Bazxard, of the fpoile.


Po: ie. A buske ; or,as Buc; Seeke Pt for Bufq ; and,


pub halles : £ Small twigs or
e:f. A log,a backe flocke; a A billet.
Droié de bu{che.Looke Droid,
C'eftoit vne bufche en fon oeil. That was a beame
in his eye, a blocke in bis way ; à great impeachment to
_ his plots ; ahinderance to his proceedings,
Tortue bufche fai&t droit feu : Prov. A crooked log
makes a firaight “but
ore — vaut ufches: Brov.4ny wood is as good |


fabs * ulche fai chaud feu: Prov. Agreene log
makes a hot fire.
Bufcheron.¢s Bucheron.
Bufcheter. To gaiber flickes for the fire,
| Bufchettes : f. Small fickes,or fprigs.
Bufchilles : f Little flicks, twigs,or fprigs.
£ : ier. Togather flickes; iene
1B pee ‘conduit, (See Bui- |
ipe of a Cefterne, or ; (See
ets A pipe oF as Buzine,


pate Full of prey, Bale, rs æ Buti- |


Butte: f, 4 but. marke, to {hoot at ; alfo, a pla
paste Anagr mare, pas of eee . cap


4 Maree haut le blanc à la butte. To demaund of one


Bes 3 alfo, to fet a bigh price on a thing that would be


:m.as Hotte ; Saxing that it is made of a cours À
fer Oxier called du ne or Plion; 3 and th 533.3 f
Wicker clofe wren:
uvable : com. Drinbablés vf tobe drunke of... -
uvage: m.as Bruv


moouable, and compaffe , branches ; or, th-one
pia scompaffe, and tb'otber firaight, Some call it a


Buvereau a eo ii
ie: nada D ae
iy an a


Indges Collations..
fus Small boufhold wine, n
I 4 Buvettes.


ab TFOM


Original fre
DIRES GO aie M LHE OHIO-STATE-UNIVERSITY


the refülution of a matter which is aboue biscapa- |


seg CH TRUE M


— oo tuile - Ale LÉ tlc eh eee eee.
? :
\


CAB


CAB


Buvettes.sippiegs,tiplings, and particularly the lud-
dater mOi die
tter.#s Buveter, —
Buvotter, Thefame. :
— : m. The dial, or compaffe, whereby afhip is


guided, .
Buydon: m. Such acage,coupe,or open basket (of wic-
te Pole ae ed bbtarchekenssbe idler
ein.


Buye. as Buie. A water pet,or pitcher.

Buycle :m, as Buxolle.

Buyer. 4 Box-tree,or frub.

Buyrette :f. as Burette.

Buys: m. Rox; Looke Bouts.

Buyfé: m.éc : m.bored, fit of boles ; 07,that bath boles
made into it,

Buyer. To bore,pierce make boles into, er make full of

Buyfine. « Buifine.


u

boles.
Buytronne: f. 4 füraace te melt,and fine, filuer in.
Buyzart. Looke Buifart.
Buzart. 4 Buzzard or Bald-kite,
Buze, 4 Buxxard, or Bald kite; alfo,as Bufe.
Buzine: f, A bagpipe; or, a clownes trxmpet ; a clow-

nifbinfirument, made of pitched barke, and founding
the 4 trumpets @Gafc.alfoyas Bufine.


a le: f. as Bible. “aA
yrrafque sf 4 turbulent, andbigh-going fea, or bor-
rible tempeff at fes; as Birrafque.


Byrantini..[4 peece of coyne worth a double ducket, or |


thereabouts ; Looke Befant; & Bifantin.
Byze. The fea fifa Bonito.
LA
| C
A. 1s fometimes an Aduerbe of Place,and fignifies,
Cres this place,this way ; fometimes pi ie
_ tion of calling,ov commaunding, where one bids
another come vato bim , (and then fignifies, approach,
draw neeve,come hither ;) or to giue him fomewhat;
(then fighifyine,lets fee there, gine me that, reach bi-
© fher;) or 10 fallow bim (and then fignifies, follow hoe,
come after cc.) This Ca is pronounced as Sa.
çaen arriere. Formerly, in former times,beretofore.
a & là. Diffifedly , farteringly, now bere now there,
ither and thither ; infeattered troups, leofe compa=


mes.
Caable.as Cable. Awind-fall.
Gabab : m. The chucking,churring,or iouking of «Par.
e. .
€. Loaden with bags, and wallets ; alfo,
commented on ;(a word coyned by Rab.) x
ps : m, 4 Cabafiet. . bes
: m.The money, of marchandife which one:
of another,to yeeld bim the balfe, or third, or fourth,
part of the game thats made thereof.
Cabalanizer,Todrinke like a bor{e;to fwill gull,quaffe,
| tipple extreamely. RAR M
Cabale : € The Mes Caball;or;a hidden [cience of di-
uine myfleries which the Rabbies affirme, was reuea-
__ led and deliuered,together with the Law,unto Mofes,
“and fron him deriucd,by faccefine en
itie ; (yet isit,in truth, no betterthan avainerabble
Phere traditions. %


)
Enr Cabale£oncealed as a fpeciall
Cabalin: mine: € ofor belonging 10,4 borfe. ere


» Go. gle


le cabaline. = e er
œ :m. A Cabalift; a profeffor,or vnderfiander
es rires radio, ms se
tique : com. icall ; of, or belonging to
the levi Caball,or lewifh traditions. ed
Caban : m.4 gabardine,o7 cloake of felt.
: f.A cote,or cottage ; alfo,a fhed,or cabin made


ee
Cabaret :m. An Ale-boufe ; a tipling,and vittualling


boufe,tent,or booth ; alfo, the bearbe Haflewert, Fole-
foot Cabaret, Afärabacca. 3
Suppaft de cabaret. 4x Alé-knight, Ale-boufè-baun-
ter;lick-{pigot common tipler ordinarie drunkard.

Cabaretier :m. 4fütler common viélualler, Ale-houfe-
keeper ; alfo,as fuppoft de Cabaret. 2

Cabaretter. Tofrequent A E

Cabas :m. 4 fraile(for raifins,or figs.)
Vn vieil cabas. An old fraile wherein figs, ec, baue
beeae ; alfo,an old,or decayed woman, that bath been
a good fellow inber dayes. -

Cabaflé: m.ée:£. Frayled ; puis or packed wp in a
Pales beaped , or boorded vp together, as in a


rayle,

Cabaffeau.as Cubafeau.

Cabafler.To fill « fraile with raifins ec ; 10 puter pack
Up,in a frayle ; alfo,to beape, or boord vp together, as
raifizs,ec,in 4 fraile.
abaflet : m. A fleight belmet,or casket.
Cabaffetde papier. 4 long bood, or Myter, of pa-


Ae
Cibatfon :m. A certaine little, sootbleffe, and great
headed, fifh.. ;
abat, as Cabas.
Cabau,# Cabal.
Cabeillau: m.Frefhcod.
Cabecon. as Cavecon,
estan :m. The Capftane of a fhip.
Cabilaud : m. The Cheuin ; (tearmed fo by French Pure


3.
Cabillax :m.Frefh cod,


Cabinet: m. Agabinet.pr casket, for iewels ec; alfa,


4 clofet, luttle chamber or wardrobe, wberin one keeps
bis beft,or moft efteemed, fubflance ; alfo,an arbor in a


arden.
Cabinet d'Allemagne. 4 kind of fandifhy, or a finall
cabinet feruing for,or bauing in it,a flan
Le cabinet du Roy. The prinie chamber.
i e. as Capi e.
Cabirots: m. The —— or fpawne, of Sturgeons,
fpread pon bread , and eaten with vinegar oyle, and


pepper. |
Cable: m. 4 cable,or great rope. à
Cable:f. 4 wind-fall ; atree ouerthrowne by wind, or
tempeftuous weather, ~~ À : 2
Cabochard : m. arde: f.Headie,wilfull,obflinate;gid-
die, LÉ pet ebay
Caboche: £ The Head : Pic,
Caboche bien tymbrée. A well-garnifhed head-
peece,well-tackled braine-panne,a flayed, or difcreet
pate,
Cabochenu. as Cabochard: - I
Caboches. A rebellious crue of Parifians in Charles the
~ fixts time; called (0 of their captainc whofe name was


C D
Cibocheux, ae Cabochard ; Or, whofe head ic full of


= toyess whofe courfes are wholly guided by the fond de-

wee, owne braine. 3
PAS nde pierre precieufe.Thebeazil,coller,head,
NW ; or.


NOTE NT NOR Se PPS ee ee


EDEN de, UN 2 a. 2) oa)” »..


RO a Oe ES se


4
4
3
a


CAC


“@AD


or bighef part ofaring,or iewell, wherein the
fits 4, the boffe,or rifing of the ‘flone it felf; 7
les bood.
Cabot : m. The Gull. ffb,Bull-head, Millers-thumbe.
Cabore: f, as Cabot; Or, (more properly) a Gur-
nar.
Cabre: £. 4 Goat.
A la cabre morte, Vpon his necke.
er. Toreare,or fland upright on the binder feet; 310


rife bigh before ; as a Goat , or Kid that b des Cds |


tree.
Cabrer fur Je devoir. To bee reftie, or bac wii in
duetie (from a iade that rares up when be fhould goe
forward.)
Cabril: m. 4 yong Kid.
Cabriole. a Capriole.
Cabriolé : m.ée:f.capered.
rioter. To caper,to cut a caper.
brol :m. Aniffice made for a fiflula
Cabrole:f.4 certaine blew-backed,white-belied and
Small-mouthed fi fh.
abucé : m.ée : f. Headed, like a cabbidge.
aburlaut : m. A Gull, Bull-head, Millers-thombe:
Rx
us: m, uce; ou,ufle: £ Headed, round beaded ;
poe beaded ; and,bence,
Choux cabus. 4 Cabbidee
ae cabuces, ou cabulles. Leaned, or headed


{ abutter To cabbidge ; to grow to « bead ; or, grow
round and clofe together as a Cabbidge.
acaber. Tochucke,or iouke,as a Partridge; to counter.

fit the voice of a Partridge.

Cacaflement de poule. The cackling of a ben. .,

| Cacafanguc : f. The bloudie flix.

Cache: f. as Chaffe : Pic. Alfo,a hiding bole,bidden
cornet ; or r mooke out of the way.

Caché:m.ée: f. Hiddea,concealed, sheot Secret; in co-
Mert,in corners ; ; lurking i infome odde nooke or other ;


conucied away.
Ic mal. MATE à qui le cul parojft: Pro. Hee is
_ ill bid whofe taile appearcs; be wor, difembles whofe
el gars ap aha are.

¢ à qui l'on voit le dos: ‘Prov, Hee


site on bimfelf that fhewes bis backe ; or as the
met,
| Cachebugade : £, Æihiopian Hartwort, Sefèliof Æ-
thiopia ; (Afhrub thats alwayes greeñe.)
| Cache-col. À véluetattire, or ornament for the necke,
much worne by the women of France, in ancient time
when their gownes were cut low before.


| Cach Jia canfumpton; at pineth a-
ang ct y pr NA
Cach m. A maske,or muffler. or

| Gacheletas Cachelaid” batted ie}


| Cachemaïlle : f. À money box, 1 ih ‘
heinent : Re
c fe


mifhed.
| | Cac Ga ee
Uo

i ich “ es Arma mar. ees Kai


nn a => |
con 5 hic,
Cacheren la met Tonite thee


_ Cacqueter. as


ÿ Cc del: meling; one that bath meed |
3 afhip toge bien, ep


: at euerie ward fhe is li
tbr into the fea. fe paf Free Pas ie
Iliette la pierre,& cache le bras. He does mi
but will not be feene nor Jceme, to baue pa
Du temps qu'on fe c it pour prefter de l'ar
| ses rai mi honef fimplicitie, and innocent confi-
when men were more carefull 10 conceale others


mfg than to ET their ovene debts.
On ne cache 2 aiguilles en fac: Pro. Needles are
not eh af be nn in. ride. i


RE mA ET pay fe fyves,
du Roy. The prinie fignet; wherein is not,as
in ours any fèale uftd, but de the kings name flam-
nat characters of filuer , and afterwards couered
with inke by one of the Secretaries ; 3 (this flampe is
Nr kept by the Conftable; ; fometimes fs 4


Cacheté Un. éc:f.Sealed.
cheter. To feale as a letter.
Cachette: f A lurking bole,or corner; 34 a ae nooke, fé:
He place,biding bole; alfè,a dennc,or
-rinily cl oleh eerily, conerthsbidden-
cliente


agen bug gger mugger.
:m. A hider, concealer ; fuppreffer.
Cachexic : f. An euill di patin of the mie often by
long fickneffe,ill diet,or bad phyficke ; ) SES makes
the patient no whit the better
achile. Sea-rocket.
ire.as Chafloire: @Pic.
Cachot. as Caquot; Ai/i,a couert for Deere, or denne
for a raueñous wild beaf.
€: f,as Cachette; 07,the bole in a prifan;fome-
times alfo,a graue ; and bence ;
Ha efté mis aujourd'huy en facachotte. Hee was
buried to day.
hotté : m.ée:£, Layed in the bole of a prifon:
: m. Rafemarie feed (Mot Barbare.)
Cacidoine. The Ho flonc called,a Calcedonie. ~
Cachéyrnies § Euill difgeflion; or, ilk inyce in the |


Cicobtie: m. Akind of moft venomous, and incura- is
ble bile,or fare ; or,abile, or fore thats ill to bee cu.


re

Cacoliq ue. (Aa irronicall allufion to Catholique ; o-

‘berm of little or no fence.) :

je: f. €uill feech ; railing,reproach, reuiling, |
tra


Cacophonie : f. An ill, -baifh, or vnpleafing found |
(in words ; 3) 4 vitions vtlerance , or 1 png ;
tion, ;


any ie be eates,


.#5 Caque ; A cag.
queter.
uetoire. See Caquetoire.


foret eat fall,or [bowre ofraine.
i ad: @Langued, |
ce Foutnccanion gh tow, or cou sf part ||
ma
A intent er fe }
what lands be Rovuri hereby fitb-


ir reno rik pasa pt alfo, as 3


Le oA 6
| Cadelé: m. ée:£ cockered pampered, filed, cher-


Shed; mb f. sual, ny
Lettres cadelées Great, ¢ or text fers.
Cadeler. Teter name es cherifb,make much of
alfo,towrite a Text band ; or make a capitall UL letter or

great letters.
at:m. A Padlocke,
Cadence: f A cadence; auf,
words; 4 proportional time,or euen meafure, in any
aétion,or found.
‘A chacune cadence. At enery turne,euer and anon.
ene: f. An yron chaynes
Cadet: ah A younger brother (among Gentlemen.)
oi
dr» f. Cadmia;js either mineralhor artificial; the
pad de two kinds; the bo alone, participates of no
mettall (though it be ne el to the parting of fome
mettals) the other bath fome affinitie with copper, or
with filuer. The artificiall one comes of the finoake,
or fparkles, that arife from firnaces wherein copper
» melted, and made; and bereof there bec ees


kinds,
Cadran.» Quadran.
| Caducité : f Frailtie weakenelfe,aged feeblenelfe.
uque: com. Fraile,caduke, feeble,ruinows, readie
to fall,unable to fispport it felfe.
Eaux caduques. water that runs over a Poole ; or,
\ out of the waft pipes,or fpouts of Conduit heads.
Arien: m, enne: f. Looke Cefarien.
Cafard: m: An hypocrite; à counter feiter of, at dif
bler in,religion,deuotion,pietie ; one that feemes, bu
not poly; e(pecially,a Preacher, er preaching Frier ;
who in his teaching refpetts bis owne, ov bis Orders,
\ profit, See Sa 4 nn Ge ery
Rest rap i peur nace m foew. (
Li ré ei
bypecit


teme
Peake pouf, but ol
eake pioufly, but meane ou :
en, but more to profit bimfelfe,or 1 cr,
Cahn td Eras Se

va pocrifie,outward belineffe, pretence of


|| comnter| it boline
fel a


preach


ke Far


flew paca gf aie

ten 4 t . Yoat

sere a Fee sen

Cafas. ee
rile


4
arene Ft |


Caffar i 4 24240: bars. 2
SR tain


Spite wi


er as Cacafangue, ”
c:f. ACage.


Bhs eae tice
ux vault eftre oifeau de bois que :
erence b tie,and thr:


falling, round going, of


tmbling,feeming


“ac


bable,or prate much,to little purpofe.
eur: m. À greatjand idle,pratler ; one that (like
a layin a cage) iangles mich to no purpofe.
otte: f. À Chesfordesor Cheat (of wicker.)
Cagnardier, 8c. See Caignard,crc.
Canale f. À great bitch.
en ma . À bitch.
que;Parler cagn. To fheake doggerie.
rf. The rauenous,and ougly dog fifh, called (of
of ber bead) the Mallet-fifh.
be ia A little dog ; and particular sakind of little
Gh Sifh,that bates men extreamely. €
gnotblau. Another,of a light bib co elowsotber-
ce mc refembling the former ; the blew
| wy + An Ppperros or difembler allo, a ire


je perfs ls ali mit leprofie.


ouille: f Ad eaw-fiayle


Ca oulle:£. 4 Monks bood,or Cowle. ;
C : :m. 4 fil ‘i ace, pes es mr etch mi
able, gr gett wlan bye ing.
Cagueraffe cher, feuruie ba le
odger; or,a cruel BR Hi ra |
#enous oppreffor. woollic:
Cahin-cahau.as Qu-'a-hu qu-'a-ha.
anier.asCayer. @Rab.
ot:m. The iumpe, bop, or iog of 4 coach crc, ina
rugged,or unenen,way.
a To inmpe.iog,or bop, as a coach in uneuen


Cahuaille. A companie of Owles; an Oli if compa-
nie. @Rab.
Cahuët. as Cahot; alfo,the backe ‘point,or flap,of a fri-
ers Cowle,
Cahuette: f. A little cottage ; alfo,as Luctte. .,
jot. as Cahor... à


enf. A lit aies voltage.
‘ahutelle: fi The faime;(or a diminutine ear 1S


iche:m. 4s M, Catzo ; membre, vir
nard: m..A laxie vagabond, lowfie bedgecreeper
neni rte _ ? "

To play the idle vogue; = (ike unafiic co

Tit eggar) pean / elfe,under abedge, |.
Sime 4; Sunne, :

gnardier: m. a aig
Caignardiere: £. Abedge-w eee
Mort


Caignart : m, as Caignard; af a je and filthie
= placer corner, wherein begg in 7a
lowfe oy tape ‘the baunt pales
hence,are ridges. Paris otis
ci a sot ) tsalled. Ka
A bite .
Caine one (an Interieétion eee ofp Gus mele


th sh SAT
me rn fie er binder à part of. themes


| pes Can ae à


LiNEUS


vin


o2 cl ob Let


Originalifronss
THE@HIO STATE UNIERSETY


7)


CRT CAL


Roy des cailles. The fame. durate fpirit,a feared confcience,

Chand comme yne Lille (ore very bet complexion) | Calabace: £ as Calebaffe. k

as bot asa Quayle, Calage: m. The caulking of a fhip ; alfo, Ockam, or the

aillé:m.éc:f curded,curdled ; coagulated,congea- tome, wherewith it is caulked.

led,thickened. Calamar : m. A Pennar ; alfo the Calamarie, or fleene-
c eran caillé. À fat purfe . Le uns

aulebotes: f. Curds; the curds of milke. : im. A cane, reed; wheaten, or oaten firaw:
Cailleboteux: m. eufe : f. Full of curds. f Ebifate 5 oe. as the Latine Calamus. ae

Lieux cailleboteux. Cragcieflonie,rockie,or flintie aromat. The fivect Arabian reed, or cane,


places ; places made unewen, or umeafie, by manie a Calamus odoratus, or the Arematicall


ones. reed,
Caillement:m, 4 curding,curdling,coagulatingcon- | Calament: m. The bearbe Calamint.
gealing, thickening. ament aquatic. Water Calamint ; (bath a larger
Cailler. To curd, er curdle ; to coagulate; congeale as, flalke, greater branches, and longer leaues, but leffe
turne into,curds. vertue, then the other kinds.)


Cailles. Round beads, wherewith Frenchmen lay at Calament d’eau; ou,de marais. The fame.
Trou-madame; and whereof the Trou-madame # Calament de montagne. Moxntaine Calamint byfh


c ge Pañe-caille. Calamint,boarie Calamint.
ailleteau: m. 4 chackefione,or little flint flone. Calament fauvage. wild Calamint,corne Calamint
Caillette : m. 4 foole,ninaie,noddie natural. wild Penniryall will Pollie J :


Caillette: f. A Rammes cod ; alfo, the outward pond Calamenthe: f. as Calament.
the cods ; alfo,a finall bead ; as in Cailles; or the dim- | Calaminaire. pierre Calaminaire. 4 yellowifh mi-


nutine of Caille. nerall,or flone, whereby c per às turned into braffe:
Caillocux. as Cailloteux. æ Calamine, si ism,
Caillon: m, A dot,cluster, clot, or congealed lumpe of | Calamine : f. 4 certaine yellow minerall fubftance,

fogne sbloud cre, which fire confitmes,but melts not; mixed with copper,
Caillorofat: m.4 Lording apple; alfi,a certain greene, it changes it into a fine braffe, that lookes like gold; al-


and great peare of a pleafant taft. So,the beauier foyle of braffe, or copper; which comes
Cailloté: m.ée:£. brits Wy clotted congealed, ped sh and Peake tha aie ficm the Fret

thickencd turned. sleaue to the roofè, and vpper Sides, of the boufe,

ailloter. To curd, or curdle ; to congeale, thicken, or | - wherein it ts melted ; alfosa kind of apple.

turne ; as milke,orc. : i «To frizle,curle,or crifpe the aire,
Cailloteux: m.cufe: € Flintie ; full of bard and fharpe | Calamite: m. The Adamant, Loadfone, cr Magnes-


Gittle flones., Sone’; alfo, a kind of Cadmia,or the fluffe that cleanes
Caillou: m. A flint flone. > unto the yron reds wherewith melting copper is flir-
Caillouét. The name of avery fivert d


red.

Calamité : f. Calamitie miferie, wretibednefe, great
trouble, much woe ; misfertune, aduerfitie; mifchiefe,

extreame burt,or damage, :

Calamite. Of or belonging to, reeds; or kept in reeds;
whence:


Storax calamite. The bef kind of Storax, brought


eg and kept in canes, or in the leaues of


are.
Caillouëux: meufe:£. Flintie fill of fmall,pard,and
Sharpe flones.
imand:m. A beggar ; one that goes « begging, or
craues almes, from doreto dore. _ ;
Que, To beg ; to go a begging,to beg from dore
10 dore. 6


Caimanderie: f. Extreame pouertie, lineffe,beg-


arie,the flate of a beggar ; the art, action, or vfe, of aye
Loos. 4 x Ç Calamiteufement. Wretchedly miferably mifchievon-
Caimandife. as Caimanderic, sto bis great trouble,much woe,extreame burt.


he m. Awretch, poore [nake, miferable per-


Caioler. a Cageoler.
ef is Son,moft unfortunate fellow.


Gijollerie: f. 4 ge i a


aion. A young, Calamiteux: m.eufe : £. wretched miferable off ;

Caire : £ The vifag mc ipeclreprefin- + pare moft unfortunate, fraught with troubles,
tation of the face. == Es calamitie, :

Cairin : m. 4 Turkie Carpet


fan Caitein Bgypt. CRC te don ane
Er L'O à RULES € as ;
Cäifhe: £ A bitch pirais Calandré: m. ée: f. 45 Calendré. ;
¢- as Caigne. Tepes cgay An accufng.an appeachings a chal-
ce age 01 Se


alenger.


<
Tete


ù À é i


fers ; al-


Ca rf calcination, or calcinating ; a vedu-
ng of mettals unto peuder by the fire; a purifying of
Utals,or minerals, by fre. Cal


Original fror


tx Go gle ies FHE.OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


CAL


Cocasies com.Calcinatorie,calcinating; or which
tet


freunte pouder.

cinement : m. as Calcination.

Calciner. Tocalcinate; burne to duft,reduce unto pou-

derby mettall,or minerall.

Calcioler. To beat,or fland much on a matter’; torepeat,
tra La taney to mate it be ter on

derflood,or remembr

Calcite. as Chalcite. fi, let eye

Calcitrer. To kicke,fpurne, wince, t flyeyerke out
os ls salfenie be, Lena t

at sob, €,07,0 tein dif nee,

Sakoes: m. Short, on linnen breeches,drawers,
vader. PS.

Calcul: Pe A calculation computation,reckoning an ac-
Fe t, or cafting of accompts ; alfo, the Stonc im the

der or (more properly) inthe reines.

Coles :m. A reckoner, calculator, cafter of ac=
compts.

Calculatoire: com. Calculatorie,calculating.

ere m: A calculating, reckoning, accomp-


Calctler. To calculate,reckon,accompt ; number, make
a computation.

Calderon. 4 kind of long,and round whall.

Cale: f. A Bay,or Creeke of the feayentring,or eating, in-
to the land; alfo,a kind of little cap ; alfo, a little peece
“of wood put t under a log,or peece of timber, thereby to
make it lye the better.

Calebafle: €. A bottle made of an emptied gourd ; or, as
Callabaffe.

Le caline dunreraié. re finned of
mar d'un a prinie.
Calendes: f. Calends ; the firft day of eucry moneth.
Seats’ The Side peace ars Pois. &
Larke ; m Paris

: ci Creat alos ‘ertanianfy) called :

endré: m. ce: f. Gnawne. d, as corne by

Weeuils ; al/o,fleeked,or fincothed ouer, as linnen cloth,

oe.


Calendrer. To fleeke, finootb, plane, or polifh (linnen
clot

Calendreure: :£ A flecking, finootbing ; planing, poli-
CEE : m. An Almanacke,or Calender.


. Calendr alendrine. A Sle S
=, Calen cae ec ar ayes


to; accufation, 4
an arr
eye me ales of; or
1 per that are Den &


conte all, to Res s accufe, ee .


charge with, call in queftion for, an


Île; ehend: Msn
Cala a Calengé @Wallon te


inages: m.Dsitionaries. }
epiner. Te interprete,or ar a Bt SR « sonal


DiGitized«by.


Calciné: m.ée:f. Prop eatin: FE


CAL


; and hene
C les voiles. T le;
opel se clone eed


Colefions. asCalgons.
Calfactif: m. iue: f. Heating or warming; of propertie,


Cie. to beat,or to warme.
Les ee in a Galley that lookes to the caul-


ere - Pad
Calfaterie : £ The caulking of a {hip ; the Popping of the
holes and chinkes there of efit erin à ora
flopping in of Ockam,or Towe, betweene each bord, or
[ras ee ontfide thereof.
Calfat; or,the caulker of a fbip.
Calfatin : m. mre reales TA or caulker of a


Cage m. The caulking of a [hip ; or as Ca-


Calféutré ée:f. Caulked ; who
palier te diene Pan de: pt Lu


utrer. nae To caulke abi 3 to flop. a a
chinkes thereof with Ockam ; er to flop in mye
betweene each planke thereof.

utreur de Navires. A caulker of hips.
Calfourchons. à cal. #, àcheuauchons. Afiraddle,
r beftriding.

Calfrccer. as ASS @Rab.

Calibiftris. The priuie parts, or members.

LE f. À qualitie, flate, or degree ; or, as Quali-


Calibrer, fecalibrer à. To equall, compare, fet bimfzlfe
in the ranke off peixebimfelp à ia balance with ; efleeme
ere as good,value bimfelfe as much, rate bimfelfe


as bi
Calice: m. ù 4 Challice,or drinking cup
Le Calice d'unerofe. The Cale or cup of a rofe;
whereby the yellow Due leanes of the flower are
contained,and held ix together.
Calicules. Little cups,or poles alfo,the rough [hells of


Chefinuts; alfo,the parings of a Corne,or Kernel ; alfo,
little skins upon the eye,liner, or any other tender part
the bodie.


idité: £. Ut arin, berne
Caliges: £ Stockings,or netherflockes ; alfo,preaues,leg-
barneffe , or armour for the legs ; forefold flartups,
: of naylesin the bottome; alfo, breeches, or
peeve
aire caliges,ou caligas. To beray bis bof? ; or to lay
[omewhat in them that fhould not be there, ‘
Caligineux: m. eufe : f Dimme,ob[ture,miflie,almof


dar
DE sare :£ Obfemite dimnefelindnefedarke-
Cali, à cl Secret, cf, pray in ngger-


Cualigs m m. A begearly rogue, or léxie vagabond, that
pS ger rege other, in hope that men will
pitie bim,and gine him fomewbat.

Chlinaire Alone lepman,er fiveet heart, qProveng.

Caliot. The name of a certaine Peare.

Callabaffe: £4 great ale oa bottle made gs


Fee
Callate: Æ ‘A defending, or declining plot ; à «fing
Ds hu de) a


fige altxorn be
THE-OHIGSS ATES NOES


-* + nes 7


BA: L-


LE":


- for avroman; alfèa little
‘ander a hat. dé


7


GAL
Calle: £. A Bay,or Creeke of the feaserc; as Cale; alfo,
the hold of « fhip.
tf, A great Gourd ; alfo,a bottlemade of
the emptied rinde thereof.
Callebotes. curds ; or as Caillebotes.
¢:m. Ce: f. Curded,or beeftie, as the milke


a woman thats newly delmered,
ene 2m. ée: f.Caudked,or full rig ged;See Cal-


Caller. as Caler; alfo,to kittle,as a cat.
les. as Cal; or,Cornes in the feet,or toes.

Calleux: m. eufe: f. Hard, or thick-skinned, by much
labouring.

Callibordes: f. Crutches.

Callifourchons. as Calfourchons.

Callique: f. A certaine fifh,that refembles a little fhad;
and us taken mofl about Montpelier.

Callofité: £. Calofitie, or,a brawnie bardneffe of the
skin.

Calinar. 4 Calamar.

Calme : com. Calme,flill,quiet,peaceable, faire; gentle,
unmoued ; without florme without firges.

Calmement. Calmcly, quictly,peaceably ; flilly; fairely,
gently,

Calmer. To calme,appeafe,pacifie,quiet pill.

Caloches.as Galoches ; Woodden fhooes,or pattens. ©
alomniateur. A cahunniator, malicious detratior,
craftie,and falfe accufer.

Calomnie : £ À calumnie ; falfe accufation, forgedim-
putation, ps detrattion ; malicious inuention,or
bea ed for the trouble, or difgrace of ano-
ther,

Serment de calomnie. An Oath taken, fometimes,in
perfonall aétions, both by the plaintife that be fues not,


and the defendant that be anfweres nat, with any pur-
pofe to calumniate, or vex bis aduerfaric, but becaufe :


be imagines himfelfé im the right,


Calomnié : m. ée: f. Calumniated ; accufed falfely, ||


charged malicioufly, appeached wrongfülly, reuiled
wed pan vniu/:}y reproached, flaundered,or detra-
ed from.
Calomnier. To calumniate ; launder, detraët from; to
reproach Mer +4 accufe falfely,chargemalicie
peach wrongfully ; to impeach the credit, stem she
fame, indanger the fortune of another by forged impu-
tations


Calomnieufement. Calumnioufly ; flanderoufly,
Calomnieux: m. eufe: £ C us detraéting re-
Proachfil, launderous; full of malice,fal{ehood,or for-
erie in accufations, | om,
en eae. made of a Quill, or Elder
Doi, a Callofiré.

. a Calotte. . eee TA
Calotte: £ The paper, or cloth which women put about
their flax on the diffs alfa Café bal trahi

cap or night-cap worne


Iquas.asCarquois; « Quiver. (wim)


re) skull,orshalpe ofthe bead.


vatre: mses f Lid alllong (ke alter ab


ber) om his backe.
J + POI » A certaine le that
bath a blackiforindes SPP:
: Pee
AE D =
RE,


C eme Aindlef bearbe as Kali. 0 0.


A bye bireins forthe time fur |


| COTE M ee |


ce: m.as Calice. A cup,or chalice.
ce. Chalice-like ; or nade like a chalice. 7
he: m. ACaliph ; a name or title ef Office, and of
Digaitie, in Ægypt; (in old time the Calipbes were
Lords ine’; now they are but fubiects.)
Camail : m. 4 bood to cover the bead in fixle weather;
alfosa ril sor firing to tye up the baire with ; or.
“94 Fi sts ria of our korights of the Order weares
about bis necke ; alfo, a blacke, or purple Ornament,
wbat refembling a captaines Gorget) worne by a
cal po aboue bis Rochet,and reaching as low
as the bending of bis arme.
“ome f. The bearbe Cameline, or Treacle Mu-


+ as Camard ; or, borne with a flat nofe.
d.nez camard. A flat nefe.
Camarine : f. 4 filthie, and finking lake in Sicilic; al-
Se, certaine flinking bearbe,that preuokes vomit.
narre: f. À Martingale for a berfe; crasCamorre,
Comageu: im. The precious flone called a Sardenix;al-
fora brooche, 9 ;
€ antiques. Medals ; cr,old,and auncient
images of mettall, molten, and caft into the firme of
Cambouy. as Pr 5
: m. The blacke,and oylie grecfè,of a wrousbt
| salpoobenb 3 Some call theGone. ce ;
ou,Toilede Cambray. (mbricke.
Cambre: com.(rooked boughtie,bowed,cambrell-Like;
vaulted,arched, bent or built arch-wife.
rm. €e: f. The fame. :
iers cambrez.Shooes which have bollow,raifed,
or Polonian,beeles. ~  :
. To bow, crooke, bend ; vault, arch, or build


arch-wife.
Catnbreure:f. A bought, vault, arch; or,as Cam-


ye €.

Cambrure: £. 4 bowing, crooking,or bending ; a vaul-
ting,or building arch-voife; or as Cambreure.

Caineau. as Chameau ; à (ammell. |

Cameleon: m. .4 (amelion; à beaft, which (as many
ch on nought but the ayre,

aclin. aller Je camelin. To pace like a Cammell;the

. sou left foot bebind following the left,and right

efère.
Camelin. fauce cameline, A certaine daintie Italian


fans e.
sc : f The bearbe Cameline, or Treacle Mu-
: m. Chamlet 3 alfo,Lifle Grogeram.
ore à ondes. Water (hemlet.
jamelot plenier. Vnwater (hamlet.
eloté:m. ée:f. Of (hamlet ; waned like water


Se Canelorr Te! rugged, or fell of worinckles
to become eon :
Camemine: f. ou rbe Cameline, or Treacle Mu-


8


Dieta, bb lo,
Akind of Pear.
Æ (The name of) @ certaine fiveer Ap-


Me.


Original: from


BA DHE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY ©


CAEN  :
Camille. 4 Mefénger (in the Hetrurian tongue.)


qRab.

Camin. as Chemin. €Pic.

Caminée. as Cheminse, ice

Camion: m. The finall rt Pinne wherewith wo-

pe psc their ruffes,érc ; alfoya kind of little cart
pe! fe the a rs of Paris; a/fo, a jmall
4 borfe.

Camifade, f. À Camifado, canuas, or cold Pie; a fud-
dain affaulting,or fierprifall of the enemie (fo tearmed,
becaufe the fouldiors that execute it, moft commonly

_ weare fhirts ouer their armours, or take their enemies
in their fhirts;) alfo, the thin filme, or skin, which in-
wraps a child inthe bedor after-birth,

ifole : f...4 waeass (for a mans) alfo, a certaine
robe,or garment of linnen,worne by the French kings at
their coronations,

Camomiille: f. ‘The bearbe Camamell,or Camomill.
Camornhille blanche. white fivect Camomill,or gar-

_ den Camomill.

Camomille à fleur purpurée. Red Camomill, red
Maithe Rofearubie,Adonis red flower.

oinille jaulne.Y eHow fiveet Camomill;alfo,yel-
low proce or, golden Cotula.

Camounille faffranée. Golden corne-flower, yellow
corne-flower ; the wild,or corne Marigold.

momille fauvage. Wild Camomill, May-weed,
Sinking Maithes ; fome alfo call fo, the bearbe Hore-


Camomille vulgaire. The common, or wild Camo-
ed ; like unto, bat nothing fo fiveet as, garden Camo-


Gear: :f 4 La xp double-edged Caue[fon of y-
ron, ee era rfes nose

£. The name of an Indian root, which rofted, is
very pest meat. f

ird : m. Azo:
Canon: im. Lens | ais tow
held under the noft of.a flug,or
=) m. A Coupe; an Bit OS bla: a
Fie


Camp arrefté, 4 fortified, Setled, or flanding campe,
Seige ‘fill in one place, whether it be to bares

field,or to fee a fort.

clos. Looke Champ.

mp ouvert. À plaine or open place, wean abat-
tell or combat bath beene,or may be,fough:
Camp volant. An armie of cof ight bear Tight armed
penis t for and imploied in,rodes.

dem He bath gotten the vitto-

res the


mpagne.: £ vA ln fs Lg, wide ad


Leuell peece of gro

Ca :m. PUS : £. Fieldie; keeping, or lining
in; ofser be to,the nt
Campai plaine field ec. as Campagn
Capa ale £ Cn of bg
campe,or

€. A bells alfo,the bearbe E ;
pee or pr ces or the ame Le


which refembles a Bell.
Mettre la au chat. To make a iarre, to fet
oddes , to begin a quarrell, to bring together by
eares.
wo Campanell, or Bell-fafhioncd rowle in
fa a Ts ; alfo,a Bell bitt.
a>. Bac ren” ras ae |


CAM


elle à culde baffin. 4 Campanell, made
compajfe like the breech of a cannon, or outfide of the
bottome of ne qu
npanelle lat. À Campanell, whofe broad
end is cio Ape ee <a ”
Campanette:f.Withiewind; Bindmeed,hedge-bels;alfo,
the Peach-bell, or, rSteple-bell ‘flower ; alfo, the white
Daffadill,or Naxciff
ettes ads White Peach-bels,or Stee-


ple-bell-flowers ; alfo, great finooth Bindweed , or
Hedge-bels.
Campanotte jaulne de Bourgongne. The yellow
Daffadill.
as Champart.


Campeger. Toi mate, itch acampe; alfo, to re-
Cr te the fields. ; “se
Cabin lege c age ns unie pitch a campe.
gumme tearmed,Campbire.
Corn AA Artificiall Campbire, is fuch, as
7 bene refined, and whitened in the Sunne, or


Can hre en rofe. Naturall Camphire, is uch, as
bath oe beene touched se enol ù f


L’odeur de camphre chaftre l'homme: Pro. (Such


power bath that Simple, divers wayes, to make aman |.
ba


[4
Cam ré. m,ée:f. Camphired; made of, or mingled
wit: ampbire ; and hence;
a camphrée. Campbire water.
hrer. repels Camphire ; to dreffe, mingle, or
po with;Camphire.
fame mpiger.as Campeger. site a
mpole. The name of a certaine white grape,which
Ci ag 2" er ofl
ampoles : f. The Tendrels,or twyning fprigs of plants.
coe The leaue to play,or ec time fir {chol-


eae. He bath betaken bim tothe wide,
ot io fie bse voc flatly run away.
us: m. camufe: f. Flat-nofed.
Ilfut rendu bien camus. He was very much a
med, extreamely out of countenance, exceedingly put
downe ; whence ;
Des harangueurs bien camus. Blanked,erauelled,or
er toa Me J inn
nufer. To flatten,or qua nofe; to breake
the bridge of the hs to make flat-nofe & >
amuferie: £. The being flat-nofed.
ufet: m. ette: f. Somewhat flat-
Camufette : £. A little flat-nofed Elf.


anabaflement: m. A canwaffing ; or, a curious exa~


mination, fearching,or fifting out,of matters.
afler. To canuaffe;er curioully to examin,fearch,
rs th of amatter. :
Can as Canabaffement.
Canabel: m. A kind of earth (like vnto the finalteft
Sand) which (as Arabians report) fals with raine from


Canadelle: East Late; orge
v

cial: ies shel co re a co

of curres; @ crue,roguil oupe,r. com-

: s + :

fat cae eo


Canal: m. 4 chanaell,kennell fro, gutter alfoya.con- a


duit pipe.
Le canaldelabouche dun cheval Faces part
… wherein his tongue yes.


\


e ia) wae
ema,


q ir
ite he


ty ahr


Lecanalde csloms. A bl rei nie,
auen ss acham chaanell ym pillars.
in Teresa debicat Talian peate that vipe in the


A Drake, :
canard. The bearbe Gooftfoot, or wild O-


Vendeur de canardsà moitié. A cowfèner, guller,
Soret for
>m, A Canarie bird.
Canart. as Canard.
© Grace de S. Canart: Prov. A gif of that which the
giner cannot keepe.
Cancame: m. as Lacque ; an Armenian gumme vfed
: by Dyers.
Cancelarefque: com. Chancerie-like; ofor belonging
to,the Chancerie.
Cancelation: f. À cancellation,o cancelling; a defa-
» cingyeffzcing,vafing blotting or croffing out of (a thing
written) alfo,a forgetting.
Canicelé: m. ée : f Cancelled yaxed; effacedycroffed,or
blotted out.
Canceler. To cancell croffe,raxe; deface,effacesblot or
put out, roe
Cancelle: m, as Branchue.
Canceller. as Canceler. nee
ancte:m,. À 3 al/o, the figne inthe Zodiacke,
tearmed Cancer ; alfi,a 3 Or aba une-
wen fnclling, of an onely plackifhor blewifh colour;al-
«fesait ancient engine of batterie whofe firong and yron
head was made likea crab. - ;
Cancre de Barbarie. The greateff hind of crab,
| round; and ver gil, frs, w a land,
very fwift in the watcr; and by old authors tearmed
2) Meayor Maia.
~ Cancre fquinade, Looke Squinade.
Cancre ! (ax Interieéfion of denying,or forbidding) fie ;
2 warre that ; what a pox meane yous Oc.
Candelabre: m. 4 éandleflicke.
Candelette. 4 Suppofitaric, Langued.
Cändeur:f. A bright, or fining whiteneffe;, alfo,cour-
+ a tu: faire dealing, vp-
righinelle.
Candidat. A flatterer, foother,finoother 5 one that euer
sat it faire weather, ‘
{ ide: com. white fairesbright,orient ; alfo,profpe-
rous,happie, fortunate; alfo,gentle courteous faire con-
ditioned ; alfo,upright.fincere,innocent.
| Candideinent. whitely, fairely,in white; faourably,
gently, mildly , faithfully, vprightly, fiacerely, without
frandmalice,or enuie.. PIRE
Se Candir. To candie, or grow candide,as fugar after


ling. VX
Cane: f. A ducke ; afo,a menfure for clothsbeing a yard,
or thereabouts; alfo,a.canne, or fuch like meafure for
: hag dea meafisre of fiue foot and tenne yncbes, for
NX PARU OF 4
Cane de bois à brufler. A certaine quantitie of, or
47 D iting fr, freer 1 2 9 GX er
‘Cane d'une campane. The lomeft part |
RL UE QUES se 2 SANTE


inde. isbicger.


a bell,
or line


is df termed Cane au colier blanc. vers
La petite cane.7he wild duck,leffe then the tame one.
Bec decane. See Bec; alfo,a litile inftrument ufed in
grafting en efcufion.
Eftonnez comme canes. Skared like a companie of ||
duckes. ,
Faire la cane. To ducke;likea coward,when a blow is
Toss bile, play wa m A5 when ai ave a dea-
|} liag ; to bide, or abfent om a bickering, or
RTE dre pit
| of RU as Calebafie ; a bottle made of a gourd,
ol m.¢e:-f, Channeled, fluted, firrewcd , fira-


Vked,
Caneler. To flute, rake, firrow, channel ; to cut bol:
rewes,or gutters into ( flone,ov timber.)

\Caneleure: £.4 fluting,channelling, firaking.firrewing;
gutter-worke (in flone,or timbey.).’ ï
me : A reed-plot; a ground thats full,or (tt full,

of reeds, , ~ + ;
Canelle :f. (Our moderne Cannell, er Cinnamen ; (Looke


Cinnamome)alfosthe faucet,or quill of a wine veffel;
it


alfo,the cocke,ov por Yb care ;
Canellé : m. lée: f. Of Cinnamon , of a Cinnamon co-


lour , alfo,made of,or feafoned with,Cinnamon.
Canelline: f. A little cannell, pipe, or bollow rod.
Canelure: £. 4 channelling,or firrowing in fione, or in
._ timber ; a fluting.

‘anepeticre: f. À certaine daintie land-frmle, that re-

Sembles a Buflard, or the Partridge called Arbenne ;

eme flees not fo big as that, nor rough-footed as

thus.


Il fait dela canepetiere, He(cowardiy)bides bimfelfe
in exerie bole; or ducks at the appearance of cuery dan-
ger.

Canepin : m. The thinne inner rind of the barke of the
Linden,and th outward of the coat of a Birch, tree,
written onin old time in fiead of paper;alfo,th' outward
thinne,and white pilling,ofa dreffed fhecpes skin, à

Canepineufe. The batke,or inner part ofa fugar cane,

Caner. To fquirt. | -

Canet. A yong ducke ; ora wild dde git

pete = waddle,or goe, like aducke ;alfo,to breed
yon MEAS

Cartetler: mere: f Of a ducke,likeaducke ; catching

-duckes ; feeding,or preying on duckes.

Canetille: £ (Guld,or filuer)Purle ; alfo,a finall purle of

_ needle-rporke; ora {mall edging (bone) lace; alfo, a

__ freckle,or,the freckledneffe oft Fite.

Canerillé: m.ée : f.Set,wrought,or itriched;with purles

> alfè,cdged with a finall (needle-worke) purle, or bone
lace; alfo.freckled. 4

Caneton:m. A duckling; yong ducke;or drake. ?

Canette: f. A little ducke; yong ducke; wild ducke 5 al-

: Jo little canne, or crufe; alfo, the quill of a {pinning
wheele, Le ec +
Canette d'eflang: 4 kind of finall wild ducke, that

*_hanats meares,and great landing waters.

Canevers : m.Cazuas.


ecke and belly j
anif: m, Apen-hmife,

Canin: m. ine :£ Dogged,doggie.of dogs,dog-like.
~Convulfion canine. The crampeuf the mouths or,
forced, and painfi:ll wrying of the mouth.


Low. 5


le


Original frony +


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


=<) a = :
= C A N GRAN UE LA
ree Dents canines. A mans tullies ; or,the teeth where- | Canteau.cs Chanreau, €Pic,
fedin with be breakes bis meat. mr ay eae A hope kie,and muddie fea-fifh, that
Rofe canine. 4 wild Rofè. Looke Role. : neuer changes ber mate ; alfo,a great lug, or Tankard.
amie of iffe:f A Gittle eons is 28 of reeds, whereon Cantharide : f. The venomeus greene flye Cantharides;
fruits are dried,or filkeroormes fed. ») IRAN ‘(which breedes in the tops of the Afb, and Oline,
blew is Canivet:m.A Penknife.. ~ trees.) à |
a dea Cannamelle: £ The fivcet cantor figar cane. Cantharidife: £ 4 confettion of Cantharides.
7G, oY Canne : £ Areed,or cane ; alfo, an Hebrew meafwreof | Can it: m. A certaine tawnie,and'vnfanorie, fea-
wine foot ; (the ordinarie one; for, Canne du Sanäu- . ŒLangucd.
rd, aire,was teune) alfo, akind of long Pipe vfed in diftil- | Canthon. as Canton.
fira- lings. + bint mnicre.asCantonniere. _ À
a Spodon de canne. Looke Spodon. Canton: m. A corner, or croffe way, in a fireet ; allo, a
ut bol: wi Canneau du col: m. The nape of the necke. _ Canton,or Hundred; a Precintt, or circuit of Territo-
f nelle. as Canelle. rie wherein there be divers good towmnes,and villages;
rrewing; ; Canne petiere. See Cane petiere. (This word is proper to Helvetia, or Switxer-land ;
| Cannetille. as Canetille. which, at this day,confifis of thirteene fucb Cantons.)
or fet fil, Cannifade: f. A cage,or basket,of reeds. Cantonné: m. ée: £ Cantonned,or cantonnixed; feue-
: Canniffe : f. «s Canifle. red from thereftof their felloms,and fortified,or quar-
mn; (Looke + oniquetnent. See Canoniquement. tered apart. F3 de
ine veffel; qe Cannule : f. A little cane, reed, pipe,or bollow flraw, | Se Caritonner. To canton, or cantonnixe, it; to fèuer


through which one may fucke,blow,or conuey, any moi-


nMOS 60 flare, finoake,pouder,crc.
LA Canaule parfumatoire. as Canon parfumatoire.
rod. lé. Hollowed like areed,or cane; or, as Canclé.
fione, or in * Canolle: £ 4 baukes Narell; one of the little boles
, whereat {he drawes in,and lets out,ber breath,
de, that re- :m. 4 Law; a Rule, Decree, Ordnance, Canon
Arbenne ; à of the Laws alfo,a publicke,and authenticall Rowle,or
b-froted as Catalogues alfo,the Gunne tearmedsa Canon; alfo, the
| barell of any Gunne; and(mere generally) any Infiru-
des bimfelfe mentor thing,that ws long, and bollow, as the bar®ll of
Feuery dan- a Gunne; alfo, the -boord of an Organ; alfo, a
> Graffe ; (Secke, Enter en Canon;) al/o, a Canon-bitt
parkeef the Sor a borfe; alfo,a little Ducke,or Drake.
ir We TN CEE Prrtitee of Caflia fiftula.
ANA outre Canons x Chaufles. Cannyons . 2
eye sk hed, whichis tte leu) whereas
ram | À a he parts for hit Dev)
off Î Surgeons perfume,bathe,or moiften the Narvelseares,
L 2 iit, CC
Canon pevier. A Canon Peuier,or Perrier; a great
teste me 4 sleries Peece of a wide Bore,and thin bartllsbie-
«catch | ged (moft commonly) with a ftone.
duce sce ogy page ce de
cage unne made thereof. ù 1144
foyer? ailler le canon. To deceine,euB,coufen.


me) lace; alfo,s


ichedgoith pers
ep bat


anonicat: m. A Canonfhip, or Canons place, ia aCa-
thedrall church.

Canonique: com. Canonicall authentical!; orderlitac-_
cording unto rules; alfo,veceimed, or put into the Roll,
Catalogue,or Lift of.


para. anonically,authentically; alfoor-
ld de - sr


pe qual ofa pri


4 date dt in,the Canon Law, io 4 ae! _ tributes; or,as Cadaftre. @L
galbwild dus “i Canonization: £. Acanonixation,or c 1 |G :m. A Corporal, ET ag
ig ater La Pois ae ” Capdeul: m, À gentlemans chiefe boufe; falling (almoft
rss receiued,or put into the catalogue of Saints ; alfa. _| __ euerywbere}unto the fhare of the eldeftheire.
rhe be ES ee a “A Mariners pp Hesse a
À nizer. Tocanonize; to mak 307 a Saints to cloake, or t in of acape, a ca-
maki sreceine,or put into oral of Saints. ee puche,bebind it vo bood,or large,and fquare peece
PAT LA à ben Canonner. To {hoot at, or beat, with a Canon; alfo, as of water Chamlet, crc, wherewith women prefèrue
che gap ule 1 Enter en Canon. , their beads from wind and raine. See Cappe.
hier: m. À Canoncer, or maifler Gunner. _- Cape de Bearn.4 fhort,and fleeuele(]é gown of courfe
suet » niece : os nr, mx 2 | e clotl : worne by the poorer mhabitants of
i eli! Canore: € ii iosiag anal melo ‘apeau: m. (in fome of the outsvard parts of France)
he ions es of a pleafant,or, afiag >Les # Chapeau; and hence; | bed


quement. Cc Japa ris
di due , a
Cones in Cen « Prefer of or Pris e.


a


: A pe Te |
LE of 7 7"
+ à


themfelues from the relt of their fellowes, or from the
bodie of a State, and ie So or pe: anew
State,apart. |

Cantonniere: f. A Doxie, common backney, bedge-
whore ; one that will lye downe vader any fall, or in
any corner of a fireet.

Canule: f. A little cane,reed,or pipe. See Cannule.

Canus.4 kind of ftrong-toothed,and pearch-like fea-fifh,
purple on the backe, and on all other parts of a coloxr,
between ved,and yellow; lines altogether among rocks,
and flones; and is very good meat,

Cap: m. 4 Promontorie, Cape, bill,or nooke of land out

retched into the fea; a bead of land lying out into the

fea; alfa,the bead,or niple of a ripe Impoftume.
Cap d'Efcadre,ou d’Efcouarde, 4 Corporal.
Cap de mouton. (in a fhip is) a certaine flat peece of
wood bored full ef boles,and feruing to fliffensor firetch
out,the maine fheate; we call it,the Rammes-blocke.
Bouter, owfairecap à la mer. To put backe into the
maine, for feare of running vpon {hallowes, or comming
too neere the fhore.

Capable: com. capable, fificient ; large,big,wide ; apt
to receive, or take into it; able to hold , or containe
within it ; alfo,of good capacitie, apprebenfion, under-


Ca acité : Ê Capableneffe, largeneffe, receineableneffe ;
he rg art, M eae if
on: m. A Caparifon.
araflonné: m. ée: f Caparifoned; fürnifhed with,
prouided of attired ina Caparifon,
‘Caparaffonner. To caparifon; to fienifb with, pronide
| of;dreffe or attire in,or put ona caparifon.
Caper tree,or fhrub


© ie: A Subjidie booke ; a Regifter of taxes,or of
apdaftr ,


Capeau carnu, oucharnu, The | fa-Nettles calle alled | Capitaine du Roy,oudu Royaulme. A title ;
fa tone Marfeillis. mee A a SpA race Dukes, Marque:
Capécr. as Cappéer. fes Earles. À a. Ar > - “y |
Capel: m. 4 little bat ; or as Chapeau. Norm. Le grand enna ens de pied, See Colonel:
lan: m. .4 Chapleine; or, the poore Curate of « general de Ent.
Chappell; alfo,the Codfifh; or,a kind thereef. pitainerie: f. A Captaineflip ; the Authoritie Office,
Capelettes: f. The heads of Cloues. or Place,of a Captaine. 1 $
clin: m. 2s Capeline. Capitainefle. 4n Admirall Galley,or Ship. "14
Capeline: £.A little flat, round and narrow-brimd bat, ipital: m. Wealtb;wortb; a flocke,a mans principall, -
v/ually worne by fhe pheards,melfengers, footmen,érc ; or chiefe, fsb fiance; alfo,a captaine,or commaunder.
In old time fouldiours wore yron [culs of that fafhion, En <= foit le capital de celuy J qui te ueut
and name, wbich bred the Phrafe; ; mal: Prov. Let money be thy enemies whole flocke ;
Il eft homme de capeline. He is a man of action, fill. Looke Argent. .
of courace,fit for an enterprife ; be ss a worthiesor gat- | Capital: m. ale : € Chiefe ; capitall; mortall, moft bai-


. lant fellow nous deadly death-meriting ; worthie of difgraceor of
Capellan. as Capelan, great punifbment. if
Capeluchon, as Coqueluchon. Lettres capitales. Text letters,great letters. ;
Capendu.pommedecap. A certaine apple which is | Capitalité: f.capitalneffe; ora capitall faétor offence.
left,and more delicious,then the Pepin, Capitation: £ Head-fi 'sPole-money; a fubfidie,tax,
Caperaffon: m. A Caparifon, or tribute,payed by the Pole.
Capefolde. as Capefoulde. tau: m. A Captaine,or Commaunder (v.m.)
Capefoulde: m. 4 Gentleman of a Companie ; or-one taux. are numbred,in the 75 Article of the Cu-
that bath extraordinarie Lendings ; alfo,extraordi fomes of Bourdeaux, among Earles,V icounts,and Ba-
rie Lendings,or entertainment. rons. ; 9
Capettes: m. The poore Schellers of Montagu Col- Capite. 4 Cabbin in a {hip bead


ledge in Paris. itel : m. 4 frong rende Lye, whereof canters |

Cap ; &, Capharder. See Cafard, & Cafar- and other violent remedies are made. .
es | rig Eau de capitel. 4 firong corrofiue made of that Lye.

Capharde: f. 4n hypacriticall wench. iton: m. Capiton ; courfe fleaue (fi'ke.)
Capharderie. 4 Cafardies Hypocrifie. Se Capitonner de. To cover bis bead with. —
Caphetan: m. 4 kind of md ra grofe,Taffata; alfo, Capitouls : in. are(in Tholoufe) /we/ue principal ma-

4 long calfacke of the fame, ‘| Siftrats ; whereof the firft is to be a Gentieman(of that
Capietrement. Privelyyelofely; theenifbly, ealingly,by Grapnes) the reft. Lawyers, and fubfiantial May-

Fe SANK = > chants.

Capifou. A play which id not much vnlike our Harry- | Capitouls d' Orleans. The Sheriffes of Orleans; or,


ealth,
racket, or Hidmaa-blind, as,les Efchevins.
pilaire: com. Hairie, fill of baire, belonging to Capitulaire : m. A capitular decree, a capital Ordi-
baire, nance. | er
Capilament: m, Ahaire, little fireake, or flaw, in a Capitulaire: com. Capitular ofsor belonging 0,4 chap-
flone, ec. Ae F “ “ter ; alfo,capitall, ° pay n° :
Capillaire: £ The bearbe Venus baire, Maiden haire, _Affembléc capitulaire.d Chapter beld,by the officers
Pca sage PERT. : NET Te ee ne drall cr iy ‘align on * CR
a re. as Capilaire, “ri gine see ement. ¢ 5 : ?
Cabirotade: f. A Capirotadoes or, fiued meat, com | | fill confent of the Chapter. Gish trons
pounded of Veale, Capon, Chicken,or ares min. | Capitulant: m. ante: f. Hawing a voice in Councels,
| -ced, fpiced, and layed upon fèuerall beds of Cheefe . Affemblies , Conuocations , Chapters ; alfo, capitula-
Ca oe m. Schoolemaifiers, Regents, of Schooles. , <a
G = ali : lotte af
Capitaine: m. dre 7307
companie of fouldiors ;. or, te


:


| tH ie FIRS 2
Capitation: f. A capitulation ; an article of agree.


CG É:m.ée:f Capilulated; agreed upon diflingui-


Ring-leader. ° i MELEE by Articles,or Chapters. - £
 Capitaines du charroy de l'Artills itulerTocaprtulate; agree vpon articles; to diflin:

(chofèn out of the frontier Prouinces \_ghifh by Articles,or Chapters,
= as may be) obo areteprasideas : eur:m, A capitulators. . ;

nice, foure thoufand draught ‘Capnomantie: £. Dixination by /moake rifing from an

ters, and fiue hit s,0r char o> Y Ce emia Re pee feedyis oe js
: proportion; The yearely ent Dre one of | Capolie: fA. certaine Indian finit muchlikea Cher- À * ~

LE on nested s Tour. which he | ae Lo f
asin warlike). payed bim by


ER peaceable We A
/| . the Receiuer of the Tailles of the Election whereia he
|. refidess In ti TS yaad alfa fiftie foi
|: Tour.a da), for binf 6, and twentie fhillings
Wheat fo bts de Bal
Ps 54 the Threforier des frais ex
: de l'Artilleri Sac |


rie. M Tnt: 8, sy cast are We Et
1 € Corprattofa band of indir.

EE $ fées Ex HA Ur
Ro


d Musk UL-fifhr; alfo, g
ind, and ruddie apple.Scc Cape. À !


14.


ordinaires =) oil SR ma ‘Cappe à A large hood of water Cham
_ Capitaine de la nil er, let, ec. 1 citizens wikes,. Cc, in fiulesmese )
“¢ —


d (=: thé (26
+ Singler à la Cappe. #Cappéer.


~~


- 7 3 A = = = À
| HE 24 Original from
ii DIET gle “THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


om lege


{
¢
}
'


LS


ci


CrA'P
CPE m. ange ca-


Ruffed Pigeons ; the top of whofe
meet is enuivonned xh aruffe, or tip
thers.


ae A fhip to lye a-try; alfo, to goe very neere the


noirs cappets. Looke Chapeaux noirs.

Caper es f. Aline! 3 or cloake, bauing a capuche
in fiead of a cape.

Cappiettement. for Capietrement. (Rab.
ppot:m. A countrey cloake; or courfè, and frantie
cleake; alfo,as Capot.

Cages . des cap. The fruit Capers.

res d’ Alexandrie. E Egyptian Capers ; the beft
Cas brought from Alexa:

Capprier: m, À plot fet with Caper site 30r,as Ca-
prier.

Cipres: f. (The fruit) Capers.

ice: f. A bumor, caprichio, giddie eine fihta-
jaan conceit; a fuddaine will, defire, er purpofe to
oy; a thing, fer whic one bath no (apparent) rea-


Car PRES eufe:f. Capricious, bumorous, fanta-
tcall conceited, giddie-headed.
ricorne: m. (apricorne one of the twelue Signes,
containing twentie flarres.)
er: m. 4 Caper fhrub,or Caper plant.
ers f. A Caper plot,bed,or ground.
Caprifice : m. Awild Figge-tree.
Caprimulge:m. 4 Goat-milker ; an valuckie, and
ull-refembling Night-bird, that ‘fuckes Goats, and
mortifies their vdders.


Le F re Rana
Cri; ime Ce ies of cer a


Cr or ET re se coe
Manna-graffe,or pe à Prdde Cor-


neille.
riot: m. A caper in dauncing.
Cprioter. To caper,to cut a caper.
Cabas le: f. À coffer,che gs 3 box; cafe.
oe fetin:m. À litt coffer, or chef; à casket, or
Xe


Capocg: à m. The rights,and royalties belonging to the
ord of a Place. @Bearnois.
file: £. A little cheftyor coffer a casket,box,or fir-
sett.
Lacapfule du cœur. Thes cardium; wherein
th br es jeans < a
cœur me tremble capfüle. 1 t
the very beart. ee 3


Cope Capt. re aa


BOLO»:


alfo,deceit aie fa udulent caute

if: m, ine: 3 taken in. or imprime

x par mar that hath loft bis libey-
tie.


Captiuer. To captivate ; take in,imprifon by, warre ; ab
ET of. libertie, bring into feruitude, make a
£ aa a ; coca - "ii


-| Caquetiere: £. The fame.


SA à.

Capuchon: m. Aapuche; a Monks Cowle,or Hood ;
alfo, the hood of a cloake ; alfo, one of the ie mufeles
whereby the fhoulder-blades are moued,

ucin: m. A Capucine Frier (of S. Frances Order)
a neither {birtnor breeches.
D Pr m, The Profeffion, Order Efiate;or life of


Ca «ven A coffin for a corfe.
utions: m. Monkes; Dae Friers.
Caque: m. 4 (2g; or,the fourth part of a Muid;(a bar-
vell,or vefjell, wherein [aults-meats, pitch, rofen, oc,
are vfisally carried,or kept.)
queduc? m. A nigeard, micher ynifer, fcrape-good,
Le ati penay- thers a conetous; and greedie


Caquerel A fprat, or pickled berring 5, or as Caga-


Caps. : f. The fhels of Snayles, Periwincles, and
UC. €.
Caquenslisiestidfiore full of little fhels. Rab.


Caquerotier:m. 4 catcher, eater,or owner of fhel-


fi
Caquefangue: f.The blondie flix,
ne mn-Prasling,tatling babling,titele tattle pruch
talking,
Caquetard: m. A pratler,babler,tatler,long-tongue.
Caqueté. Tatled,pratled;babled,chattered.
Caqueter. To tatle,bable, pratle,chatter,pr ate,ufe ma-
ny mords.
Caquetereau: m. 4 pratle-basket,a tatlingiacke.
Caqueteur. as Caquerard.
Caqueteufe : f. Apratling bufivife.


aquetoire : m. .A4 place wherein women meet, and
pratle together ; 2s. a myll, an ouen,a goffips feaft, Ge;
alfo, the feat whereo they vufe to fit at fuch a mee-
ing.

Se m, A tatling,cackling,babling,prat-


Ca-queue : f The bearbe Horfe-tayle, Shane-graff,
Pewter-wort.

Caquots: m. White Leapers, infected inwardly ; (for
bi faces are very cleere,and faire.)

: m. A Carre,Cart,or Waine. Picard.

ae For,becaufe; (ao) infomuch as, confidering that,

Seeing it is as it is.
abafle : f.as Callabaffe; a Gourd; or a bottle made

peed (alfo, a Grit, Grampel, Pungar-ffb. @Mar-


Carabafi é: m. ée: f. Much vfèd, or carried up and

downe,as a Gourd-bottle is,
frees: 6 :f. A Corracle, or little round Shiffe; made of
wouen together, and conered with raw


yellow Amber.
hdi m. A Carbine, or Curbeene ; an nf
cans with a morrian,and breaft-plate and


Carbine: m. Mens Stee
Carabiner. nes knocke, with a Petronell,or
horfemans Peec


Caracol: m. 4S: 3 (whence
Faire: le fre to capt themfelues into


a Round,or Ring.
Caractere? m, 4 cavalier; letter, figure, or forme of |
5 Seale. » impr effion, or


Pe Caraétered,or caratterized ; im-
0 ÿ q nr À ts


Ak %


printed, flamped with a (peculiar) marke, figure, let. |
Tr


ter.

Caracterer. To caracter, or caratlerixe; to make, or
print, chavaéters, letters, figures ; aff, to imprint,
lampe, fet, fix a marke,or figne on.

Carafte : € A certaine fumme of money, payed as a Paf-
Sage Toll,or dutie,unto th’ Arabian boot-balers, by fuch
as trauell,witbout a flvong Caravan,towards the Holy
land,&c.

Carammot: m. 4 Prawne; or,as;

Caramote: f. The greateft kind of Prawne ; fomewhat
refembling, and little leffe then, our Crenice, @Mar-
feillois.

Carance: f. want,or lacke of,

Carance debiens. 4 Note, or Teftimoniall (under
diners bands) fignifying, that fuch a one bath no goods
nor chattels infiuch a place.

Caraque. See Carraque.

Carasse: f. A buge,or great face.

Carat: m. 4 Carrat ; among Goldfmiths,and Mintmen,
is the third part of an ounce; among lewellers, or
Stone-cutters, but the 19 part; for eight of them make
but one Sterlin, and a Sterlin is the 24 part of an
ounce.

Fol à 25 carats (dont les 24 font le tout.) Am egre-
gious foole,a foole beyond all proportion; (the fineft gold
eing but of 24 Carrats.) 1.

Carathement. A charming of a mans child-get-
ter.

Caravane : f. A Carauan, or Conuoy of Souldi-
pe , for the fafetie of Marchants that trauell by

and,

Caravelles f A Caruel; (the little fhippe fo cal-


ed,
Clou à Caravelle. See Clou.
Caravellon: m. A final Carnell.
Caravene: £.4 little Boat or Skiffe made like a Trough,
and (moft commonly) of one piece.
Caravirée: f. A wry-mouthed, or wry-faced wench or
one that often makes wry mouthes, or ill fauoured wry
ces, Li
Carbaffat: m. wet fucket,m
long white Pompion,cut infl à
on frag )-fifh PMMA
au:m. The red ie
- A (arbonadoe, a rafber on the coales;
MNT 1 farchert she flefh with


donne.
on: & A corne-deuouring Mite, or Wee-


arcamoule : £ ‘The battering Engine, called a


Carcan : m. A Carkanct, or coller of gold, ec.
worne about the necke; alfo, an yron chaine, or collar,
wherein an offendor is tyed by the necke to a poft, and
(in that pofture) expofed unto publicke view.

ex t. on fame. oe

chiophe: m. An Artichoke.

| Carcinome


1ome. A canker ; See Cancre. te
bee M onde br
___ yard, palfe through certaine Pullies. 3
Etes | of Thornebacke, ealpauie
Bee. Mt
î Mine a Ree 77e


, A Yep


+


Go. gle


LE gE TES


CLA


Cardanalizé. See Cardinalié, er |
Carde..A thifile Finch ; alfo, the white thifile, whereof
a > saad of Cardoons are made ; alfo, the Cardeon
at felfe. .
Cardes. Cards for wooll,érc ; working cards.
: Carde de montagne. The white Carline thifile.
Bois de jo SeeBois.
:m.éc:f. Carded (as wooll,erc.
Carder la laine. To card wool. 4
deur de laine. À wool-carder. ‘
aque : com, Heartie,beart-eafing, cordial, com-
fring tht heart alfo, pained in the ftomacke, vor um
at the heart ; alfo, in a confumption, and continua
Sweat, by the indifpofition of the heart,and parts about


it x
Cardier:m. A Card-maker.
inal: m. A Cardinal, of the Church of Rome. °
Cardinal en Greve. One thats beheaded in the
Greue at Paris.
Elle a fon Cardinal. she bath ber flowers.
Rae efté ps acon a sai eae Rome. He
aredcap withext a Cardina 3 Viz. bee -
bath Wh bis bead. ts

— ale: f. Chief, principal, of the firft
ranke. !
Artillerie cardinale. Ordnance of the wideft bere;
or,as Cardinale.

Vent cardinal. One of the foure principall winds; as
Eafl, Weft,North,or South,

Vertus cardinales. (ardinall vertues ; viz. Wifdome,
Iuflice, Fortitude,and Tempevance.

Cardinalat : m. 4 (ardina pee.

Cardinale: £. 4 kind of Arti en fr ip lee then
the Culuerine, and denifed at firft by t oe Ut of
Lorraine. ;

Cardinalin : m. A little,or young Cardinal.

Cardinalifé:m. ée: ££ Red,redded, made of a red or
sharlet hue; in a red or skarlet habit, fuch as Cardi-

ont weare. ‘ a a sate
ardons: m. (ardoones; the flalkes s,0r
of the white thifile, buri in the ground, or otherwife.

fèd,to L fe; (excellent meat.)


Care: m, A certaine difeafe that benummes the bead,


and makes the whole bodie more fencele[fe then an A-
poplexie ; or,a deepe fleepe, or feepinelé, ioyned with
of the brame, fences ion.
Care: £ The face,vifage,countenance,looke,afpect.
Carence : f Want, lache of ; See Carance.
Carene: f. The Keele of a fhip.
arefine:m.Leat. ©
Carefine entrant. Shroue-tue/day.
Carefine prenant. Shronetide; Faftnes ; or Shreue-


tuefday.
Plaidoyé de carefme prenant. 4 wanton, baudie,
lafcinious plea,or argument.
Amoureux de carefme. À Lenton louer ; «ba
modefl,or maidenly woer ; one thats afraid to touch bis
 Figue de carefme. A drie figge,Frayle figge,Lenten
F carefine.LeokeSain@.
… Violette de carefine. The ordinavie blew, or March
2 Py ay prefehé fepe ans pour mn ee
=, A 0er ir À ea there, eae |
Ce, &,Carefme-prenant. SeeCe-


refme. 3
| Cs.


C#ALR-


Carefle: £ A cheering,chersfhing,welcomming friendly
pc MT ANT EI


|. king much of. a:
Careffer.To chat bag mabe much of;intertain friend-
1 ly,ufe kindly,make good cheere vate,
Caret.fil de caret; Packthread.
tfou: m. The peale which we alfo tearme Curfüe, be:
ing af one belland about eight or nine of the clocke at
night. ) à
Cargade : f.as Cargaifon.
Cargaifon : f. The fraight , fraught , or lading, of a


De

Cargue: f. A charge,or enfêt, given on an enemic.

Carguer. To charge; alfo, to lade; alfo, to leane all on
one fide ; (im which fence it is moft vfed by Mari-
ners.) à

Cariage. Le c. The carriage,luggage, baggage ; all the
nine prouifion of an arme, cc, carried with, or
after,it. : :

Caribe. The moft biting kind of Indian pepper.

Caribot: m. A lanchion, or big peece, as of bread,


dc.

Carie : fi Rottenne(fe, or putrifaétion in wood by long
pe RE 3 4 worme in wood; corruption in any
thing. ‘

SeC A To gg en 2

Carieux: m. eule : f. Rotten, putrified worme-eaten ;
corrupted.

Carillon: m. A chyming of bels;a knell.

Tete frotteray à double carillon.1 will beat thee like
a feck fife 1 will fwinge thee while I may fland over
(2 ER


t
Carillonné: m.ée : f. Chymed,or knowled.
Carillonner. To chyme,or knowle,bels.
Carillonneur: ary Jo tm bels.
mari carimara. . See ari.
Carine : £. The keele of « fhip. ‘aac
iol Cariole.


“atiol:m, 4 ;

Cariole: £. The root of a horfes tayle,or the bone there-
of; the rumpe-bone.

Cariophillate : f. Hearbe Auens,Bennet,or bleffed.

Carifi. The name of a certaine Peare ; alfo, the perrie
made thereof.

Carizé. Kerfe.

Carler. as Carreler. .

Carlin. .4# Italian coyne worth fortie Quadrins.

Carline: £ The Carline, or Carline thifile ; erronioufly
Can by fome Authors, with our Ladies thi-


Petite carline. The low, or little , Carline ( thi-


) |
Carlingue : f. The flep of a Maft; the timber
here she fat pret PE nr
Carlonne: Vivre ila Carlonne. To deale plainly.
Carmalgnoles Mic

arinai if. icockes. à
Carme:m. Averfe ; al à chard doe borne

beame,or yoake tree; alfo,a white Frier ©


Friers. °” .
Carminatif : m. iue : f. Wind-voiding, wind-di
uing, windinelfe-correéting ; alfe,
abating.
Cpiiicsteur. A verifier ; a maker of verfes.
al: m. A kind of Turkifh (bip.
L ie,of eh; bloudie, cruel! ;
5 buing, or feeding on


25


lacier: m.ere:f. F
uriaz, bloud-
}Carnaffier,


-Carotide. 4 branch of the great Arterie ; which after


Carmelitains: m. The Carmelites; an Order of white


aming, Luft


€ A R——


Carnage. Flefh time, the feafon wherein tis lowfall to
eat PA Pic: alfo, a flaughter, butcherie, kelling,
Slaying, mur ther of men.
wane Flejh, flefh-meat, fle ware, prowifion
0 bus d


C ier. #6 Carnacier.
arn re: m, as Carnage ; 4 killing; 4 flaying;
a er QE efbecially of bea 345 in ide %
. To kills butcher, flay, flaughter ; efpecially
ne found damage-fefant (which the partie damma-
ged in fome places and cafes, nay lawfiully do) and eat,
or fell their fefb.
eries: f Flefbic matters.
aflier: m, ere: £. Plumpe, fléfhie, fill, well batled,
| well fed; alfo,as Carnacier.
Carnaval: m. Shrovetide ; alo, a licentious,or diffolute


eafon.

Carta: f. A wench ayes owne “ licentious, or
&,vfèd as licentioufly, as the Carnaval; (ou, qui eft
chevauchée mines CT :

Carne: f. An edge,or corner.

Carne deteftons. A quarterne of Teflons, confifiing
of foure,or of fértie.

Carneau: m. A battlement (of a wall.)

Carnelé : m. ée : f. Imbattled ; bauing battle
ments.

Carnelle: £. The ftampe of « peece of coyne, ~

Carneller. To flampe,or coyne,a pecce of coyne.

Carnet. as Cayer.

Carniforme: com. Of a flefhie fibflance,or forme; like


efh.
Choficé : f. Carnofitie, Flefhline[e , funefe of


efh. F

Carnu. Looke Charnu.

Carobe. as Carrobe,or Carrube.

Carocher. A coachman. \

Carolle: f. A kind of daunce wherein many daunce te-
gether ; alfo,a Carroll,or Chrifimas fone.

Caroller. To daunce,to reuell it ; to jmg carrols.

Carolus: m. A peece of white mony, worth x d. Tour,
or a iuft Englifh penny.
Carolus de Bezançon. A filuer coyne ; and is worth
about ix d. flerl.
Carolus de Flandres. Another, worth about iij s.
feerl.

Carooler. Te inroule.

Caroffe : f. A carofft,or caroach.

Carote: f. The Carrot (root,or bearbe.
Carote fauvage. Daucus, wilde Carrot, birds


neaft.. x
Carotes. The hearbe Carroway, and Carroway feed;
qDodoneus.


it bath mounted a little by the fide of the necke,diuides

it felfe inte two branches; one (inward and the grea-
~ ter) goes up to the braine ; ‘the other (outward) be-

flomes it felfe on the Larinx,tongue;nofe, eyes,and muj-

cle of the temples, TRS
Carouges: £ Carobs,or Carob-beanes and Carob-beane

cods; tearmed alfa,S.lobns bread. ;
Carous. A carouffe of drinke.

er. To quaffe,fwill,caroul]e it. ;
arozze. as Carofle; a caroach,or great coach.
@: m. A certain plant, whofe inice,being drunke, |.


ureth im fleeping flrangleth; (A re-

pe of at ser 3 for the moderne ones ei- |

at ti “i, or confelfe they know it

not. ‘ 2 :
0 ix


Original-ftonas :#4 et ee
; THÉOHID'STATE-UNJMERSIRESSSSS


ey +"


C A R°


Capes m. The wrift,or firft part of the palme of the


Can æ € A Carpe (ffh)
arpe de mer. The fèa-Carpes fomewhat blacker
then the frefhwater one, but tee Saya unto


Sa de la carpe. À turning top ouer tayle.

Carpeau: m. A young Carpe.

Carpendu. pomme de car. The apple called,a Shorte-
tart.

or :f. The yoke tree,borne-beame,bard beame.yoke

meWitch hafell; (alfo,as Charpie, Pic.)

Carpion: m. A kind of long-beaded, flender-bodied,
blacke-backed,and wbite-be
final [cales poudered ( efpecially towards the acke)
with blacke and red [pots ; aud growing not to aboue a
foot in length.

Carpionne: f. as Ca -

Carpir.as Charpir. Pi

Carpobalfame:m. The fait of the Balfamum, or Bal-
fame, tree.

Carpot. The balft,or part,of the frnit,or profit of avine-
th |, yeelded as a rent by the tenant, vnto the lord,
thereof.


ee og m. A carcanet ; 4 (rich) chaine for the


Carquant. The fame ; or (both) as Carcan.

Carquafle: £. A carkas,or dead corpes ; the dead bodie
of any creature; and hence,a Cate Pelt or dead bird,
to take downe a Hauke withall,

Carquois: m. A quiner for arrowes.


kept in a quiuer.
ete Mb om ve fr ke
acon:m. A/fimall(but marée
Carraque: f. The buge {hip tearmedacarricke.
Carraquon. as Carracon.
Carrat de bois à baftir. A certaine quantitie of tim-


ber.
Carré. À Square; a fquare peece in Cutworke,or Net-
worke ; a fquare bed sna garden.
| Ocil de carré. A fi fide, or leeving eye ; 3 alfo, a proud,
Phebe sei if looke.
Carre.le Carre
rorke.
Caïre: fas Caire.
Carré: m. ée: € Squared; quare.
Carre: com. square; bro
Bcarre. 2 fharpe (in Muficke) e.)
Deb carre enb mol. po TN or uncertainely 5
from one fubiebt to another.


yt paving tyle 5 rite
Fine sbefire'tbe rs
= «dors pr on; alfo,
with, Lag 7 ope’ end ee sey in se 4
© middefl Se pricke fit, mee mit ites t (in
- France) they Quan
~ Carr be bender sles ef i
“ine boyifh Sel fein


eaux.
oe er


| Fraise. rie bd dei


d Trout; bauing very :


Carquois: m. ife : £.0f a quimer,belonging toa quiuer,


Pun rocher, « Ted se 4


m, (à ge re alittle DEP on
beng ithe fauare of ai (or as.
planchet |


d, or leeds ood


CAR


Carrelet: m. 4 (kind of broad,and fhort) Plaice;
Sea-fifh cet refembles a Hem ate


fore a dearth,or plague
Carrelure:f. A fole ; apt fol of foo.
Carreluré de ventre. Meat,belly-timber,belly-cheere.


Carrer. 71 ; b
SeCarer. 2 Sleep rae sate fab er biege


Carts £ A ; alfo, breadth , |
neffe; aie 4 "Ab he »4 pyre ra
quare.

=. m. A finder of flones,or quarries of flones; al-
ie fone-digger, a quarrey-man, a worker in Quar-


Onis: f. An bigh way, rode, or fireet (Langued.
alfo, a quarrey of flones; alfo, a barr par
backe; and (more generally) any exercife, or place for
exercife, on borfebacke; ac a borfe-race, orya place ba
— @s to runin ; and,their cowrfe, running,or fall peed


Carriere de Valois. à eight foot broad.

Lance de carriere. Seeke Lance.

Donner carriere à fon efprit. To recreate bis fpirit ;
er, 7 oa, pre Si dé Rel a gadding, bis


a 0 ts on a gallop.
nner Carriere. To raunge, flye out; giue bim-
ee Scope; or to recreate bimfelfe ; to run bimfelfe out


Faire le less à la carriere. See Loup.

Parfaire fa carriere. To finifli bes careere,to run out

bis courfe,to end bis race.

Prendre bien fa carrigre. To part readily from the

band into a ftrait,and fwift,careere.

< arret m. A chyming,or knowling of bels. See Ca-
on.


Coptonner. To chyme, or knowle bels ; to make a


has m. The Carob, Carob-beane, or Carob-beane
cod,S.1obns bread ; 5 ao as Carrube.

oce ; &, Carroche . As. Carrofle ; 4 Car-

roche. y


Carrochiets ou, Carrocier-as Carroffer.


ade tosses | a ‘a coachman.


de Gallen, Looke Cerat.
:f, as Carote.
Carroube: m. as Carrobe; alfo,as Carroubier.
Catroubier:m. The Cawob tree,or Beane tree.
e.asCarrobe. # :
Île: f. A little hollow reed.

Carrozze: f. A caroach.

Cartozzier: m. À caroach:man,a coachman.

m. as Carrobe; alo, a (mall weight (a
Mintmen,and Goldfmitbs) making but the 24 part of
an ounce.

Cartame:m. Bef définit 6er le
fron,Saffion Dort
Cartane (ylvettr. wild baftard Saffron.

Cartafonne. The Indian yobole-boofed,and bleck-ber-

Cane gi of d;

# f. A paper, or peece pa Mt alfo, a car
Ai Lorpekaevor teat


Abcee; aPic-
or Sipporter, of afleboord coed it line


nen.
Carte blanche. À Blanke ; and bence; |
-!-Donner la carte blanche à. To offer te receine, or
©. fübmit bimfelfe-onto,any conditions.
Ten Jaiffe la carte blanche à eux. I leane them to


Original from


ARE OHIO: STATE UNIVERSITY


CS


CAR CAS
debate it; 1leauetbe decifion, (or difpofall) thereof \ _ ficers of the Crowne; diflurbance offered vnto
pores < fe of bis Officers, in the execution of pp. ee
Brouiller les cartes.Looke Brouiller. toany that goe vp anddowne about ins bufinelfe ; Vi-


Lepremier en carte. Th’eldeftor ,the firfi thats dealt
vnto,at cards.


Cartée: f.A(letter of ) defiance or challenge, for a( fine |


gle)combat.


Carteranche :f. A certaine meafare for falt.

Carthame : m. Baftard Saffron, wild Saffron, mocke
Saffron, Saffron dort.
thame fauvage, ou fylueftre, wild baflard Saf-

Ton, «

Carthellages. Square peeces of free flone.

Cartibe. 8 uare table of fone, but fomewhat more
long than brosd. |
Cartibes d'vn moulinet. The ferrels, or bands of y-
ron whereby the ends of a windleffe are firengthe.


ned.
Cartilage : m. A grifile,or tendrell of the eare,or nofe ;
or fach a skin as u betweene the toes of geefe, duckes,


dc.
Créihsghenr : meufe: f. Griflly; full of tendrels, or
griflles.
Cartifannier : m. A maker of (playing) cards. ;
Cartoche. # Cartouche; alfo,a Cartridge, or roll (in
Architeéture,)
Carton: m. The thicke paper whereon Painters draw
Sometimes ; and that whereof fome fannes are made ;
_ alfo,afquare peece thereofor of paftboord ; (alfo,a Car-
ter,or carve=man : ee
Cartons d'une Selle. The skirts of a faddle.
CHERE Law-bookes,auncient Records authen-
tucall writings ; alfo,the roome,cheft,or pre{fe,wherein
Such writings be kept. Tf
Cartouche: f.The cornet of paper whereinto Apotheca-
ries,and Grocers put the parcels they retaile ;alfo, a
Cartouch,or fill charge, Fra iflell, put vp within a
little paper, to be the readier 3 alfoya peece of
paftboord,or thicke paper falfed (in around, or pud~
dinglike forme)with bullets,@rc,and to be {hot out of a
great pecce ; aifd, as Cartoche, GE
Cartouflle.(The name of) a fhrub, that beares a Mufo~
rome-like fruit ; alfo,the fruit it fe.
C €. as Cartouche.
Cartulaire. 4 great paper-booke; or ,#s Chartulaire;
alfo,as Refve.
ire : com. Cartular ;of,or in,paper ; proper un-
to paper,or paper-boolgs,
luges cartulaires. Iudges that gine their fentences
Car Es - feed.
rvi: m. Carowayes,or Caroway feed.
Carvi fauvage. wild Cheruill, or wild Carowayes.
Caruncule: f, 4 little pue A Le
arymari carymara.Fained words expreffing a great
cove flirre ic lyburly, or the confifed Dre


rude companie.
Caryote:f. ADäate. aint;
: m, À Cafe.caule,matter, thing ; af, a crime, of=
fence ; falt ; alfo,efleeme, account, reckoning of; alfo,

the priuities (of manor woman.)

Cas fortuit. A bap,or chance,
… Cas previlegiez, as Cas royaux,

Cas royaux. Royall cafés ; caufes wherein the king 1
intere {fed for the preferuation of bis rights,or the main-
| rs of his authorities fuch as bee Treafons of all


(bumane)Maieftie; the violation of paf:
Pog poi mi 0


ae


IR EF


olence vféd,riots committed,or armes borne jn unlaw-
fill affemblies ; all caufès that concerne bis rights ye-
uenue,finances,coyning, officers, ordinar:e feruanis ;
Churches (athedrall,or otbers of royall foundatiun, o
therwife priniledged; the execution of letters pates,
dr of Commiffions,or Iniunétions under the great feale,
and generally, all caufes that depend on les droits
royaux ; for which,looke Droi&t. é
Avoir fon cas. À woman to be in ber flowers,
Ce ferabien voltre cas, This will fit you well, or bee
for your turne, ;
Cas fur cas n’a point de lieu, (A ground in law) if a
thing be feifed by one, it cannot bee vefeifed by ano-
ther, untill the former bane tried bis title vato it.
Cas: m.caffe :fHollow,or broken founded ; hoarfi like
4 bell that bath got a craze, or the voyce of one that
bath got a ~
im. Abuge,or great boufe; a Mannor houfe;al/a
a villagdorbemiet. a Lee
Cafanier: m. A boufe-doue,or bome-bred fluggard; one
that neuer flirres out of bis ovone doures. .
Cafaque :£. À caffocke,mandilian,long coat,
Cafard : m.arde: f. Home-bred, bouft-louing , ene?
fens within doores; alfo , tame, or kept about a
“je.


Cafcaret : m. A firious,and boyling tide, or fea, that
Sometimes comes in (betweene Bourdeaux and Ro-
chel) fiaging,and roaring,and enerturning the barkes
which bein the way thereof. L

Cafcavelle :f. 4 roundelsy,or countrey fong. TE

Cate : £. (15 properly)a poore houfé,tenement,or cottage;
(and fometimes)any boufe, or dwelling place,
Doubleten cafe. A corner point taken with tromen
at Tables, , A
I.a Cafe monftre le Meffer : Prov. as, La Maifon
fait cognoiftre le Maiftre.

Cafeiforme : com. «Made (round , and flat) like a


cheefe.

Cafernate:f. A cafe-mate ; a loope, or loope-bole, in a
fortified wall. .*

Caferet: m. A cheefe-fator chesford,tomake a cheefe
in.

Caferte : f. A little houfe ; a cote, or fmall cottage,

Cafier.as Caferet, A .

Cafinc:f 4 cote, a little cottage, or country boufe.

Cafois: m. 4 countrey clowne, a 8 hinds: a
bome-bred boydon ; a ruflicall boufe-doue , an igne-
rant,or idle clufterfift.

Cafole: £.4 pofnet ,a/fo,a kind of narrow-mouthed pots
fomewhat like a perfuming pot. F

Calque : £. The bead-peece tearmeda caske, or caf

e t, . -

Hor nana teased , :
able: com. Fraite,brittle eafie to be broken.
Caflade :f. 4 gudgeon, frumpe;macke, flont, gull,coufe-
ning patt,cheating pranke, deceitfull tricke ; whence;

Avoir la caflade.To be gulled ; or, t0 fivallow a gud-


geon. =
-m.ante: f. Frayle,brittleeafie to be broken;
i: aaa
Cafard nee caer, 4 caftalike receptacles
Cafsations A caffations a quafhing, caffing, brea-


‘hing; abrogating annulling infringing.


.


—-T- _ eh. Ss eee. Oe eta?) ew. E


C'OATS ”


Caffaudes : f. Daifies ; or, Bruixewort.

Catle: f. The drug,or fpice tearmed Calsia ; or as;
Cale aromatique, The aromaticall wood, barke,or
baftard Cinnamon,tearmed Cafsia.

Caffe de bois. The fame.

Cafle des iardins.A /weet bearbe; which is beld to be
Lauender pike.

Caffe laxative, Cafsia fiftula, Pudding pipe.
Caffe nigre. as Caffe laxative.

Cafe: f. 4 bex,cafesor, chefi,to carrie, er keepe wares
in, alfo,a Marchants cafh, or counter ; alfo, any cheft,
easket,or cabinet ; alfo,a coffin,or fhrine; alfo, a drip-
ping-pan; alfo, an open mouthed pan, or veffell of
earth, ec, fit to boyle things,or fet plants,in; alfo,the
hollow part of the fole ofa borfe-fee.

Caffe pointuë, 4 fafhion of a fimalt boyling panne,
which bath a narrow,or pointed bottome.

Cafsé : m.éc :f. Broken,burfi,quafht in peeces ; alfo,caf-
Sed, cafcered; cancelled; alfo,decayed,worne,or bre-
ken with age,

Voix cafsée. A weake, hoarfe,or whizzing voyce.
Aujourd'uy caifsier demain caffé: Prov.To day in
requefl,to morrow caffed.

Cafse-loix, Lawes-infringing, difèrderbe, exorbitant,
outra, gious .

Caffe-moeurs, Mazners-breaking, rude, fanageun-
ciuile,

Caffe-mufTaux. Chee/e-cakess or, a kind of thick,and
three-cornered,or horned cakes, made of butter ,egges,
and cheefe, :
afle-noix : m. Acracke-nut, or nut-cracker ; alfo, a
kind of little mountaine Daw, fpeckled,as an old Star-
Ling all ouer with white,

Cafse-pot:m. A (port wherein(the gamefters flanding |
in rowes) one Lofseth an earthen pot at another, vebo if
he catcheth it not, falling it breakes, and bee forfey-
teth,

Cafler. To breake, burft, crafhin peeces , quafh afun-
der; alfo,to caffe, caffeere,difèbarge, turae out of fer-
hice PRET 3al/o,to infringe anaull,
cancell abrogate,

affer la noifille. To cracke the nut ; alfa, to coggea
Dye. :
Lalangas humaine n’a point d'os,& cafle poi@ri-
ne & dos. 4 Prouerbe expreffing the force of a malici-
ous,envaged,or infeéted tongue, =

ui a des noix il en c & qui n’en a il s'en
pafle: Prov. Many,when they bane fuper fluities, can
fe them,and when they bane none can want them.

Cafferie : £ A breaking or quafbing ; « difcharging; an


charging cancelling. .
Caffidons C: £. À Caffidenie ; a bafe,and brittle fone of
fall value though rt fhine like fire; alfo, a kind of ex-
-_ cellent marble, , »
Caffier, The tree that beares the fruit Cafsia.
19NO0: m. A pump,or thin-foled fhooe,
Cafliñe :£. À ban ting boufe; a sated cut-houfe, or
Summer-boufe in the fields;alfe a little ware-boufe;al- |*
So,a little Terrace-garden, or garden befire a window,
Cafloie:£ wt : Pic.

€ : f. A coffin, box, or casket es; c;
RS » box; or casket for perfimes ; ec;

lette. 4 little chef, coffin, box, or casket to put

Sweet,or precious things insalfoya kind of (mal pot with
a narrow mouth yefembling a perfuming pot ; alfo,a lit
tle puns ofnet.

Cc. as Cafole; or Caflole.

MN: m. A great chefi,binne,butch,or Pandard.
Caflonade : f.Pewder Sugar ; efpecially, [uch as comes
fn “mr

ure. as Cafleure,
Caftadour: TE 0 à
: f, Finger-knackers , wherewith Play-
c pig. mas pres noyfe in fome kind of daun-
ces.
Caftagneux : m. The little water- fovle, called a Dob-
chicke,or Dydopper.
C Ole :f. A big finned,and chefinut-coloured fea-
7 in feafon about the Spring time, but then withall
Jo common,that the better fort of people care not for it :
gnon. A certaine fifh that maketh à neft in the
water; See Roquau.


a maigne. (hefaut-colenred; of, or like à


Caftaigne : f. Astallop-like peece of yron in the midft,
or mouth, of an old fafhioned bit.

Caftalojgne. 4 Spanifb couerletor rug.

Cafte. Looke Chaîte.

Caftillan : m. 4 Spenifh waight proportionable vntothe
Pefo, which in gold comes to viy.s. flerling, im filuer to
liy,s, or thereabouts, |

illanifer, Te imitate or affett Spanifh fafhions, or

humors ; to play the Spaniard ; (hence) alfo, to fpeake

ig, fland on prond tearmcs, take verie much vpon
im.


Caftille: € Cafile (the noble part of Spaine ;) alfo,
contention debate brabling,. brain bee, Us
font en Caftille. There M a iarre betwixt them 3
and


infringing,or cance Prendre lacaftille pour autruy. To undertake ano-
Casserins : m. Tillsdrawers or boxes ina prefe,or ca- ther mans quarrel. .
binet. : Pierre de caftille. Lime-flone.


CafSeron: m.The Sleeue, or Calamarie; a fifh, thats
fomewhat longer than the Cuitle,or Sea-cut, but other-
wife refembles her; alfo, a veffell fomewhat like a pof-
net,but without feet.


in: nA biele chelates cabinet: fal fr


; box,till,or i,
Cane ct à ire ballet bone va made of
boords 10 put flowers, or branches offnalltrees ins al(o,
 afinall abinetor forcer ; aljo, a box, till,


{tillier : m. The wild Goofeberrie Jhrub.

On : m. The beaxill,collet, or bead of a ving, ec;

wherein the fone is enchaced, ;
Caftor : m. The beaft called a Beuer.

aftorée : m, as Caftoreum,
aftoreumn.The fiinking on of Beuers flones; or rather
an oylie liquor contained in two pouches which cleaue
unto either fide of the Greine of both male, and female


aad

Beuers ; (each of tho, es being as big as a large

dr, alfo,a finall » or firine; alfo,a little | bonne Sop ml t flone SFR Bale dicho big.

trough | birds meat; 4 , alittle i pan, cr than a cocks fio sand one fall ed unto bis back-
Cafleur  m. Abreater, buifer,quaftercaerscan- | Be) Re era eneee

celler. ÿ Caftramnetatio The pitching, or meafhring out, ofa


ett os


je. Read Gafltomantie: €Rab.
; aii Cafuel:


| Cafleuré: € Theb ing, à fell ; a
a breaking mr de [A dif


Original.fyom


te Peche ture o& ea


va


nab; uncertainly; tranfitorily,

de m, A cafuift ; one that writes of the cafes of
confcience.

Catachrefe : f. The abufe,er neceffarie vfe of one word

for lacke of another more proper.

Catachreftique.Abufiue ; or vféd,though improper, fer
want of that which would be more proper.

adoupes. as Catadupes, ,

Catadupes. The falls of Nilus ; or, certaine high places
where that riuer violently falling makes a roaring, or
horrible noife, 7

Cataglottifer. To kif with the tongue,

Cataglottifine. 4 kiffe,or kiffing with the tongue.

Cataginatique: com.Ofor belonging to broken bones,
or the breaking of bones ; alfo, bealing, or clofing fuch
breaches,

Catalepfie: f. 4 difeafe comming of the braine, di
tempered with drineffe,and cold.

Catalogue: m. A Catalogue,lift,rowle Regifler, Kalen-
der, enumeration, recenfion, recitall of names, mat-
terse.

Catalongne :f. A (white)Spanifh rug ; or, a courfe co-
uerlet of Carologna.

Cataminy. womens flowers. à

Cataplafine:m. A cataplafine, or poultis; a (fifi,or
moifl) plaifter.

Cataplafme de chair de vautour avec les vifs. ee
Say, a plaifier of warme guts (wherem leacherie is
meant.)

Catapuce grande. The bearbe Kicke, or Ticke, Reci-
nus, Palma Chrifti.


DT e.

Catapulte: £. 4 fing,or c engine ywbereout great
arrowes or darts were fot. MA ie

Catara@e : f A violent fall of waters from a bigh and
freepe place; alfo, a flrong yron-bound cheft, open in
the top,and (et with pikes in the bottome, thereby to
fiicke faft,and fleadily where it is to fland ; (vfèd efpe-
cially in water-workes;) alfo,a Cataract,or web in the

€.


Catarrhe : m. Ar. catarre.
Catarrhé: m.ée:f. Troubled withrhewme.
Catarrheux : m.eufe : £.Xbewmaticke, full of catarres,
_or of the rhewme, :
.4s Cadaftre.
€. A Catafirophe, conclufion,laft att,or part
ofa play ; the fhutting up ef a matter ; alfo ie
ruine,fubwerfion , defiruétion, fatall, or finall, end
of. - ee : iO.
Cateclifine, A deluge, illuvien, or inundation: @Rab.
Caciqe : com. Sad,heauie, forrow/ill,in melanch
lie, full of penfiueneffe; and hanging downe the bead
withall ; (vfed in my Author (by one that would baue
_ . fPoken learnedly)for fhort wiaded,or troubled with the


? Tiftc €.)


\ ide. An ayrie inflamation : (Rab.
orgue om goal plane autbenticall,
ieadie refolued on, :


as


Ca ucment. Cathegorically plainely, roundly,

D. | Carte ge pale b of itfelfeit
a 307 0

bei del “t ribo ested


Cattel, A chattel, or mouable : &Wallon,


Le
dr oe + onde abe EE


CAT


CAT
Cafuel :m. elle: (afuall, accidental; uncertaine, | ble sor as Cateud.
tranfitorie ; happening by chance. Catelongne :f, as Catelonne.
Parties cafuelles. The fale of Offices, erthereuenue | Catelonne:f. 4 white Spanifh rug; or, a courfe, and
which the king makes thereof’, Seeke Partie. vough couerlet of Catalogna(ia Spaine.)
Calüellement. Accidentally,cafially by bap, or bab- Catepleure :f. A croffe fayle; (fuch as is ufed in Cam


vauels, Gallies, Hoyes, érc ;) a fimacke, or mixxen


ayle,

Caterolle: £4 rabbets neft ; or,the bole wherin a(Doe)
conie cep nd feeds her yong ones,

Caterve: f..4 rout,crue band froupe, uncertaine num-
ber,confifèd multitude, |

Cateud. A chattel; or pat onely a mouable (which may
Follow a bodie and be remoued from place to place) but
alfo, any immouable, that isno inberitance .

Cateul. as Carel.

thartique. A purgatine, or enacuatine ; a purging


ine.

Cathechifer. Tocatechife. -

Cathedral : m.ale:f. Cathedral! ; ofjor belonging 16,4
Cathedrall church; and bence; i
we cathedrale. 4 Minfter,or Cathedvall church.

Cathedrant: m.ante:f. Sitting as indge, or modera-
toy. . ?


- Cathedratique. À certaine fee,or duetie, belonging to


a Bifhop when be is firfi inuefied into bis fea.
Cathegorie : f. A predicament.
Cathelane. ‘The name of an excellent plum; wheveof
there are three kinds, the greene, white one,and violet


ene,

Cathene:f. 4 chaine ; whence; Marde cathene. 4
firious,or enraged foole.

Catheretique : com. Eating,or gnawing away füper-
finons, and ouer-emment ficfb,or skin.

Catherinaire.The bearbe Tobacco.

Catherine. The bramble berrie, blacke-berrie ; dew-
berrie; the berrie of the baïre bramble, or beath bram-


le
Catherinettes :£ Certaine prettie flowers (leffe than
_ piakes) growing in clufters, or many together on one


Cathet :m. Cathete : f. Perpendicular , plumpe


downe
-Catheux. A kind of mouables,although they adbere to
the foyle,or be faftened to a boufe.
Cathoheon. A certaine compofition in Phyfickes fo tear-
med,becaufe it purges all kind of bumors,
olique : com, Catholicke , vniuerfall, generall.
Catholisation:f The being, or becomming a Catho-
licke. à
Catholizer. To catbolikize it, play the Catholicke, be-
come a Catbolicke. — : :
Cati : m. ie :f. clapped clofe unto,tbruft bard together;
bard,er clofewouen ; ( for it is a weauers tearme.)
ilinifme. Catilini{me,confpiracie,


imi. In corners, band, in bugger mug-


er, .
Chr. To clofe,to fettle,to thrusthard together , in wea-
uing ; (for it isa weaners tearme.)
Catoblepe f, A kind of Bafiliske or venomows worme,
which with ber fight kils a mile off:
ire. A bee-bine. . ;
Catonien:m.enne:f. Grane, feuere; grim, aufiere ;
cenfuringeuerybodie. ;
ons. des ca. Catkins, cattails, aglets , or aglet-like
blowings of nut-trees, Oc.


Cato) tie : f. Diuination by a looking glaffe.
Cate . as Chatouiller ; To duane oh


fi


.


CA V


Droi& du meilleur cattel. 4 Heriot : the beft beaft
a Tenant hath, at the time of bis death, due unto bis
Landlord.

Cavailler. as Cavallier.


Cavain : m. A bole,caue,bollownes,bollow place,bollow


way.

Cavalcade : f. A riding,or,a road of borfe;whence;
Faire lacavalcade.To courféyor raurge vpér downe
onhorfebacke. \

Cavalcador. 4 Horfeman,a Rider.

Cavale: €. Amare.

Cavaler. To flaulke,to dog; Ste Cavaller.

Cavalet: m. A long hollow flicke, through which they
ufe, in fome places, to blow the fire, in flead of bel-
lowes.

Cavalier: m. A horfèman, or man of armes ; 4 caua-
leere; alfo, a gallant; a noble,or worthie,fellow.

Cavalin: m. A litle borfé. i

Cavalle : £4 mare. .

Cavallé : m. ée. f.Ridden ; trauelled on ; toyled ; alfo,

a ee dogged.

Cavaller.T ride ; alfo, to tranell,toyle, ufelike, or as, a
borfe ; alfo,te flaulke,or dog.

Cavallerie : f. Horftman{bip; alfo horfemen.

Cavallet des planches. The higheft,or moft-raifed, part
of garden-beds.

Cavallette. A kind of Locufl. ,

Cavallier: m..4 high plaiforme in a fortreffe, to plant
great peeces on; alfo, as Cavalier.

Cavallin. 4s Cavalin.

Cavalot. 4 certein coyne worth about iij.s.alfa,a nag,

__ ordittle borfe.

Caubare : m. 4 fandie coulored and verie venemous
ferpent, ofa cubits length.

Caucheaux. Taxes payed unto Lords in Henault to.
wards the maintaining of common bankes , or can


fèves. ;
Caucheinare, The difea(é called the Night-mare.
Cauche-poulet , or Cauche-vieille , 2s Cauche-


mare. ;
Caucher. To batch,or fit on; to broode,or fit ouer ; as


benne. wind
Cauciage. 45, Caucheaux ns | ter
Caudataire : com. À iraine-bearer, one that beares up.
the trainc ofa great perfin,
ce :£.4 cawdell: (in la Beauffe,)
auderet: m. 4 hot bath; called fo in the countrey of
Bearn, where Chaude is pronounced, Caude, ~
Candies m. The flocke, + bin or bodie of a tree, or


Cave sf. dune, cellar, vault, or bollow place in the


(4 &
Eau benitte de cave. Wine ; prong drinbes
Marier la cave & le puis. To mingle wine and mater


ae.
Cau : f.A Chough,or lacke-daw : Pic,

. Cavé.Hollowed, made bollew ; diggedimto.
Caveau: m. A litle cauesorfélar.
Cavechure : £. Abaulter ; or , thing to baulter with:


€ Pic. : RCE,
Caveçon:m. A canechin ; or canelfon , for a berfes


 nofe. .

Cavedal : m.Tbe principal fumme lent out to v/e.

Cavelide: Ed of ny fio ofa tea int
(and e none of the daintiefl.) ;

Cavelot : m.A prop,fiay,ertreffle: € Pic.

Cavement : m«4 ing, or making bollow ; an ex


| Caveure :£.4 bole,a bellow ; a hollowing.


bennes do their shickens ; or, as Cauquet ;10 tread a |


C AV


canation; a digging into,
Cavenne de bergier: £a Shepheards cote; litle cottage,
ar cabine made of turues, firaw, boughes,or leaues.
ver. To bollow,or make hollow ; to aig into.
Cavereau:m, A little cane,or fellar,
Caverne :f. A denne,cauerne,gvot ; bollew place; lure
king bole,prinie corner.
Caverneau: m..4 little caue,or cauerne.
Caverneux: m.eufe : f. Hollow, fu ofdennes , canes,
holes ; ah, dwelling in canes,cbiding in dennes, lur-
ing in boles, ;
Cavefanne: f. 4 cauefan, fafè-raine, or head-flraine
(commonly of filke) to lead,or bold,a borfeby,
Cavefche : f, The head(barbavoufly.)
Esvehe. Frowardly. (v.m.)
Cav Ot :m.4 Pole-head.or Bull-head ; the little black
vermine whereof toads,and frogs do come,
veflane. as Cavefanne.
Caveffinc:f. 4 martingale for aborfe.
velion, as Cayegon,
Cavette: £.4 little fellarsalfo,a little cave denne,vanlt,
bole under ground.
Caüette : £.4 (hough,or Fack-daw : Pic.


auhare.See Caubare.
Cavier. Seigneur c. À Landlord, or Lord of the foyle,
wha bath low inrifdittion ener bis tenants.
Cavillateur im, A wrangler, cauiller, contentious film


Cavillation. Acauill ; a wrangling propofition , ouer-

thwart reason; aljo,acauilling. ‘
villatoire.#yangling,cawilling.

Caviller.To cauillwrangle;reafon croffely, fbeake ouer-
thwatly.

Cavillon. À kind of little Mullet.
avin: m. 4 hollow way,or dry brooke.

Cavine:f. ‘The bottome of the mouth wherein the root
of the tongue is. 3 :

pe din f, A cauitie,bollowaelfe ; bollow way ; or bel.

place. /
Conic: m, The flalke,or flemme of an bearbe ; al, the
ar en ,


auleba £ A gourd; or, a bottle made of the rind


Caulods : th. Cabbidges,
Cault. as Chaud; Hot : QPic, alfo,as Caut; sraftie.
nas. Hot : Li Gafc: i“
Cauné. The name of a kindofvine.
ic. A certaine ffh, not much unlike vate a
Pearch. ¢ ORD
Cauny.s Peneux(at Tours.) : :
ite : f A tent(for a wound; )and hence;
Quandla fille pefe yn auque on luy peut mettre la


cauque: Prov.
Gauge: m. ¢e: £ Trodden, as abenne; tented, asa
wo


Cauquemare.as Cauchemare: €Pic.
Cauquer.Totread a benne,as a cocke doth : ENorm.al-
fo,to tent a wound : qGalc. ae
USdian: m. dongle brangle, brabinger bi |
ausateur : ma. A Suite, a parte contendings «partie
Caufativement. Litigioufy 5 allo, canfatinely,or, fora |


teaufe,realonor occafion; alfo,a cafe, mate |
sor suit in law, re


[el


,


Ortginal f |]
PHE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Cc Ax V°>


a pr Des but b badly ; or Le Sometimes # Ga
| Û as wr
#10. Caufer. To ais arte the accafion of afi, 2
< Cont 23 tot ns together in words; al:
w place; lite So, to prattle, babble, talke idly, reason foolifliyy vse }
much bree to little purpofe, » .
erefle :f, Aftowld,a, brabling woman ;alfatat-
mes, Calis, ling bufwife, pratling goffip.
dennes, lur- tie fi A pratling,talking, babling; idle ppeech,
vaine talke tedions difcou fing,
heed fraine ufeur.as Caufaian; alfoya baler pratlertatlr as
‘M. erate talker, one whofe tongue neuer refts ; al/o,
. ¢ ICP: bookes) as price a partie ina fisitjor
tbe tte black Clé : fas Caufeufle. ..
nt, : Caufled'va Ayfement. The Vottome of a iakes ; 5 the
c Try place wherein Hew - Ligh
auftique : com, Cauflickes burning, [caulding, (toi
a the 5 shinne ; alfo, pins pepe
, taft,
ame Caut: m.caute : f Craflie, fublile wilie, fly; wariead-
a ci cunning,circumfpect.
uteleufement. Cauiclonfly, fubtily, cunningly, fti-
‘ Su crafily, deceitfilly ouerreachingly.
fe oa auteleux: m.cufe: f, Cautelous,deceitfull, guilefüll,
ue » coufèning ; full of fleights, wiles, fetches,rea-
L
inf Chictlle: f. Awile, cautell, fleight ; acraftie reachor
often, ot fetchsgeilefilislene or endeuor; alfa, craft, fabtile,
ir ila nar tn gees.
er. Todeceine,beguilescoufen,ouerreach,
cake ont emenht, Slily, craftily, Fsiae che füubtily, warily,
hh <circarafpe lly aduifé


ie: m, A cauter; a fécrine bot yron ; pre
pena) x ais ‘to burn 3


Carte vt ry ae ich a ne
burnes aëtually,and incontinently; as, feaul A
red-bot mettall ; wood through-burnt,Grc. N

Cauttere à bouton. The button cauter ; fmooth, and


the skinne issonely to be opened for an iffue,

Pages circulaire, The circular cauter; à made of
inted butions, [et roundsot in ating, theveby to

i the more e off tually,

Cautere claval. A certain canter that goes little, le


er than the skinne. >.
ihe ac hae if cauter sis Like a life
in the beat long makes


flax pin beope-
ned by a Trepane. so ie
Cautere ental. The fined: canter made ie epi
* of a.two-ed; ed ford. ae
tere olivaire, The oline cae stemmed ie
ce made like an oline flone: ;: efter)


: giana Te ace 4
canter, wh mens oar fear re
went corr pt na Gangrenes. : 33) Sh


Digitized-by Go: gle
* 30 ~~ =" °


Tela bonne caufe qui eft condemné : Prov good


héaded like a button; fit to cauterize 1 whereof |


_ tearmed otherwife Ruptoire,and Veficatoire. Er >
~ Cautere punétual. The punétuall or pointed cauters


open impoflumes.


e " M Square,and altogether [harpe pointed, and fis
| CRauon : : f. A cauterifation,or cauterixing,


Cauterizé: m.ée : f.cauterized; burned; fear ed,or clo-


fed upwith fire,or fierie medicines,


Cauterizèr. To cauterize ;10 feare, burne, or clofz up
rte fre fre-hot inftruments, yrons, Seite hl


Cautell ts as Cautelle.


Caution: fA caution; a fuertie,pledge,or bayle Sars
ailing, (wertifbip, fecuritie. re
nie bourgeoife. Looke Bourgeois.
Olabonne caution: Glron, He # a2 bone man
Cane I would not take bis mord for a button.


¢. as Caution ; isertifbip, :
Caution eee ée:f. PISE MT NT that


Sa pat in fuertiesà


Cautionner. Tobe bound, become rire "er into


baile...


Cautionheur: m. 4 faertie,p poe


Cauvette. 4 Choughor Fa


Cay.as Quay ; Alia Sempculen nied cad ofan |
imperfect periodyand marked thus |
Cayer: mA quire of written papers a Hp >
tem booke dinided into equal parts,
Gaymander. as Caimander.
añderie. #5 Caimanderie.
Caymant mil certaine great Lixard,or crocodile that


lues in bot riners.


Cayreux: m, eufe : f.. Worme-eaten | or month-ea


ten.


Cayfferone little cheflor coffer of wood: qLangued,
Cayflon : m. 4 wooden cheft,or coffer: ss ae :


Cazole.#s Calole,


Cazotim.A coteor final houfe.

Ce. (A Pronowne demonfiratine) this ; ; alfo,that ; 4,
it; and, (going before any (plurall) termination of the
Verbe Etre) thefe,or tbofe : Put afier that Verbe, in
a queflion,tis asthe Latine Interrogatine Ne; as, eft
ce ma femme ?ferace demain qu'il viendra? 15 this
my wife or no ? or,Is not this my wife? what ? will be
one tomorrow? or Will he not come to Pirate


Here within sin this place ; in this boue,


Er re little bulch-backt, mifhaper, or ke sé


Ceci.æs Ce.


Ceciliane : if The wa water chaîne ofa bit,


Cecilie: f The blind worme,or floworme. |, - hs Cu
Cecine: f. Beef? growne rie, ved with lo


by the fire; Martlemas-beefe.


Ceci :£, Blindne(fe, da RS 2
a cas


this,this very thing.
Céder. !


tint) Ibi, ri à


LATE


Toyeeld,grant,o7 er
- mM mari SF eles AEE Ls “aN


ee = The ui. FT ES


Te Es ae


Original.from


THE.OHIO STATE -UNUVBESSEEY.


Pa = re


CEI


Cedriac. A kind of Pome-citron, called fo in Pro-
uence,
Cedride : £, The fruit,or berrie of the low Cedar.
Cedric : f. The roxen, or pitch that iffues from the great
edar


Cedar,

Cedrin: m. The fiskin ; alittle yellowifh bird that re-
Sembles the Canarie bird; but fings more, and more
fweetly, than fhe.

Cedule: £ 4 cedule; a (crowle,band-writing or priuat
inflrument in writing ; a bill, obligation, acquitance,
oc, figned onely with bis band that paffeth it; alfè, an
addstion, or fèrowle annexed vato aTeftament, or
other deed.

Cegué : £, Hemlocks. :

Ceïnét : m. A girdle ;a band, or firing to bold a thing in
with,

Ceinét: m.cte:f. Girt, begirt befet about ; enuironed,
incompaljed , inclofed, beld, or hemd,jn on all fides,
Ceinétes: ft be bends,or wales of a fhip; the thicke led-

ges that compaffe th'outfides thereof,

Ceinéture: f. 4 girdle ; alfo,the waftband of a bofe,er
doublet. :

Ceinéture ardente. The fierie Zone, feated between
the two Tropickes, and ordinarily called , Torrida
Zena.
Cei


ippiere. À belt, arming girdle, or
of the old fafhion.

Deinéture dorée, A golden girdle ; (in former times
sworne onely by fuch as sent for bone women ; fornoe
ted whoores were forbidden it; yet,

_ Bonnc renommée vaut mieux que ceinéture do-
| rée: Prov. A good report excells all ornaments,
inéture de ducil. Sce Dueil,

La ceinéture dela Royne. A certaine pecuniarie
right,or taxe due vato the Queene of France ; Looke
Royne,

songer fa ceinéture. À woman to gine ouer
the adminifiration, or difpofition of ber deceafed and
indebted husbands goods ; (a phrafé appliable alfo
> unto any Adminifrator; See Quiver la ceinGture ;


| apres, |
leëter fa ceinéture à terre. Looke letter,
Les mains penis à leur ceinéture: Ils penfent
ui leurs femmes tiennent les mains, &c. TI
their wines line peakingly at bome, and p
Jrawes,plucke daifies, picke rufbes, or blow their fin-
gers; generally the pbrafe imports,an idle,and laxie fa-


e.
: us la ceincture. À certaine tricke in
prifons ; Looke Parler.
Large de bouche, &eftroié de ceinéture. Open
mouthed,but clofe banded. or
+ Ia perdu fa ceincture. He hath neither money, nor
meanes left him: all is gone.


Les dlaceinéture. Idly, floath lef
Fr ti cation,”
Ge laceinéture. To breake, to fall bankrupt, to


6 to fut vp his {hep windowes ; {


(a8 th did, and of dayes our
b, L . fe , = -


.


r
a. uen in thefe times 2


hi -


Ceingtarés mere Gan mer 361-1530


CR ee ON PURE © °°" CU
fi ‘ .


C EL


Cancomer, as Ceindre; To gird , or put ona gir-
e


4) Cein@urette. A little girdle.


SO wears cary Ceinturon,
indre. To gird ,begivd; enuiron, inc bold,
nr all ftce PO a
Ceint : m.te :f, Looke Cein&,
Ceinture. Looke CeinGure,
Ceinturier: m. A girdle-maker.
Ceinturon : m. pr rs Small girdle ; alfo the firapjor
Jide-peece of apaire of bangers, *
ifan. A vaffall,or fubieét unto a Lord: €Bearnois,
ber <= aoe aren of tbe fecond, and
third perfon)that,euen that ; alfo,the aét you wot of.
Celade: f. pr om rtos a reese
Cele, A kind ofpreferue.

Clé : m.éc :€ Hidden, concealed, kept fècret ; cones
red, diflembled. :
Celebration: f A celebration, folemnizing, celebra-

ting 3 alfo,arenowning; a making famous, or gle-


TOU.
Celebre: com. Famous, renewmed , glorions, bonow-


_ rable,
Celebré: m.ée:f.celebrated,or folemnixed with great
Pree alfo, magnified, renowmed, exceedingly
bonoure


Cclebrer. Tocelebrate,or folemmize, with great affem-
blies of people;alfo,to magnifie make nf nd
abroad the reputation, or fame of,

ité : f. Celebrities glorie, honour, renowme, fa

moufneffe , a good name , a great report in the world.

pi rg Secretly, conertly, biddenly , primily, by
ealth, :

po bide,conceale, keepe fecret,couer , cloake, dif

mble,

Celerier:m. The Yeoman of a fellar.

Celerin: m. A little, yellow-headed, and white-bodied
Sifh, lining in the fea(and infome lakes)and refembling
the Sardinos fo neere, that many take it to bee the


Céerité :£ Celeritie, peedinefe, baf, frifinefe light


neffe, e.
Celefte : com. Celeftiall, heaucnly dinine,
Paën celefte, 4 wild Peacocke.
iel: m.clle: € Celeftiall, beanenlie,
Celeume. The fhowt,or noyfe that Mariners make when
they weigh anker,or do any other office in the fhip with
ioyned firength ; an encouraging found.
Celiac : m. aque : f. whence ; Le flux celiac. A con-
tinuall thinne flux caufed by the weakene[fe of the fo
mackes and accompanied with fretting, or paine in the


(4 .
Maladie celiaque. 4n extreame weakene(fe, and
difabilitie of difgefien, in the flomacke accompanied
with a moft thinne,or waterie flux.
Celiaque: com. Troubled with belly-ache, or fretting,
cat a continual flux proceeding from the weakenelfe
1] 1e fe 14 :


Celibat: m.Single-lifé; the conditien,or eftate of an-un-
pe ot cs A A es Lis TS VS


elibe :com. Vamaried, fin le; folitavie alone.


CEN


ding,or bending,towards beanen. _ x:
Celle : £ The boufe,’or manfion of, and a communitie
of goods among , villeineg or perfons of a feruile con-
dition ; theirthldren alt, being at fchoole, or in fer-
act, by their parents appointment are [aid to been la


elle, +
Celie.rhe féminine of Celuy ; fle.

e. Sellerage; a diète payed for the laying of
_ nunesto fellars ,
Ccilerier:m. A Butler, Drawers Xeoman of the Sel-


ar,

Celoce. A kind of (wift Brigantine,or Pinace,denifed,at
__Sirlt,by the Rhodians : (Rab.

Celfitude : £. celftude,bighmeft,excellencie ; (tearmes
conferred on Princes.)
cluy : m. celle : The fame, .

Celuy-la, That fame(man,érc.)

Cement: m. Cement ; a flrong , and cleaning morter,
made (for the moft part ) of tyles , potfhards , glaffe,
fiat, the diol]? of yron,érc, beaten to duft, and incor-
porated with lime,oyle, greafe,roxen,and water;Looke
Ciment.

Cemeticre : m. 4 churchyard.
De nouveau medecin cernetiere boflu: Prov. An
unexperienced Phyfitianfattens the churchyard,
Veau mal cui, & poules creuds font les cemetie-
res boflus : Prov, Raw veale, and chickens make fat

= churchyards.

Cermiterre. A4 Scimitar , or Turkfhfivord.

Cenacle.Looke Senacle.

Cencer. Torecken, eficeme, account among his reue-
nue; to number, tell ynufter; alfo,to rate,affeffe,taxe,
_ value, prixe, |
| Cenchre: m. A gréenifh Serpent, 07 Snake whofe bodie

_& couered all oner with skales ; and {pots refembling

> Mullet feeds ; (thofe that be flung by bim fall into a

end flecping lies Jorasy +

Ce “A green Ô Serpent, bi
about the head , verie towards tl tayle,

full of Milt-refembling fpots (onely) on the bellie; or

Cenchre.

‘Cenc e. as Cenchrite.

Cencivé. as Cens ; Aifo an inheritance held by, or

_Sibie unto, Cens ; alfo, the title of, or a Tenure by,


. Cens. ; ‘
Cendre : f, Afhes; cynders ; imbers. '
Cendre gravelée. Afhes made of the burat lees, or


Le-


dregs of wine.
~ Cendre des Orfeyres. as Cendrées des. Or-
TOP
c jour des res. .
re rue Lets pie ECC fay,
or sat home. = TEE
Ce rs Gein Gat fie oie alfa, afb-
coloured. ~~ wie 2.8


| Cendrée: & melting, or purifiing of filuer, &
Ppa bee €, Lumpe,or ball o
0 melted; alfo, anafh-heape sand, a place, «
burnt vato afbes. -
+ mammockes, or bits of mettall , and found, af
tera melting, ing Goldjmithes firnace, and among
he fiveepings of his fhop; Thefe the Finor puts into
and hauing wafhed them, pickes out that
worth ought from


“ionized by Go. gle


Cendrées, & laveures des Orfevres. The afbie


À
Cend
b
flow
Cendr
afhes
Le
G
à


CEN


thereby undertaking for the goodneffe , and value


thereof,


Cendrée fauvage. wild Marierome, grove Maric-
>. rome, Organ, Origanie,
endreux:m. cule: f. Afbie, fill of afhes ; alfo,pale,
. wanne,lew,of a dead, colour or complexion; alfo, lin
ther, fluggifh, idle; whofe nofé is exer banging ouer
the fire and bence ;
Au Chat cendreux jamais ne tombe rien en
- Gueule 2 Prov. The idle boufi-doue neuer getteth
ought,
Cendrier: 4 maker, or feller of afbes; alf,a place to
keepe, or corner to throw, afbesra; alfa, à fluggard,
ackesdlesbie ; houfe-dous ; one that fits lurking
in the chimney corner. à
endroyé : m, ée: f. Burat unto, or turned into,


Cc .


eS ee ee ee Te LÉ


To buvne unto, or turne into yafbes.

Cene : fA füpper; (a word not much ufed but by
thofe of the Religion, who thereby meane, the Lords
Supper, ;


—_—


pe Et

Cenolade:f. Ayerke,lafh, or firipe with a girth,
engle: f. 4 girth ( for a borfe ; ) Looke Sangle.
Il en avoir tout le long des cengles. Hee was cour- |
Sed cudgelled, or did Soundly ; alfo,pee bad taken À
in bis full lading of liquor, p

Cenglé : m.ée: £ girt,girded,

Cengler. To gird,or girth,
enotaphe: m. .4 monument,hearfe, or emptie tombe
erected in memorie, of to the bonour, of a great Pera


fon.

Cens: m, Rent of Affife, Quit rent, old vent, chiefe
vent; the firfl pecuniarie charge thats layed on con-
quered , or vnrented land, as a figne, or in acknew-
ledgement , of the dircét Seignorie of him that grants
it: Thus charge had it oviginall from the firft con-
queft of Gallia by the French; whofe Princes gi-
wing whole territories unto their Captaines ÿ they
made a dinifion thereof among their fouldiours, and
the naturallinhabitants of the countrey , on conditi-

‘1 0%, that thofe fhould offift, and attend them in the

” warres (which condition, being atruf}, they intitled,
Fief) and that thefe fbould till their land, and pay
wato them for it fuchyearely vents, or tributes, as they
bad (ovmerly yeelded the Remanes (by whome thoje
rents crc were tearmed Cenfas;)and thus this charge
impofed at firft as a refemblance of former feruitude,
continues to this day a marke of a bafe, or ferwile, Te-
mure... D

Cens capital. A chieft, or capital! Cens's chiefe |
rent.

Cens à chechage. which muft bee demasinded by

- Lord Cenfuel , or bis deputie, of the Tenant, or de- |
tayner of the inheritance, that yeelds it; therein dif- |
ferent fiom that Cens which is payable at a place, |
and day, certaine. r PA
Censà cher pris. 4 racked Cens, whichverie neere
counteruailes the yearely reuenue of the land, and.

which being extraordinarie, and chargeable to the te-
nant be pe Ep difcharged of the Ventes, and Re-
levoifons, which the ordwmarie Cens carries with


it.

Cens à iour nommé, Looke Nommé, ‘
~ Cens mort. A Cens feck , or dead Cens} à Quit
rent ; which, ‘it felfe, yeelds the Lovdno manner

‘ora €, at the death, or change of
nt; (This Cens +s no figne of ig=


Jade


Ofigiga! from


- n >
THE OHIOISTATEUN IVE


D OUT  —<« ~~ -


w


CEN


Cens à quefte, ou requerable. as Cens à cher-
age.

Cens rogo.The fame, \

Cens truant. 4 Cens/ècke, or dead Cens; a a

Censyor Quit vent ; of ne profit, or aduantage (ot

than what comes by it felfe)to the Lord,or owner there


of.
Chef Cens. A chiefé Cens,or chiefe rent.
Cher cens.Looke Cens à cher pris.
Droiét cens. The firft, capitall,er chiefe Cens; tear-
med fo belike, becaufe tis a marke of dire Seignorie.
Gros cens. A furcharge of Cens upon a fecond grant
of land ,wbich by reafon thereof lands doubly charged;
viz. both with the firftCens, which ener fillowes it;
and with this, which euer exceeds the firft; and is pro-
portionable in fome refpeëts unto a Fee-farme vent.
Menu cens. The ‘it ccptel, or chiefé Cens ; tear-
med fo becaufe tis commonly payed by pence,and halfe.
pence; or exceeds not a verie fall proportion.
Premier cens ; &,pur cens. The fame; or,a Quit
vent,a chiefe rent ; a Cens of Affife.

Cenfable : com, For which, or to whom, Cens is due;
alfo,which may be charged with Cens.

nfe: m. as Cens; alfo,a generall,and publiche valu-
ation of private mens goods,and polféffions.

Cenfe: f. A farme ; alfà,Fee-farme.

Cenfé:m, ée :£ Reckoned,efleemed, accounted ; num.
ren 3 alfo, rated, feffed, taxed,valu-
ed,prixed,

Cenfeable: com. For which, or to whom, Cens u due ;
al(o,which may be charged with a Cens.

nfer. 70 reckon,efteeme, account among his reuenue ;
to number ,tell mufter ; alfo,torate,affelJe,taxe,value,


prize. ,

Contes: m. A Cenfor ; or Comptroller ; a Mafter
ARE, reformer of manners, punifher of dif-
orders.

Cenfier: m.-A farmer, or Fee-farmer; one that payes
a Quit rent,or chiefe vent for the land he bolds; (gene-
vaky)one that holds by the titleofCens.

Cenfier :m.cre: f. Of Cens; yeelding Cens; or , te
whom Cens is due. à |
Iuftice cenfiere.as lufticeC


by Cens ; alfo,the Seigneurie thereof: :
ff :m.iue: f. Cenjine; held by the title of Cens;
or for which Cens 4 dues
Cenfive :f.2s Cens; Alfa, an inberitance beld by, er
Subieët vato, Cens ; alfo, the title of, or a tennte by,
Cens. ;


el: melle :f. Cenfuall; :
held by the title of Cens ; whereto Cens is due ; in re~


_ gard whereofCens w paied,
+= ice centaelle, Baft, or Low iurifdittion, belonging
404 reafon,or for the recouerie, of bis Cens,


Didized-hy Go. gle


otf a horfe.


enfuelle, oo
Cenfif:m. An inheritance, or eftate inland thats beld |


og


TT ES OT
bat ‘


C E P


Dones , and freeth Rauens (fo comes weake innocen-
fede the blocke, whilefh power full wickednelfe is win
at.) me


.
Cenfiurer, Tocenfirre controll, admonifh, veproue with


authoritie; te pronounce,or denonnce a beauie fentence
againfi (an )


Cent. 4 bundred.


aure: m, A (entawre ; one that is balfe « man,and


e. The hearbe Centorie.
Centaurée majeur.Great (entorie,
Æntaurée mineur. Small Centorie, common Cento.
rie,
Petite centauréc. The fame.


Centeine: £ A bundred ; the number, or proportion of


abundied; a Band,ov companie of a hundred.
Par centeines. By hundreds, bundred by bundred, in
great number, many together.

tenaire: com. Ofa bundred, containing the num-
ber of a bundred, ofa hundred yeares continuance, a
bundred yeares old,

tenier : m, A Centurion, Captaine,or Commannder


of a bundred fouldiors ec.
Cen


. Tocount,or cull out by hundreds,


te
Centidoine: f. Centinodie ; Knot-graffe , Way-graffe,


Rirds-tongue, Swwines-grafle, Bloud-wort, S.Innocents
bearbe.


Centiefine : m. 4 bundreth; a rate, or proportion,


of a bundreth; « bundle, or troupe, containing a bun-
dreth,

Droiét de centiefine. The bundreth per of a fibm
ieéts goods,or the value thereof, exaéted by fome Sour
raigne Lords,


Centiefme: com. The bundietb of.


itine d’une rouë : f. The boxe (er bole) of the mane
ofa wheele,


Centoire : £ Thebearbe Centorie, as Centaurée. _
Centon: in. Arapfodie ; « confiifed beape,or collection


of many different things,a mingle mangle of many mat-

bled. 2 confifedly bespi buen
tonifique: com. Confifedly heaping , or 4
: etal longs together; making, one worke of


tre:m. A center ; the verie middef}, or point in the

_ middeft, of any round, or circled thing.
Centurie: £. À centurie,or bundreth of; alfo, a certaine
puise of,or meafire for, gronnd,amounting to two


eth furlongs.
:m. The focke of atree,pr plant ; alfo,a logor clog,
of wood ; fuch a one as is bung about the neck of aran-
ing curre.
es ceps. A paire of Stockes for malefactorss


alfo , (out leffe properly ) fhackles , boults , fetters,
&


Ce
e :£, An bearbe thats verie like unto Brooke-lime,
or water Pimpernel (if it be not the fame.)
Cependant. Newerthele (fe, yet notwithflanding.yet for
alt that; Cependant que.The wbilefl that.
Co muraille, To vadermine, dig, breake, or cut
nearmall,at the foot,
le: m.The Pollard fifh.  :
Bo manie. Divination byan affes bead broy-
: com, Good fir the head, curing a difeafed
De belonging to, the bead.

_ Veine cephalique. The head Peine ; Looke Veine. _
a a pr one that col to x flocks ; or
ba eof them,er of thofé that are in them. 0"

é geofthemser of thofe Cepride:


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


‘ Se
Corcelé : m.ée: f. Hooped; incircled ; compaffed


C'E R


Cepride : m. Bawlme, :

Ceramite, Potters earth : @Rab.al/o, a pretious flone of
the colour of a tyle.

Ceranvienne :f.4 certaine pretious lone thats alwaics
ot 5 ene

Cerafte..4 mot venomous ferpent,called otherwife (and
the more properly in French) Serpent cornu; See
Cornu.

Cerat: m. A Plaifter made of waxe, Gummes , eC,
and certaine oyles ; wee alfo,callit, a Cerot, or Seare-
cloth.

Cerat fandlin. The purple clout wherewith Cookes
dye their Gellie ; or , a Searecloth made of Saun-


ers.

Ceraunobule. Thundering with Bulls; as the Pope.

Cerceau :m A circle, ring ; ; avound,or around
compaffe ; alfo, the Sercell, or Sarcell ( feather) of a
bawkes wing,
Cerceauicraquetant. The ierting circle which a Pea-
cocke makes with bis taile or a Turkie-cocke with bis
win


with a round or circle; fireaked, or {cored round as 4
circle,
Cerceler. To boope,incircle ;compaffe with a round, or
circle ; flveake,or [cove,vound as a circle. i
Cercelle : £, (The water-fowle called)a Teale.
celler: as Cerceler.
Cercerelle £4 rattle clicket,or clapper;alfo,a kalivell,
fackwind, fleingall ; alfo,a Teale.
( e. as Cercerelle (in the laft fence.)


v.m.)
Ca. f. A fearch, inquifition , inquirie , feckine
ter. à \
che ralongée. Th'in nt wherewith Mafèns
round ji illar AS


Se :
Cerché :m. ée: £ Searched, fought ; bunted, inqui-
red after ; felt,eroped, founded ; traced.
Cerchefi. Looke Sercifi. mt:
Cerchement: m. 4 féarching, feeking, bunting, inqui-
ring after ; al{o,an inquifition,ov examination.
Caer. Tofeck:, fearch,hunt, looke, or inquire after;
to trace, féele,grope, found. :
— Cercherlebrouft. To bunt after feafts,to play the pa-
a ee
cher chappe cheute. ppe.
Cercher mitt ou il n'eft qu'onze heures. To
e for a thing which is not, or, before it is, to bee
bad ; alfo, to make faults of trifles ; alfo, to feeke
after bis owne burt, or to purchafe bis owne


bar
Cacia en vi soute any i Curioufly


pieds. te |
looke for more at a mans bands than bee is able to per-
Cercher noifes pour noiferces.To pick a quarel out |


of trifling occafions.
ui m'aura perdu ne miaille ‘en
1à. (A phrafe, whereby one fignifies Davies mile ef


a countrey.


at
À


Chacun DY chet femblable: Prov. Ewerie perfon |-


Seekes his Peere. )
Tcerche trop bas la charité qui fouille prez des
. feffes: Prov. The charitie istoo bafe that floopes fo

law as the buttockes; or, hee — low fer cha-
OCKS «


ie that gropes about the butt
Le fon : Prov. The foole indenors
ae vnbappie; or , the foole fludies bis
owne .


Cer


Quia affaire defeuledoit cercher; &; quia be-
foing de feulecerche avec ledoigt: Prov. wefay}
(with fome little difference) Let them that bee acold
blow at the cole,


Cercheur: m. A fécker , fearcher ; inquirer , tra-


- > hunter ; looker after; a feeler , groper , foun-


er.
Cercle: m: A circle ; a compaffe, a round ; al/o, a boope


for caske ; Looke Cicle.
Cercle finiflant, Th'Orixon ; a circle that dinideth
the ce part of beauen from that which to vs is in-
vifb


Cercle vertical. Seeke Vertical.
Uyquarrele cercle. His fquaring is there out of


On ne ift point le vin aux cercles :Pro. The
goodnes dom is not known by the fafbion,or ftrength
of the hoops that begird it,
:m.éef. iacircled compaffed ; begirt ; bound,
or hooped about. ARE
Cerelet : m. A little circle; round;compaffe ; hope ; al-
foya _— wreath of Oxisr tmigs,to fet under a difh on
a table, ; ù
rclet à feu. Awreath, or circlet of wild-fire; a
fire-worke made lige a wreath,or circlet.
Cerclouéte : f. A paire of weeding tongues:
Cetcot:m. 4 fauegard,
Cercueil: m. A coffin ; alfo(but not fo properly)a beere;
alfo,a tombe,graue, fepulcbre.
Cerebelle, for Cervelle: f.The binder part of the bead
wherein the memotie is lodged;
Cerebrin : mine: f. Headte,yafh, giddie,according to
bis owne braine, after bis owne fancie,or humor.
Cerelle: £, A kind of pleafant perrie, made of the peare
Carifi.
Ceretnonial: m, ale:f. Ceremonial ; of, or belonging
to,cer emonies.
nie: £, À ceremonie ; a rite,cufiome, or fafbion
ingor about yeligion. | :
ieufernent. Leoke Ccrimonieufement,
Ceremonieux. Ceremonious ; full of ceremonies.
Cerf: m. 4 flag,a red deere; abart.
Cerframé, A raine deere.
Cerf volant. The great borned beetle ; or bull-


1€.
Le de cerf. Hartshorne , Sandwort ,  Bucke-
borne plantaine, Crowfoot plantaine , bearbe Ivie, or
Eve. ;
L'herbeau cerf. Haztsafedder; fuppofed to bee a |
kind of wild Parfenip. :
Langue de cerf, The hearbe Harts-tongne 5 or
Harts-tongue ; ordinarily miflaken for, and made all
orie witb,Scolopendria. : =
Oeil de cerf. À kind of wild Parfenip, that beares a
red flower,and is net ill to be eaten.
Poilde cerf. The dunne,fandie, er decre, colour of
ome borfes ec,
Ronce de cerf. Rough Bindweed:
Faire le cerf de. To paffe a thing fleightly over, to
make no confeience,nor account, of it.
Au cerfla biere, au fanglier le barbier: Prov. (So
dangerous a beaft is an enraged ftag.)
êtte. metre. =
Cerfouir. To dig the ground about the roots of trees ; or
as Sarfouits ;
Con 7 bearbe ren er D
vola e great horned beetle,or buil-flie.
tille:f. Afinall tittle, or addition to the foot of a
P ÿ < Clas


CER CER


C (as in ¢) which makes it be pronounced as an S.
imonialement, (eremonially , renerently, religi-


tation of marches, an appointment of meeres betweene
the lands of feueral (priuate)men ; or betweene priuat
mens lands and thofe which belong to the publike ; as
commons, bigh-wayes, riuers ; Oc.

Cer :m.ée : Bounded, limited whofe mar.


ches are inted, whofe meeres d, and
publicke Oficers > whofe affigne »4 fet, by


oufly.

Catosll A ceremonie ; a rite,cuftome,or fafbion in,
or about, religion.

Cerimonieufement. Ceremonion ly, with great reue-
rence many cervmonics, much ado.

Cerimonieux: m.eufe: f.ceremonions; affecting, fol~


| : : quemanement : m.47” ing of bounds an ap=
; lowing,or full of,ceremonies. à ; Pointing of marches, a Setting of meeres betweene land
° a in: we Serin. A finall bright-greene bird. and land, À
rin-perfe. A bright skie-colour, . To limit, affigne,or (et meeres, appoint
Cerise: f, A cherrie garden; an orchard of cherrie marches, layout the pr + Pid ee”


trees.
Cerife: f. A cherrie.
Cerifes d'outre mer. The berries of the bearbe Night.
Shade , called by out Hearbarifis | winter cher
ries.
Faire d'une cerife trois morceaux. -To eat nicely,
feed daintily ; to mince it, or make it goodlie.
C'eft folie de manger cerifes avec fon feigneur :
Prov. No wife man will be very familier with one that
is much better, or mightier than bimfelfe; befides, bee
that cates cherries with bis mafler gets not many good
ones.
Le re faoul trouve les agrifes ameres : Pro.
Looke igeon.
Cerifée:f. The reuenue that comesin, or profit thats
made;by cherries. 3 ;
Cerifier : m. Acherrie tree.
Cerifier bas,ou petit. The dwarfe cherrie tree,
Cerifin : m. The little bird called a Siskin.
Cerne : m. A circle , round, compaffe ; inclofure ;
: turning round , fetching a compalfe , wheeling a-
wat


aneurs: m. (ertaine fworne Officers, who
bane authoritie to fe, or pluc vpyneer vis bounds
betweene fewerall mens poffeffions ; and to examine,
reférme incroachments made vpon bigb-wayes, com-


mons viners crc.
ex :m.Tb'vaprofitable wild oke,tearmed,the Holme .
0)


Cerres:f, as Serres; A bawkes talants ; alfo, the pulfe
called great Chicblings, or flat peafin ; Locke Pois


Corres fauvages. Wild Chichlings milke Vetches.
Cerrefine: £ Gumme ; or liquor becomming like r0xen,


or gumme.
aa m. A certaintie,certaine truth, firene[e, af.
redneffe.
Tefmoing de certain. A witneffe that affures,or faies
be knowes,all he fayes. !
Certain: maine : F.Sure,doubtlefe, vmauoidable; af:
Juredmoft true, vnfained: approued ; cleere, manifeft;
1 nr” 3 firme, fleadie, faft ; conflant,
truftie,
Certaines perfonnes que. Certaine, or fome perfons
greg perfonnes q » or fome perf
nement. Certainly, doubtlefly,furely, affuredly,
pr truth, queftionte[fe ; vnauoydably; cleerely,
Are :


out,

Cerné: m.ée :f. Incircled, compaffed with a circle ; in-
uironedor inclofed roundabout; alfo, rounded, com
paffed,or wheeled about.


Z eau : m. The kernell of a nut,erc, manifetly,
oa Pers A É of garlic, pew ana Ciné, dé:
ner.To incircle,compaffe with a circle; inuiren, or | Certe: àla certe. Certainly,do qneftionleffe.
| ins ie che; 210 26 mike «and ich ADS Cereal da MN En
à dette doper : flit, ov inci delicate p ya’, Ss e L =
es arbres, To a round flit, or incifion , ri 5 # Certainement,
‘into the barkes of Les  - or cut themvound a- | — “A certes. In foot ‘spire roundly, throughly, te
bout. ' pur itbout dalliance or delay.
Cerner des noix.To crackWallnuts; orto open them, ateur:m. Acertifier,aftertainer, a[furer ; al-
and picke out their kernels,with a Cernoir. {o,an Informer or notice-giner.
Cernoir : m. À little blunt, and bulch-backt yron toole, Certification: f. 4 cie palfeport ;alfo,a certif-
or knifé (of (ome two fingers length,e> hauing a wood- Mt aaa alli à of. :
den handle about an ju thickand three fingerslong) | Certifié: m.ée:f. Certifie sAljured, afcertained ; in. |


wherewith countrey people cut ripe wallnuts in twe
786 they are yet inthe fhale) and picke out the ker-
ne


De l'arbre d'un preffoirle manche d'un cernoir:
Prov. To make a verie great, a verie fmall,thi


formedor aduertifed of; made Acquainted with.

T. To aljuve, auouch,afcertaine ; alfo, to certi-
Pe;informe, aduertifè,or fend word of ; gine notice, or
intelligence,vnto,

Certiore: m.ée : £. Certified, informed, aduertifed of,


altering, ener cutting away, made acquainted with.
peece pre it. : M itude: f Acertaintie ; an affured notice, or true
as Ceroirre, | | knowledge of.
: Ceroine: £. Azy ointment or plaifier, whereofroxen, or | Cerve:f. 4 Hind. -
wax ave the principall ingredients. Cerveau: m. The braine.
(Ceromantic:£. Dinination, or foothfaying,bywax put | eaux à bourlet, Ignorant Lawyers, dunfical
water, — : » pettifoegers. =


raat ne ight, giddie,rafb, bumoreus,
Fes
k erve.


Ê Avoir oir le vnpeu gaillard, To be bumer
_— 2ifh, fantafficall newfangled, he


CES


CET


Eftre en cerveau. To be in his right wits ; to be flay-
ed, well-aduifed, and out of aduife,refolute,or fècure ;
to be prouided againft all chances , armed for all ef-
ayes,readie for whatfoener fhall befall

elat:m, 4x excellent kind of dry faucidge that
refémbles our blacke 1g , but that it is fome-
what thicker , and fhorter ; and is eaten could in


flces,

Ceruele: m. The binder part of the braine,next to the
nape of the necke; makes but a tenth of the whole,
and is dimded from the ref} by Dura, & pia,


die, fantaflicall, harebraind,
Ceruelle:f. The braine; or, binder part of
wherein the memorie 5 lodged, the feate of the me-


morte. = ’
Ceruelle à double rebras.4 dunce,blockbead,iober-
nol, ioulthead, thicke-skinne, dull fellow ; one that 4
vbftinate ly ft; one mto whom no wit can be beam
ten, no underflanding driuen.
Gens de cervelle, ou (qui font) bicnen cervelle.
Wi fs or faved people; [uch as baue found braines, or
ood beads.

Feniren c cervelle. To keepe inawe, or in play; to
arme with becd by often allarums ; to barrie, bold
buificd or in breath.

Cervellicre: £. 4 full, or falet,of iron.

ical: m.ale: f. Belonging 10 the nape, or binder
part, of the rete.
Artere ceruicale, Secke, Artere.
bros cervicale. 4 branch + + rer u ve
whic alo: thetranfuerfe proceffes of the
arr à my the membrane led ura ma-
ter, an sin it,

ier. Loup Cervier. See Loup-cervier.


tie vam.

Cervoife. Beere : f

Cerule:f. Cerufè, or, white lead, wherewith womei
paint; differs from Lithargie (called alfo, white lead)
for this is made of the groffefi lead, as it sin the mine;
that, of lead refined , out of the mine.

eux :m. eufe:f, F ef Cerufe; beplaiftered alt

ouer with fard.

Ces: ni. A faycefing, leaning, forbearing alfa pit
ting to filence, or forbidding to proceed,

Ces (The plural : ) Theis.

Cetarien:m. enne: Sectes af, er belonging


taCefar,
| Enfinement Cefarien. The birth of a chi
ps bm af ba mabe omit de ab


Panne a eé:f. supe troubled, pele


'_ vexed in mind;
Ceffation: £. Ace ve) ceafing, flay, paufe, interme
le for a time;


__, fron, dient ee aning
a vacation ; alfo, lingering, flack, > loitering,


br The fame,


ceffe. ne fey win itr eng
à rte, per; imnttinen,


= STE en, pets |


PAHeR


Go gle


Mater
Ceruelins m, ine:f. Brainle(fe, beaddie, wilfull,gid-
the bead |


continued , intermitted, forborne, flayed, beld backe,
or a oner for a time; alfo,lingered, flackened,loi-
tere }

Ceffemnent : m. Looke Ceffation,
le Toceale, forbeare ; flop, flay, pawfe, leaue of,
ii ouerste furceafésdiscontinue;mtermit,refl a while,
ld baske ke for a time; alfo,to linger,loyter flacken,play


Oy sah Yeeldable, refiguable , abandonna-~
Ceffion : £ Yeelding vp, or giuing oer ; an aban-
donment of, or departure fiom; and particularly, a


ining of place,
Cas des Biens. An abandonment of bis owne
goods , or a venouncement of bis title to another


mans, thereby to bee but outof the reach, or dan-
ger, of creditors ; This muft bee done (efpecially in
the firft cafe) by the debtor bimfelfe (vagivt , and
bare beaded) in the prefence of a fill Court : Af-
ter which bee is not confiraynable to poy bis cre-
ditours more than can bee ee by the fale of bis


goods,

Ceffionnaire : com, À ceffionarie ; 3 i swe
dons , or giues up his goods as
Ceffion de bien who dough bee Tone Die ie


Fil thereby., yet 5 bee not held fo bafè as a ban


upt.
Ceffiouner: To eat betweene meales ; to take an afier-
noones repaft: €Norm.
ft :m : fes Cet.
Caine: m, A ftudded girdle, which (inold time)the
Bridegroome about bw Bride as foone as they
pore maried , and tooke off when they went to bed,to~


e ther,
Cetin, . A kind of yellow floue whereof beads are


Cervinefpine.The flrub way Mmes laxa- Cefluy. (A Pronowne Demonfiratiue ) this many alfo,
e.


« (With addition of that locall Aduerbe) this
man bere; this verie man,this fame man,

Cefue: £. The Sap of tiees ; Looke Seve,

Cesure :£. A cutting, (ettion,dinifion,

Cet: m. cette: f. This; that; it sas Ce ; but with this
difference; that whereas Ce is put before words that
begin with a confonant,or H pronounced(as in naturall
French it 5) Cet precedes thofe which begin with a
vowell or with H umpronouaced (asin words derined
from the Latine.).

Cetacé. poiffon cetacée. Of the kind of whales,

Cete. a Ducs The feminine of Cet.

Ceterach : m. The bearbe Scale-fearne, Stone fart,
Fiager-feavne,Miltewaft,

Cethin.4 kind of wood that corrupts not.

Cetier de bled. À quarter of corne ; or as Septier.

ee m. À rowell for a brusfed , or impoflumed

Je. is £ Sih,

Cetuy.Looke C

Cevilere 3£. The Irie pile of fi.

Ceucheter. To in the eare,


ond f. A whetflone. >
es : F.-Chiues,chibols, —


Cerne The fame.
se the i?
Hoge and ae pu rm
the Luft of kine after the bull


$:m, Be an ada urrie
“a as goats
er P iy Chable: |


Oridinal:fram
THE -OHIOISTATE EAST


_ dt 2


‘yh “ae ee


+
>
27

2


Rod L e FORT 77


C H A


C H A


Chable :m. 4 cable,or great rope.

Chable+f. as Cable, ;fem.

Chablis. bois chablis. #ind-falls; the sees, or bran-
ches of trees which the wiad! bash ouerthrowne,

abot: m. The little fifh called a Gull, Bullhead, or
Millers-thumbe ; alfo,the ¢ little watervermine called,a
Bullhead.

Chabre : m. the (vay-fifh tearmed a Pungar.

Chabrer. To reare vpright ; or,to rife bigh-before; asa
goat that would reach to a bough,

Chace. Looke Chañle.

Chacetsas Chafler ; Te bunt ee,

Chaceur. A buater,erc; Looke Chaffeur,

Chacie :f. Blearcdneffeor bleave-eyedn efése runniag,
or wateri{hrelfe of the eyes accompanied with a paine-
full hooting and redaeffe.

Chacieufeté. as Chacie(Inextremitie, J

Chacicux: m.cufe: f, Bleare-eyed ; whofe eyes are fiull
of water,and bbud-fhot.

Chacun. (Looke Chafcun) each one,euerie man.

Chacunerie : f. Every ones owne ; that which particu-
larly concernes,or belongs unto,euery ome.
Chacun à fa chacuneric. uerie one to bis owne
bome,or about his owne bufineffe.

Chaffauder. To ftaffold,or fet up feaffalds; alfota ft
upon feaffolds ; or fhew upona ftafold. wi,

Chaffault : m. 4 fcaffold.

urté:m,ce: f. Difgaifed, blotted, blurred, be-
‘imeared marred 3, Rribled,

Chaffourrer.To disfigure, blot barre marresbefmeare,

alfo,to (cribble, or write sll-fauoure


Se chaffourrer.To dar bebe lés sal be”


drunken.

Chafouyn : m.A Polecat,

Chafourrer. Looke Chaffourrer.

Chagrigner. Looke Chagriner,

Chagrin: m. Carke ; melancholie, care, sn ;
plexitie beauineffe,anxietic,, penfiuenelfe, sah Logg
anzisifh of wind; alfo, a difeafe,er maladie; efpecially,
fich a one as comes by melancholie,

Chagrin: m, ine:f# Chagriné; Seema lai,
fad,melancholikesout of quiet. «o>

otha  crieued.perplcsed Masala

C ve beauily , fadly, arab,

yon melan


Chagriner. ae ae grieve, trouble, perplex.
fill ih cate asin fenelonchalian uifh. : À
néux:m.eufe: f. eme penfiue per-
plexed heauie;fadful of anxite,fraught with anguifh,
inherent Fan
teas C ante 1
Chaine :f. A chaine ; Looke Chene.
Chaine de drap, ou de Tiflerand, The wooft of
cloth ; the vices à me in weaning runs ouercroffe it,
:-Chainede S.Philibert..A counterfeit chaine,
Chainette. Aïlittle chaine.
on d’une chaine. A linke ofa chaine.


| Lechainon du col. Thema: es
r men the: ——


ne. ~ Digitized by Co gle ae


“Prendre chair. To battle, get flefh, wax
noes ry) indie Hlefhie,grow
Tremblantentre cuir,& gory As under Quir.
Frs fe nourrit de ieune chair : Prov. Yong fie
battles with yong flefh.
lawn chair,& vicil poiffon : Prov, Yong fle fb, and
old Son déth)
Plus prés eft la chair que la chemife : Prov. Our
women fay, neere is _ petticoat but neerer is my


Toute chair n'eft pas venaifon: Prov. All flefh is
not venifon ; ewery man is not to be affeticd, efleemed,
po peal ufed; euery faying is not footh, enery worke
worth
Chair-bouillé : m. 4 fodden fellow; or one whofe flefh
doth looke as if it bad beene fodden,.
Chair-bouillé : m, ée : £. Like fadden flefo; or, fodden


as flefb.
Chaireuidterie: f. The market, or place, where ba-
anes of hegges-flefh may bee bad readie


Chaircuiétier : m. A Cooke that feeth all kind of ba-
con , porke, or bogges-flefh readie boiled ; alfo,a bun-
of 3 an pow eteman 507 tradefinan.

aircuiteric; &; Chaircuitier. as Chaircuicéte-
rie; &; Chaircuidier.

le MATE :m.ée : f. Hacked, bewed,malled ; cut as


vend as fefh unto the pot.
cute s de es.) To how, cut,backe, or


cbap at Pr of to the pot.
Chae: f. Achaire ore subi ‘for a Preacher,
aire brifé Ge, A foulding chaire,
Chaire percée. A clofe-fieole,
Direen chaire. To preach,
En defaut de fage le fol monte en chaire : Prov. 4
foole,for rim of wifer,fleps inte the roome.
Chaife,or Chaize: f. A pulpe.
Chaïz Low warchoufesor fellars to lay marchandifé in:
@Bayonnois,
Chalamine. as Calamine,
an: m..4 wood-boat,or barge; a kind of midling
données of wood vp & downe


Chaland ou Chalant. 4 cuflomer unto.a Marchant,
cea : £ cuftome, cuftoming, v{uall trading vate
one


To clame challenge make title unto, fet in
3 alfo,to.accufe of charge with, callin queflion
cit ec 5 as Calenger.


t:m. Agreat bar ges aweflerne barge ; ors as


ant "F4 Caring , paffing , caïking, takiog thought


cide. Akind of fpotted Lexard which is veryve-
> momous, and yer. ig taken in drinke, bealeth the


burt Ate made,
ique. Life <iChaledique eh déc
er ant af €
Te {he ten ‘all
e cauflicke,
1 sbraffe;
s commonly
dus of much
pei: a > inflamati-
ee ae ane in other parts.)
uemnelc! Top on a little pipe
melle:F.4 little pipe made of a reed,or ofamber-


Origiriat from
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


2C'H A


en,or oaten, fray. Eins)
Chalemie: “Eu Chalemelle. ECS
Chalenée:£.A boat-fiull,or barge-fillof. done:
Chalenger. as Chalanger. dus
Chaleur: £ Hédtywmermth bete ; boylings vebeent
Tee a


aireyenit en chaleur ; To make a bitch proad, or


ault,

rl ig .cufe :'f. a or amer,

ments fill of beat; full nelle

chaibes me: f. setae done ouer with fteele;
wherein fleele is a belonging vate fleele.

Chaliét. Boke Chafli

Chaline: f. 4 litele uate amorning; GPoitt: af
di soy sat ought,or drie weather. er am.) oi
haliflier: m. 4 maker of Bedfleads. sito.

Chalier. 4 bare to be bagdoor breedyoung ; ; alfoxto fale
or vafbell,Nuts, &

Chaloir.fe cha. peu to ppm te thought fans d
Netechaille. Care not,be of good cheere man,take no
pre for the matter.

ui peut ikchaloir quant ala difpute > what of
that,what skils it,what matter makes it,of what confe-
quence,or importance can it be, tn the difputation?

Chalon: m.4sChalan; alfa,a kind of fifh-net. -

Chaloppes: £ The buskes, parings,or fhalings,of a nut,
or nut-kernell.

Chaloupe: f. A Shallop,or (mall boat.

Chaluc. 4 kind wf Mullet which delighteth much in ber
owne tayle. €

Chalumeau: A ve reedyor cane ; alfo, the flemme
of. he bearbe; ; Allon wheaten,or oaten 1 raw; ora pipe


thereo,
Chaman :meufe: É Rpeti gr fillof knots; as a
Chamad ie: ee eandiogef ts; a call,or fium-
mon by the found


pe à rm lee: sll, to fun


mon,cballenge,call on.
Chamaciffe : f. Spurge time.
hamaeleon blanc. The Carline,or Carline thifile.
Chamaeleon noir. The blacke Chameleon thifile.
Charnailler. To firike backe,bew, fall wit with fivords, or
other weapons upon armowr,or
Channtalibeas: m. À flafher, backSter, ‘Fivafh-buckler.
Chamaillis: m, The refounding of froakes, or blowes,
or the clafbing found of bleiwetis a battell, or skirmi
of armed men; alfo,fuch a battell, fightsbickeriogsskr -


Ch. m. The bearb Scordium water Cremeans
der Garlicke Germaunder,
Chamarier: m.4 certaine Officer,at L


Chamarre ym. A looft,and light,Gowne (andleffep r0=
perly, acloake) ee be worne afwalh, ar taf
wife; alfosa ed garment, —


Chan m. 6e: f. Laced thi see
crofe, or billet-wife; alfo, fiudded, or fet t
finds,
Chamarrer. To lace thicke,all ower ; afope,orecralfor
billet-wife.
arreure: f. A thicke lacing aflope, owercroffe, or


«for the
“ade C


wife ; alfo, a fludding, or fétting — with


CHA


ae m. A Chamberlaine ; 34lfo,a Gentle
…Groomeg on Vfher of the Chamber (efpecially the fir ft ;
other two ava mnene properly tearmed, Valers


Fer as Chembellage: qBreton.
im, Hempe. :
ambre: f. 4 Chamber ; Lodging Roome,in a honfe ;


Court, or Court of Iuftice ; or. the Roome
here té ol kept ; alfo, the box of the: ‘vaue, or
he of ambeele,
eaifce, A Primie, lakes, boufe of Office ; a
i little corner to fet a clofé floole in.
‘eardente.| A chamber, or court (in euery
Patliament one) wherein thofe of the Religion baue bin
adindged unto the fire.
Chambre des Aydes. The racme wherein the Court
of Aydes és kept (in Paris there be two of them)"
bafle. as ce aifée,
des Comptes. The court of Accompts, or
of the Exchequer s1neuery towne of Parliament there
as one of them; and in that of Païis,tworoomes;and a
double Burcau : In old time. there was bit one in
France (at Paris) and then certaine Lords,Officers of
the Crowne,and of the priuie Councell, (two whereof,
a Clarke,and a lay Lord, fate as Prefi idents ) were ap-
pointed to looke vate the Accompts : Afterwards it
was made (as now it is) an ordinarie, and foueraigne
Court, conjifling of Prefidents, and their Affiftants,
Maiftres des Comptes (in other Courts tearmed
Counfellors) and other Officers , peculiar to it [elfe :
Montpellier was the next towne of Parliament that
got one; and after it the reft, at fundrie times, got
theirs,
Chambre du Confeil. 4 Soueraigne and extraordi-
«marie Court, confifling of two Prefidents, and eight or
tenne Counfellors (balfe whereof belong to the Court of
pt and the other balfe to the chamber of Ac-
ts) who heare, and determine finally fuch:com-
plaints, as are made by- füitors again{t the arrefis, and
decrees of that chamber;and otherwift take order,that
the proceedings thereof be not,without great caufe,bin-
dered, or oppugned.
Les Chambres de fa Cour. are as well,all the infe-
rior Officers cafe ess or Commiffioners that belong
+ tow Court, as the roomes wherein it is vfitally kept.
— aux deniers. # Chambres des mon-


Chane du Domaine... Court'wbhereto Ap-
peales are made from la Chambre du Threfor.

La Chambre dorée, The principall Chamber, or
Court of the Parliament,wherein.the chie fe Prefideats


» beare and determine the weightief) caufes; tearmed


fo,becaufe the pens ‘feeling thereof is gilt.


y &. ds Chambre miparties called
; A Sane pou of she poate 1594) DE ro
: ee des E es. The Chambers, or


Courts of Enquefis ; whereof there be diners in\the
Parliament of Paris, for the examination,and triall of
- canfès sand appeales, by witnelfes,and other eui-


dences. -
Chambre de femmes. ANwrférie, or pa roome


Ce haue. 4. A dining chamber.


mipartic. 4 Court of luptice eflabli-
d Fr jand
| ne oe


Original from


THE OHIO“STATE UNIVERSE :


er


3 CH A
one half of the ludges are, and the other bane Pa-


hambre des monnoyes.À Soueraign Cit sober
ia the currantne([e, weight, and value br are
examined ; and the diforders, faults, and offences of
Mintmen,Coyners, Clippers, dc, pumifhed. This Court
bath two Prefidents and eight generall (affiflant) coun-
fellors (be fi ides inferiour Officers) belonging toit ; and
pretends it felfe as auncient as the court of. ‘accompts,
or to bane becne incorporated into the fame (whereto
there yet belongs aroome that hath a furnace within it,
and is tearmed La Chambre des monnoyes.) Ia
old time moneyes were made in 15 French townes, and
all they called Chatnbres des Monnoyes; but there
are not (0 many at this day.
La Ghainbre nouvelle. 4 certaine late-ereGled
Court of Iuflice, confilting of twentie Prefidents, and
Counfellors,befides inférior Officers.
Chambre des Requeftes. The Court of Requefts ;
whereof there be two ; the one of good antiquitie; the
other (confifling of | two Prefidents, Si eight Counfe L
lors,&rc.) eretled à in the yeare 1580,
La Chambre Réyale. A Court eveéted of | purpose for
the examination of the dealings and carriage of Fi-
nanciers,or Exchequer men.


Chambre du Threfor, Wasi hd imme a


Chambre des vacations, An ordinarie Court
pt euery vacation) by certaine felect Iudges for the
determining of peel pele caufes.

Arricre chambre. Looke Arriere-chambre.

grande chambre des Enqueftes . The great, or
| pr chamber of Enquelis.

ari La pus chambre du plaidoyé. 45, La Chambre


La Be nouvelle chambre des Eniqueftess ro or
lafl-eretted,Court of

Robbe de chambre. A nig
Vuides chambre


se


bi-gowne
s font bite folles: Pro.  Emptie
chambers make women play sata
| She, f. A nes a chamb
es imone ri er.
Chambrerie. ea f. A Cham rap, the eflate, place,
or office of a Chamberlain
:f, A little mali finallroume.
:m.eufe:f. Much lowing, ov Living in,a


jer: m. A Chamberlaine in an Abbey, or inan
Inne ; alfoya we > chamber,unto
4 Prince.


of; a com-


ne of the Crowne,Anno 1545.)
: f A chamber-maid, or
‘ iim me ag


| sata " fèrues asa rs
ET EL


urine [ges
— Harwefllafis.


TE
+


Di gitizec


Go: gle.


%


CHA
Connie :m.ée: Eschamberje; ill of inner rétine,


or cha
Chambrillon: mi. A litile roome. final chamber.
Chambrillon: f. 4 litt/e,or young chan. bei maid,or kit-
“chin-wench, -


Chameau: m. 4 Cammell, .
Pafture de chameau. The reed, or rufh, tearmed Ca-
mels bay, and Squinant.
Donner le fardeau felon le chemeau. To properti-
on a load vato bis flrength that 15 to beare it.
drée : f. Germander, Englifh Treacle (an
bearbe.)
Chamelée: f,Widow-wayle (afbrub.)  *
leon: m. Looke Chamaeleon.
Chamelier : m.A Camell-keeper; or,Camell-driver.
Chame. 4 kind of cockle, or fmall, and round fiell-
Sif, the which in eating inflames the mouth like Pep-


De: m. A little dray, without wheeles ywhere-
on the vinegar-makers of Paris drag alorg their


Lees.
Chamois: m, 4 wild Goat, or Shamoïs ; alfo,the skin
thereof dreffed, and called ordinarily Skamow lea-


ther,
pe : m.4 field land; open,ox plain peece of ground;
) any large, and copious fiubseét for
don rfe; alfè,as Camp.
amp de bataille. 4 place of battaile between two
armies,or of combat berweene two champions.
amp bofialle, 4 common field. See Bofalle.
Champ clos. 4 _ rayled in,or inclofed, asa Tilt-
yard, for fingle combats.
Champ ouvert. A plaine, and open field, or place,
wherein a battaile bath beene,or may be, fought.
Champ de relais. 4 fallow ground, a lay land; a
field that lyes a yeare together plowed, bute nfiwed.
hamp verré. Velours champ verré. 4 Verry-to-
loured,or partie-colouredV eluet.
La clef des champs. Libertie; Seeke Clef.
agers des champs. The backe-dore of a countrey
.
Sur lechamp. Preféntly: }, immediately, incontinently,
\ forthwith out of band at that ra inflant.
Lechatnp luy eft demeuré.He bath got the vitorie,
woon the field ; (for be that after a battaile keepes the
fi though be bane loft the more men, 5 held the


‘A À chatue bout de champ. Still,euer,in each place,
which way | cae one turne him,
Affez de champ


A ne) faire glane. Roome fi Ufficient

for many to belpe themfeluesin ; aduantages cnow for

them to take hold of; Ju good flore fir them to game

4 vor ‘ynough to be wrought on,gathered,or id
ont after others bane done withall,

Alle eraux champs. To goe into the countrey.

ren vn oeil aux champs, & l'autre à la sie sek


Courir les champs en pourpoint. Torun like a bed-
lam,to cal pe © amad man.


Sot at da


Yun aux oes To prouoke ene to
put bim into a chafe, to put him inte choler, te
as mad as a March bare ; 5 af, to fet ome a-


fe, ‘to put bim into a great conceit of En #


Original fron


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.


CHA


“CHA.


make him goe the fafter on, or giue the more forward;
alfo,to difiniffe him, put bim forth, or fend bim abroad,
into the world, . fond Sri ‘
Se mettre aux champs. To brawe it in fhew, to put
the better leg before; to fet cocke a boope, or bimfelfe
out tothe vimoft ; alfo,te giue bimfelfe [cope, libertie,
roome ynough.
Bois onrorcilles,& champs ocillets: Prov. Woods
haue their eares,and fields their eyes ; fo apt, and able
és euery place to deteët clofe villanie.
En petit champ croift bien bon bled: Prov. Good
corne growes very well in little fields ; or(better)verie
good corne growes in little fields ; excellent {pirits are
often lodged in exile, or final, bodies. :
Champagams The name of a Prouince in France.
Droitt de Champagne. The fees due unto the Offi-
cers of the Chamber of Accompts,out of farmes let in
that Prouince; pain fierl. out of fuch asare
worth a bundred pounds,or leffe;and foure {hillings for
thofé that exceed that rate.
ampaigne. as Campaigne; 4/0, a field, in armon-
rie; whence;
Chainpaigne potencée.is that which our Blafoners
tearme,a Barre miere,
ar,ou chainpart. Field-rent ; balfe,or part, or
the twelfth part,of a Crop due,by bargaine, or cufiome,
unto a Landlord, and taken off the ground for bim, be-
fore the farmer lead any ; alfo, a field, or clofe ; alfo,a
cfm lying before a countrey boufe.
amparter. To diside a field (or the crop of a field)
- by eutn,or due parts; to lay out unto euery one bis por
tion therein.


arterefle. e ch. whereinto,the part of a
pan the right of Cham is layed,


arteur. À diider of fields, or field-rent , one
that fares out unto euery one lis due part of, or porti-
onin,a crop. one i |
Champartir. 2s Champarter. 3 .
Champayage:m. 4 ruming;or graxing of cattell in
the fields ; whence ; rt
Va tel a champayage en tel lieu.Hath going for bis
beafs infuchaplace.
er. To refide,or continue among fields; alfo,to
w. in, or walke ouer,the fields ; alfo,to field itor
carrie abroad into the fields’; alfo,to run, feed, graze,
or pafture in fields ; alfo (attinely) to put cattell ona
ges or turne them into the fields, to let them goe
therein,
Champé d’afur. 4zure,or,the field Azure. (Blafon.)
Champ, : com, Fieldie,plaine,champian ; of or be-


be $ al i ’ boori
cr rh
wid, rude, fauage, bagard,vnreclaimed;vnciuile,bar-
ATOS. À
Char . Cham: . PR rin an .
a le
ie, ferme, roberto. +


ampicerie ; vn tour de icerie ; 4 cheating

pranke ; a tricke of nimble knauerie, or of Legierde-
Maire. |

Re ignon: m. A Mufbrum, Toadflcole,Paddock-


impignons de pourceaux. The white,or yellow-
if farum:which may be eaten; In Latine they are


;
{fo calles i fuilli; and by Latine Phyfitions,por-
<ini, Sen scandy po apr
À forllts,or % te


Champion: m. 4 champion; one that fights a publicke


combat in bis owne,or another mans quarrel.


Champis. Looke Champi (the plurall whereof it js.
Champleute. «Chantpleat. vis


eras Champayer; to continue in the fields,


rc.
Chance: f. 4 chance, bap, aduenturé, hazard ; alfo,


oe game at dice called Mumchance, or fitch ano-
t LL :
In’eft chance qui ne retourne: Pro. AU chances
returne one time or other.
er. Looke Chanceller.
~hancelerie: £ A Chauncerie Court ; the Chaunce-
rie; the Seale Office,or Court of euery Parliament, and

Prefidiall Seat. .

Les Chanceleries Prefidiales. The meaneft Courts
erie in France ; whoft feales are different
leffe then,the feales of other Chanceries ; and

are not imployed but in fome few Writs, or Letters, for

caufès that be under the value of 250 pounds Tourn.

Nor is aie fa to-ufe them, but may procure bis

Writs to be fealed either in the great Chauncerie, or ia

that wbich belongs to the Parliament, within the inrif~

dition whereof be lines.

La grande Chancelerie. The great Chancerie ; ener

attendant on the Kings perfon,and gouerned by the Lo.

Chancelor of France.

* Les petites Chanceleries. The Chanceries of Par-
liaments,and Prefidial feats,are indifferently tearmed

So, in difference of la grande Chan. The feales of

thefé Chaunceries are gouerned by les Gardes des

{eaux in abjence of the Maifters of Requefts,who in

their Circuits, affigned them by the Lord Chancellor,

vifit, at leaf}, once a yeare, eucry one of thefe (bin-

ceries. ,

Chancelier : m. 4 Chancellor : The Lord chancellor is
ad a9 Magiftrat of France (as ours of England)
6 ja his iudgements, exempted from the iuri{ditti-
on,or cenfitre of Parliaments (as ours vncontroulable
4 the common Law;)On bim depends the ordering,and
i(pofition of luflice ; the eRtablifbment of good,and fa-
cred Lawes; the reformation of fuper fluous, and abro-
gation of unprofitable, Editts ; and the putting downe
of all Offices that be offenfiue to tbe People,or chargea-
ble to the State: He bath the keeping ef the kings (great)
Seale; and by the vertue thereof either ‘palfes, or may
put backe, fuch Letters Patents,and Writs,as are pre-
Seated vato him, :
Chancelier de Geneviefve. An Officer in the Vni-
uer fitie of Paris, who bath authoritie to examine,and


eu


” licence, Maiflers of Art. :


ancelier de noftre Dame. Another, who bathau-

thoritie ouer Diuines, Lawyers,Phyfitions,&c;and pu-
nies unrulie {collers,of what degree foeuer.
iere: f. A Chancelors wife. |


Mi cr m. ante: f. Staggering, reeling ; flut-
ting, flammering. ;
Chancellement: m. 4 flaggering, reeling , waue-


ring Le gate; a flutting, flammering, faultering, in
el


Chanceller. To recle, flagger ; waner,make indentures;


alfo,to flammer fiut.faulter in fpeech,

Bien poulfé so 2m chancelle: Pro. He fag-

gers long thats thruflwith afirong band. :

1] vault mieulx tresbucher vne fois, que woujours
: Prov. Better fall at once, then flagger

‘alwayes ; better to erre altogether,then alwaies to wa-

wer ; better to fiep in for once, on the wrong ade"


ill to doubt what fide be Low...
Pee ey ae mem
Chanceux: m. eufe: £. Fortunate, bapfull ; fucce[-
:m.ie:f, Muflie, fiflie, flinking,or unfanourie
or ill-keeping. :
ificure. Looe eure. Fuflineffe.

:m.A Canker;apainefull bardouglie,and va-
euen fivelliag which blackens,and inflames,the veines
that are about it. :

Herbe au chancre. Turacfole, Wartworte, Heliotro-


le m. cufe: f. Cankaric,cankared ; full of
Cankers.
Bofle chancreufe. A cankered byle ; pockie fore,


pige goofe.
ens eur. La rw de la rere epe . Candle-
mas day ; the Purification of the bleffed Virgia.
Chandeleufe.la Chan. The fame,
andeleux: m. eufe: f Full of candles,of a candle,


pelontite toa candle.
Chandelier: m. 4 Candlefiicke ; alfo, a Chaundier,
3 Candle-maker, or Candle-Seller ; alfo, Candlemas


y. .
Mis au chandelier. Intertained,receined,accepted
of; ufed,imployed, [et on worke. y

Pme ES SE enn en ao


Tl en tuera dix de la


_ lier. Looke Chandelle. . |

_ Aujourd’huy Febvrier demain Chandelier : Prov.

m6 x Candlcmas day is ewer the fecond of Februa-
rie.

Chandelier: m, ere : f Belonging toa Chaundler,Can-


dle,or Candlefticke.
Wherbe chandeliere. The Colewort is called fo by
Some; by others (perhaps more properly) the bearbe
Mullein;, Sceke Herbe.
Chandelle: f. 4 candle,a fixe ; a light,or taper.
Chandelles de Buchs. Rofen candles, ufed by the
* poorer fart of people neere unto Bourdeaux.
Alachandelle ; By candle-light ; in extremitie, or
at the point of death,whena man is readie to gine up
the gheft (for then the Romanifts light candles, upon a
conceit that euill gris are drinen away thereby.
‘A la chandelle allumée. The (ame; or, before all be
one ; while there x time,or any life in it ; whileft it is
in handling,or may be bad.
‘A la chandelle eftein&e . Too late; when a thing is
paft reconerie ; after all is gone, or the bufineffe done;
(This Phrafe,and the former, [eeme devined from Out-
ropes ; wherein after the Poffers made, a candle is
lighted at the bidding of more ; after wich peeeddes
put out, another is alfo lighted, when a third part more
is bidden ; and when twice as much, another; which
once put oe thing is inflantly delinered oner.)
Brufler la chandelle. par les Ei
end, things diforderedly; to fquander hee cares not
w nor what; alfo (but leffe properly) the mi-


|. cher,nigardize it, yneerely to worke.,
Su scale So a qu Z
P ) for a Ce Kun Oat-
- crie, who will gine moft, vebile thr


bouts. To wafl,or


dei ae date pcre mah |


This Phrafe is alfo taken otberwift, as in that whi
fellowes. ss rk < eee £
Ufe vient brufler Ala chandelle. The light be bath |
fete leoy war

“Tris ke bats aoe ë | es is OWN


 andfrequents the companie of other women.

- Garderlechange. Hownds to purfue onely the game

they began with; bounds to flicke totheir owne, or old
“a us to ses ee huat,their owne.


_Prendrelec


rf row/ed.
ché Ée : £. Changed; transformed,metamerpbo-


à ange : M,


y} F 4
RES: a SU


oe,


auth L 14e Cr. sl — =


CHA


Emporter à lackandelle, To carrie a thing cleere


away b ing the moft for it. (Looke ip‘Ala chan-
a eae =


Gafter yne chandelle pour trouver vn petit mou-


chon. To fpoyle much in earch after a little, faa)
Hentuera dx dela chandelle, & vingt du chan- Teldunge di
delier. Hee will doe wonders, bee will cut them into a
- many peeces, bee will make minced meat for Crewes of pendu
ee farkelles 3 20 man will be able to fland before # me ve
ab. e 2 growne fo fell, fierce, or firious ; ( Ironi- ced jain dt
Le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle. 14 will not quit ‘wrens
coft; there will be nothing got by him that toyles, or Ome: m. 4
deales in it. , Chanoinerie: t
Ily avoit à chaque Sain& fa chandelle. There was anonmie: .
for euery Saint bis candle ; euerie one bad fomewbat, Chant: bale
ad keh owed oe bn pe ame th
onter au grenier fans chandelle. To dight in a re; VIRE
turd. 6 he Chanfifeure:
“Ala chandelle la Chevre femble Damoifelle:Pro. boerinele mou
By candle-light a {hee Goat feemes a Gentlewoman ; on: A
(where,by the candle, is meant a mans owne affection, Virelay afta
or the opinion of another ; either of which followed anton de
wholly in the choice of a wife, bath often proued erre- _ Serle, thats enc
riage! of One part confi
Au plus debile la chandelle en la main: Prov. (we fon de R
fo) be that worft may bolds the candle, 07 ff offing
Il n’y afi petit Sain qui ne defire fa chandelle : nat
Prov. There is no manin authoritie, bow finall foe- A) tedions or er
wer but lookes for the refpect thats due vato bim. Ceschanfons
Chanes. le grand chances. May-weed, wild Camomill, All theft matter
inking Maithes. tO ering
Chanfrain de Cheval d'armes. The front-flall, bead- Onluy deman
eece,or forbead-piece,of a barbed borfe. ue thats but ny
Chanfrain (creux.) A chanfering ; or, a channel, fér- been {au a bird
row,bollow gutter.or flreake,in flone-worke,érc. learnt tp
Chanfron: m. The name of an lialian coyne, worth a- Envne
bout xx d, thats the
ange: m. Sumacke,leather Sumackesor Curries Su- pe)
macke.(a fhrub. ‘ en
hange: m. 4 change,tvansformation,metamorpbofis; Chantong
exchange ; alteration, innowation ; conuerfion; af, a oh, ca
Banke of Exchange, or Place wherein money is exchan- Chane”
ged,and commodities bartered for;alfo,a wrong Deere Meur:
(ia bunting,) or the heard whereinto a purfucd Deere :


is gotten,
Aller ou charges il a au ch. is {aid of a married


manor fornicator tbat leaues bis owne wift,or wench,


ange. Hounds to riot,or to run riot; to
fe out at a wrong Deere, and leane that which was


Sedyaltered, varied ; conuerted ; inmouated; alfo, ex-
hanged ,interchanged,chopped,bartered.{confed.
ging, transforming 34


ind of fhadowing; Looke Nuage. “
acer. To change, Santee. alter, varie ; inmo-
 wate,conuert ; alfo, to exchange, interchange, trucke, Ÿ

Seoorfesbarter,c ith, nes
er de main, Yofbift a thing out of ligand
into


Original from


THE, OHIO!STATE UNIMERSUPY. 4288


CHA


into another ; and (in matters of inberitance) to banea
new Lord,or owner. i
Changer denote. Looke Note.
Changerde poil. To mend bis manners, to alter bis
co difpofition, to become anew — :
€ i ne gaigne pas: Pro. ange
ae Pre“
angeur:m.A changer exchanger,banker;alfo,a tole-
taker,or gatherer of tribute.
angeur du Threfor.The Kings Receiner generall,
called fo in old time; at this day, Threforier du Do-
maine, d
Chanoine : m. 4 Canon in a Cathedrall Church.
Chanoinerie : £ 4s Chanoinie.
Chanoinie: f. A Canonfhip ; the place of a Canon.
anfi: m. ie: f. Muflie,füflie; almoft rotten,putrified; ~
wnfauourie through age, or long keeping ; alfo,mouldie, -
boarie,vinewed. ,
Chanfiffeure : € uftine([e,fillinelfe; putrefaction;al/e,
boarine([e,mouldine|[e,vinewednelfe.
baat f, A Song; Ayre; Ballade; Lay, Roundelay,
irelay ; alfo,a Poeme,or Difcourfe, in Meeter.
Chalon de Ricochet. A Song, Play, Tale, or Dif
courfe, thats endleffe,and bangs ill togetbersor,where-
~ of one part confites,ov contraditts,another.
Chanfon de Robin. A merrie,and extemporall fong,
or ffm of finging, whereto one is ener adding fome-
what,or may at pleafure adde what be lift; hence, alfo,
any tedious,or endleffe difcourfe,coc. |
Ces chanfons procedent de la mefine cornemufe.
Allthefè matters baue but one bead,ak theft bufineffes
but one originall. KT:
On luy demanda la chanfon. (Spoken ieafiingly of
one thats but newly come out of ae where hauing


been (as a bird in a Cage) inclofed,be may perbaps baue
Learnt tofing) = *
' Envne n'y a qu'un bon mot: Prov. Aad


ot) ee of barfh, and barbaroxs,
eople. 5
Chanfonet: m. 4 (anarie bird; or as Sanfonet.
Chanfonnette : f 4 little fong,a prettie aire; a fleight,
or light note,or tune.
onneur:m,. A great finger of ones.
: onnier: m. ere: & .4hwaies finging, full of
fangs. i
Chanfons. Colombine flowers.
Chanflié : m. as Chantier; « Gauntrie,or Stilling.
Chant: m.A Song, Ayre;Caroll,Ballade;Lay,Roundelsy,
Virelay ; alfo,a Poeme,or Difcourfè,in Ryme.
Chant Royal. A kind of ancient Poeme dedicated to
the honour of Fefics Cbrift,or of bis Mother ; and con-
Me om fiue or fix uerfes,commending,or di-
reéted unto, one Prince or other, not formerly mentio-


ned.
Chanté: m, ée : £ Sung,chaunted;warbledscrowed:re-
founded ; commended, or defcribed in aecter, or in


Verfe. x.
Pay chanté à fon han. I baue fpoken with him.qBar-


Tag.

Chanteau: m. A corner-peeceor peece nue

- thecorner,or edge of a thing; (and hence)al(o,a gobbet,

tumpe,cruft,or cantell of bread,exc ; alfo,a quarter or

wter-Peece,of a garment, :

anteau part le vilain: Pro. See Vilain.

Atel. # Chanteau. ny 4 :

tellage: m. A certaine fee due unto fome Lords
: Ganatries whereon wine that is fold bath


Digitized. by Go: gle


CHA


Chantelle. Les quattre deniers de chantelle. Foure
pence payed enery yeare,within Bourbonnois, by cer-


 taine villains unto their Lords,in acknowledgement of |,


their feruile Tenures.
antement: m. À finging, refounding, chaunting ;
warbling ; crowing.

Chantepleure :f. A garden Pot,or Gardeners wate-
ring Pot ; alfo,the cocke of acefterne ; alfo, a certaine
deuite,or Engine, for the emptying of awater-velfell ;
made of two Lattin pipes (of equall bignes, and length)
oars together at the one end, and thence dividing

_ themfelues,into the forme of a forke.

Chantepoulet: m.The leffer Centorie,Earth-gall,Fea-
werworte ; (Lunius.)
afitepoulets. as Armoires; Sweet williams, Toll-
meyners, London Tufts. (Mathiolus.)

Chanter: m. A finging,or chaunting; whence ;

Beau chanter fouventennuye: Prov. Even choice
delights are often tedious. ;

Chanter. To fing ; refonnd; chaunt it ; warble,as a bird;
pine: as a cocke,eoc ; alfo, to defcribe, or commend, in
verfe. \

Chanter en faulfet. To füines alfi,to fing louder and
ae iy higher and bigher; to rife fromaote to note,in
inging. -
Chanter deuant la fefte. To triumph before a vic-

Lorie.
Chanter l'hymne du Cigne.7o frg.fpeake,or utter,
bis laf:


Chanter pouilles. To {old,reprochrenile,raile on.
antez à l’afne,il vous fera des pets: Prov. Sing
youto an Affe, and he will fart unto you; beftow any
good thing on achurle,and if be da requite it, it [hall be
in one filthie mariner ot other:
Affeurement chante qui n’a que perdre: Prov. He
boldly chaunts it that bath naught to loofé ; wee fay;
and who doth fing fomerrie a note as be that cannot
change a groat ? (Thu Prouerbe will alfo afford wor-
thier ¢ a:
On fe lafle de bien chanter: Pro. Seef# Laffer.
Telchante quin’aiaye:Pro. Many a one fings that
is full’forvie, (Thofé that, againft their wils, ride vp
Holberne,oft verifie this Prouerbe.)
Chanterelle: f. The treble, in finging ; alfo, a treble
ing,or bell ; alfoya finall bell for a i
tereme : f, A greene frog,land toad,bedge toad.
anterefle: £ À Chaunterelfes a woman that fings.or


Ch much. + ;
_Chanterie: f. Chaunting, finging; Muficke; alfo, a


Chaunterie; the place, degree, er office, of a Chaun-
ter.
Chanterre: m, Az ordinarie Poet, rymer,or verifier,
C 0 tearmedinold time, —
shanteur ; m. 4 finger, a Chaunter; alfa, a finall,
white-breafted,and red-bellied forref-bird that fings


very much,

Chantier: m. 4 Wood-mongers,or -fellers yards
alfo, a Staulder, or Wood-pile; alfo,a Vine-fupporting
pole,or feof upright,or lyeas a crofje
barre, ouerthwart; and (bence) alfoyas Treillis, or a
rayle for the fame pur pofe;alfo,a Stoope,or Pile,vnder-
propping the banke fe viner ; alfo,a Gauntrie,or Stil-
ling, for Hogs-beads, érc, to fiand on; alfo, a Trefle to


| Chantier de bois. A flaulder, woodftacke, pile of


Navires eftoyent en chantier. Their fhigs


: swere on the flockes or in the docke.


Original trom


THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSE
\ i + = à BE Te


lc tvmhtils | dt Dini sé |


:


cs


CT ae ae 7


Lun - sie]


¢ HA.’ CHA
Chantillonné:m. ée: f. Chaunted; fung roundly, or Chapelet: m.4 Chaplet ; garland, wreath for the bead


merrily. also, a couer, copping, or topping (made like a Chaple
Chantillonner. To chaunt it ; to fing roundly,or mer- forany thing; (Hence) alfosa nayles head; alfi,a bakds

rilj. ‘ hood 5 alfoapaire of beads ; alfoya wreath,or circlet of
Chantonher. as Chantillonner. wicker, Orc, to fit under difles at meale-times ; alfa,


Chantourné:'m. éc: f Turned round as the fhell of a
{nayle ; or often in and out, as the courfe of a brooke in
ameddow,

Chantournement: m. The wrigling, eddie, or often,
and uncertain turning in and out of the cour{é of {mall
riers. é

Chantourner. To wryth,or turne often in and out,like
a finall fireame in a plaine field,ormeddow.

Chantre: m. 4 chaunter sa fingers alfd,a Chaunter ina
Qucere, or (athedrall. Church ; alfa, as Chavafline;
alfo,a white-breafted, amd red-bellied forreft-bird that
ufes to fing very much, ï


the breech of a Gunne. 4
C let du genoüil. The ball of the knee.


Chapelet du sarret. The bought of the bamme ; the
cambrell bogh of a horfe.

3 Rai enchapelet. Todauncein a round, ring, or |
circle. :

Chapelier: m. A Hat-maker ; alfo, a maker of Gar-
lands. | :

Chapclier-m. ere: f. Of a Chaplet, hat,or garland;
ee or doing well in, a Chaplet, bat, or gar-
and,


Chapeliere : f. A woman that makes bats , or gar-


Chantrerie. #5 Chanteries ds, es -
hanure: m.Hempe. , Chapeline. # Capeline, oe chap
Chanure fauvage. Baflard Hempe,wild Hempe,Net- apelis, Looke Chapplis. =, oe
tle Hempe. Île : f..A Chappell ; Oratorie ; little Church ; alfe,. amais purair

Chanureux: m. eufe :f Hcmpen,Hempiesof Hempe ; alfa Lymbecke,or Stillitorie. pon: Pro
fib of Hempe. à où à ~ | Ch :f. Chippings of bread. Frost a be


on:m. A bood,or French hood (fer a woman;)
also,any hood bonnet or lettice cap.
Chaperon abourler. Such a hood as Lawyers and
citizens weare on their fhoulders upon folemne dayes.
aperon de fou, .4 fooles cap fet out with hornes,
eares.ill faces,and other fuch fopperies.
Le Chaperon d'une Trepane. The head,or hood of
Trepaue , whereby it is bindered from centring fürther
them he bifts that holds it. 2 ci
~ Vn Chaperon faicà 'en veux. A notable whipfler,
or twig ger; a good one I warrant'bher.
Le moule à chaperon. A womans pate,
Deux teftes en vn chaperon. Two men of a like, or
the fame, bumor,willand difpofition ; two mindes,or
ubearts,agrecing in one. ; JE
I] bailla À fa femme dronos, &:cha ron’ de
ae, Ge bangde, belammed, thumped, fivadled, .
se CPC RE a CS
uis Pb a ais farede ch :
no head needs nohood, oil +
nné =m. éc: f pe ae hauing a hood on.
: = Pigeon chaperonné. À ruffed, or copped, Pigeon.
Cy fg “Chaperonner. To be bare,or vaconer bis Bead before" we
hapeau rouge. 4 Cardinals bat ; alfa, the blou po i DS cap unto; alfo, tohood, or puta |
die necke of abeadleffe carkas; whence 2 _boodon, = EE À
On luy a fait porter le chapeau rouge. They bane Chaperonnier : m. Looke PA aa à
cut off his bead, aie ERREUR . lier: m. cre: f. Hcoded ; hooding. à oe
Chapeau de Triomphe. 4 round garland worne a- erbe chaperonnicre, Wild Larks-béele;or, Monks
bout his head hehe he ENTRE d with the wins ec si
Qui aargenta chapeaux . ronniere : f, Chapperonicre.
è Pe D 3 or, he that ba Chaperonnieze : f. A poore fas dragle-tayle.
. bat,nor hood; be that fl iteau: m, The top,head,or chapter,of a Pillarsal= |
iti fo,the upper part of a Limbecke. RMEQUÉ
Chapitre : m. The Chapter of a booke ; alfo,a Chapter
Dean chenCconsand ler Of


hall Church.


D eats : f.d Hempen clofe ; or,yard wherein Hempe

1 fowed,.

Chaos: m. À Chaos; a confifed,or diforderlie beape;
A buge,immenfe, snd han Male, or mingle-man-
cle of findry things hudled together. ‘

a ce: f.4 Copesalfo,the locket of adagger,erc; Looke
appe, 5
Chapeau: m. A hat ; boodsor bonnet for the head; aljo,
a garland of flowers ere.
hapeau à l'Albanoïfe, A bigh-crownd bat ; a bat
prete crowne like a fugar-loaf; or of the Spanifh
che. |
Chapeaux blancs ...4 multitude of feditious, and
mutinous Rebels of Flanders, in Charles the fixts
tune, > d à

Chapeaticornu, A certaine deformed, and pricklié

fitch the great fea Nettle. @Provencois, fe ie

‘Chapeaude mer. The fames st

Chapeauxnoïrs.The flowers of Lonch


~ Quin'apo


Tre
Tan


À
=
Picdd id Petes


ae


Corey Care Apia rte © à 70 ETES


ré: m. Ée:£ Schoolec
itrer. To féhoole, correé, reprome, checke,
3 afo(leffe properly) to beat, bruife; chop,or


ts J


e . : Gos ae Original from. && à
pigitiaed by Coe) gle THE OHIO STATE UNIMBRSILY
I ‘ 4 ; > 2 F “ 4 _ ; "


~


CHA


CHA


Chapitreur de foin: m. A skarre-crow,bugbeare ; one
that threatens much,and does but alittle,
Chapler. as Chapeler; to chip bread ; or, as Chap-

ler.


Ch lis. as Chapplis; alfo, bread-chippings ; alfo, the
fl pecces tbat fe from flones in the a swe call
c br Tags. c ai el Che S
apon: m. A (apon ; alfo,as pon.
Chapon de oe) The Rochet Pa kind of red Gur-
nard.


Vol d'un chapon. à the Aker, or Arpent(or fuch a
like proportion) of land , that lyesmext unto a Mannor
boufe,or capitall Mefficage,and fals ener (if there bee

“not a competent garden ec.) together with it, unto the

foare of the eldeft fonne. Looke Cheze; & Vol.

Coucher en chapon. To goe verie foone to bed a-
ee 3 or, to get him to bed as foone as be bath fup-
ed.

A qui chapon mange chapon luy vient: Pro. He
that eates goad meat [ball haue good meat. :
Jamais putain n’ayma preud hom, ny grafle geline

on: Pro, . Nexer did whore loue boneft manypor
wanton wife ber weake man.
Jamais tigneux n'ayma le pigne,ny chapon crefter
elinc: Prov.See Crefter.
itu te trouves fans chapon fois content de pain
& d’oignon: Prov. If ibou haft not a Capon, feed
on an Onyon.

rer aie Guelt,made a Capon; cut,as a Capon.

onneau: m. A Caponet,or young Capon.

Chaponricr. To cut re to gueld.

Chapoté: m.ée: f. Hacked, or wbitled; al/o,pagled,
or dodged about the price of; bufied in mamie things to

= finall purpofe.


among armed men when they incounter ; alfo, bread.
chippings; and,the chipping of bread.

Chappon: m. 4 flip,/mall twig, or {hoot of a planter :

» tree. Bourg. aff, as Chapon.
happoté: m. éc:f. Dodged, paultred, bagled ; alfo,
hacked,or whitled. '

Chappron. as Chaperon. A hood.’

Chappronner. as Chaperonner.

dr. era Faulcon bon chappronnier. That
takes the hood gently,or will cafily be hooded.

Chappuis. Looke Chapuis.

Chapron.as Chaperon; and (in Rabelais) a hooded


vole.
fapéet A leafe of a beaft, and of the whole increafe
hereof, made for a certaine time,and price; or,a beaft
let out to the balues. ;
tels deniers. The principall fumme,and charges a
Purchafèr hath payed, and beene at, for land which the
next of kinne offers to redeeme.
hapuis: m.A Carpenter; one shat deales with tymber,
or with tymber-worke. @Dauph.& Lionnois.
Chapuifer. To play the Carpenter ; to worke Carpenters
worke; to deale with tymber.
Char : m. A Carre,waggon,Wayne,or Chariot. ~
Characie, Garden Spurge.
Charactere..4 (aratter ; Figure; ec; See Cara&tere.
Charadrien. 4 certaine bird, which earnefily bebolding
Pie that is ficke of the laundice,or bebeld by bimsheales
bim,
Charanfon. as Charanton.
aranfonné : m. ée: f Grawed,eaten into,or eaten
vp,by weenils.
Charanton: m. 4 Mite,or Weeuill.
araveau: m. 4 Beetle.


poter. To backe, or whitle ; alfo,to bagle,paulter, | Charb:


tri fle,or dodge,about the price of ; alfo, to piddle, med-
i Pages coter me ing hd det nothing


Chappe: f. A (Churchmans ya Iudges Hood ;
0,the belme (or bead) of a Lumbecke’salfosthe chape,
or locket of afcabberd ; alfo, the top,or crowne,on the
top,of a Bell ; alfo,a Mill-hoope, or Mill-cafe ; the open
«heft wherein the flones do run. :
Cercher chappe cheute. To picke,or be defirous of,a
warrell ; to Beer {piewhat fault be may find.
Debarre dela ch Al Evefque. To contend, or
brable about trifles; or for things which belongvnto o-
thers. Looke Debatre. |
Chappel:m. A Hat; a Garland, {Auvergnois.


d ;#5,Garlande d@’ Ar:
ad toh Fs in ip; the Clare er place’
of a Chaplai See urateofaChappell,
ier: m, À of Hats $5 0r Garlands.
Chabpelier:m cre : £ Looke mpelier,
Ch:ppeliere:f.A woman that makes Hats;or Garlands,
Chappelet: m. Looke Chapelet. © 2e
ste te T


Shapperon: as Cha a be
. : À A chambermaid, kitchin-
ps ag me pi -
Chappier: m. A Cope-maker. . AS. -
ins: m.Choppines ; a kind of bigh flippers fer low
men.

3 :m.ée:f. Hacked bewed, flafhed ; alfo, chip-
as bread.


bagheshem lh upon pecs alo
The hacking, bewing,and flafhing thats


arbon : m. A coale; alfo,a Carbuncle,or Plague-fore.
Lecharbon. The firft lines, or lineaments of a pidiure;
(tearmed fo, belike, becaufè moft Painters draw them


with a peece of Charcoale, ‘
Cthaben blanc, 4 hinds of coale made of the wood of
+ the Crimfon,or pricklieCedar. =” ©
bon de terre. Sea-coaie,or Pit-côale,
Fairecharbonde toutbois. To imploy, or make uf
ofeuerie thing.
D'un fac à charbon ne peut fortir que dela pouffi
ere noire: Prov. A coate-facke yeeldeth nothing but
ar duft ; Blacke thoughts can none but batefidd ais
produce. ,
Charbonné: m. ée: f: Painted marked written, with
Sine emo ee with coales;(hence)


a i 3

Charbonnée: £. 4 Carbonado,or collop ofsésé.
A vilain onnée d’afne. Looke Afne.” +

Charbonner. To paint marke, write,or fneare,with a
coale; to collowe;to bleach,or make black,with a coale.
Si vous ne le voulez croire nnez-le. See


Croire.
ne f. A Coale-pit, or, CoalÆmine; alfo, a


Coale-bouft.
Charbonnefque: com. Coalie,of Coales. :
Charbonneisbets. cult TE edi fill of coales, all


to becollowed; alfo,full of Carbuncles,or Plague-fores,

a er:m. A Collier. | Se |
Cefont facs de charbonniers qui fe noirciflent I

un l'autre: Pro. Thefé fellowes corrupt,by accompany-

Chaton as Charbonnerie ; aif, a Colliers

Charbot:m.A Beetle. x

Char-


de — -


Go: gle


GC H A


C oH cA


Charbot de bœuf. The venomous blacke,and beetle-
like flye called,a long-leg,or wag-leg; a deadly morfell
to the beaft that lickes imp. :
Chardon: m. A thifile ; alfo,a Cardoone,or the flaulke
of an Artichoke, which buried in the earth in the end
of. à 2 sp excellent meat towards Chrifimas.
Chardon argentin. Oat-thifile,Gumme-thiflle,Cot-
ton-thifile, wild white thifile, Argentine,or filuer,thi-


le.
‘Chardon afinin. The white thiftle,wild Artichoke,
or our Ladies thifile.
Chardon benoiét. Holy thiftle,bleffed thiflle,Cardu-
us benediétus. :
Chardon à cent teftes. The bundred-beaded thifile,
field Eringus, Leuant (2a Holme ,Champian{ea Hollie;
(a flranger,as yet,in England.)
Cane eftoillé. The flone thifile, Caltrop, farre
thifile.
Chardon à foullon. The Taxell,Fullers thifile,Card
Taxell, Venus bafon.
Chardon franc. The Artichoke,
Chardon marin. The fea thiftle fea Hollie,Eringus.
Chardon de noftre Dame. Our Ladies thifile white
Cp emike thiflle.
Chardon pignolat. Fullers thiflle.
Chardon roullant. as Chardon cent teftes.
Chardon fauvage. «s Chardon argentin ; or, the
ordinarie wild thijile.
Chardon teftu. The bundred-beaded thifile, or field
Eringus.
Chardons de treillis de fer. A kind of yron defence,
made thiftle-like , or full of prickles , to keepea wak
from being [caled.
Laiflons aux afnes les chardons. Let Affes feed on
thifiles; leane unto poorer fhirits dull conceits,
Qui feme les chardons recucille des efpines: Pro.
He that foes thiftles reapes thornes. ;
Chardonner le drap. To raife, or lay the map thereof,
to dreffe it,wih the Tazell,
Chardonnereau: m. The harre of a dore ; the peece,


band, oy plate, that runnes along on the bindge-fide of


fome dores,
Chardonneret: m. 4 Goldfinch, or thifile Finch,
Chardonneretre : f. The thifilic, or pricklie Arti-
choke.
Colin : m.Our Ladies thifileymilke thiftle,white
thiftle; alfo,a Goldfinch. ; use
Chardonnette: f The wild or pricklie,Artichokesalfo,
a kind of fauce for Kid.
Formage à la chardonnette. Cheefe, whofe milke
was curded with the iuice of the wild Artichoke; or,a


Lenten che de es,and the
Po rer er thifile. - i,
Chardonniere: f. A plot, or garden of Thiftles, Arti-


chokesor Taxels -alfo,as Chardonnereau. … |
Chardous: m. Chardoones ; or, the flaulkes of Arti-


chokes. -* Lares “hy
Chardouffe:f. The white Cameleon,or white Carline,
1 _


thiflle, *


Le SIG wh
_,Chardoutffe noire, The blacke Cameleon thifle. i)
1. as Chardonneret. cahepes

. as Charrée, ci


2


fe


ate


;


sn: m, The(corne-devouring) Mite, orWeee |
Fu : Res yee
& Charefi hg Cont ae FE a


Charetier: m. 4 Carter,or Carman.

Charetin. as Chareti.

Charette: £. A Chariot,or waggon.

Charevaftte: m. 4nAfb-cloth, Nafh-cloth, or Buck-
cloth.
canoe commevn charevaftre. 45 pale as an Afb-
cloth.


Chargais: m.,A certaine unluckie bird of a browae,and
ia some pen of a white,colour. Savoyard.

e:f. A Load, Burthen, Fardle; alfo, a charge,
hinderance, or caufe of extraordinarie expence ; an
Office, Commiffion ; Dignitie, Eflate; Place, or Imploy-
snent,of charge; a bufinef[e,or matter given in charge ;
alfo, the charge of a Gunne ; alfo, a charge giuen upon
the enemie ; alfo, an accufation, imputation, or fault
layed to the charge of ; alfo, a Poultis, or moifi plai-


er, |
no Palatine. The Stewardfbip of an Yimperiall
ourt.
Charge Vilaine. as Roture (called fo inold time.)
Tas de charg; . Looke Tas.
Chevaucher fa charge. To ride circuit, as a ludge,


Chargé zm. ée: £. Charged,loaden,burthened,onera-

ted; put unto charges; affaulted,or charged,as an ene- |
7 ur Cd,or charged,as an offendor; alfo,that bath
charge of.

é à poids de marc. Throughly tipled, foundly
whittled, that bath taken bis liquor to purpofe, that
hath bis full load,or carriage of it.

€ de la plus fine. The fame ; or delicately cup-
Shotten; or as in Fin. |
Lecerf a chargé fa venaifon. The Stag is verie


Cheval chargé de tefte,ou de col. À heauie-beaded,
or hard-borne hor fe.
Couleur chargée. 4 verie deepe colour.
Temps chargée. A gloomie, cloudie, ouer-caft, and
vaine-threatening feafon,
Laifler paflerles pluschargez. Totake no thought,
pare the time merrily, let. werd td pom :
thers pine through care;) er, fuffering others, t
whileft, 20 baht charge, and torment themfelues with
CANES in RASA OT
t:m. ante: f. Heauie, burthenfome, trou-
blesome, expenfiue ; alfo, charging, loading, burthe-
- er. Tocharge, burthen,onerate,load ; lye heauie
Jay.on, or lay load upon; alfo, to trouble, charge, or
put unto charges; alfo, to vine charge unto, beflow a
_ charge on; alfo,to charge,affault,or fet on.
( toutes les voiles, To clap on all the fayles.
Te ne charge de rien. 1 will take nothing upon


me,
© Qui n'a cheual,ne chariot,il pue
+ ilYeut: Prov. He loads not when be Li
both bor{e,and cart:
Chargnure:f. as Charnure. |
fm. Carriage; Cariages, Carts, or Waggons


ste dé
RCA LAURE
ARS


as quand
at wants


> Se. “ a bt à take a right
Sincerely prightlys
Chariot,orWaggonsaff,tbe feuenflarres,
fs

—Cha-


Original-from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


CHA


Chariot branflant. The waggoa,Coach,or Caroache,
that bangs by leathers ; abanging Chariot.


_}*\Compagnon bien parlant vaut en chemin chari-


“ot branflant: Prov. Agrees with the Latine, Comes
* facundus in via pro vehiculo eft,
Qui n'a cheval ne chariot, il ne cies pas quand
ilveut:Pro. Hee often wants of his will, that wants
wherewithal, à
Chariotage: m. waggonnage ; the riding in,or carry-
ing by wagons rc.
Chariotte:f. 4 jimall Chariot,or toy that runs on wheeles,
and teaches, or belps young children to goe ; alfo,a kind


of Litter borne up by anaxletreesand two wheeles ; v-


Sed heretofore by citixens wines, who were not able, or |


not allowed to keepe ordinarie Litters.

Charitable: com. charitable; bountiful to the poore,
liberal to the needie,mercifall to thofe in miferie; good
unto all,

Charitatif: m. iue: f. as Charitable ; 4/0, doing cha-
ritable deeds ; or,jaclining unto charitie.

Charité: f. Charitie,loue, mercifulneffe ; pitie on, good-
neffe unto,tbe afflicted,or poore; alfo, loue,or good will
unto,agreement or concord with, neighbours ; beartie
friendline[[e maintained, good offices continued vnto,
or among,all;alfo,a bad word giuen,imputation caft on,
ill turne done one ; and hence;

Ce font des charitez qu’ ilm’amonftré. Such are
the fauors,and friendlie offices which he bath done me
i my abfence ; (Ironically.)


Il cerche trop bas la charité en fouillantfiprésdes |,


Fetes. Charitie is toobigh a vertue to be laoked for fo
low as the buttocks. an
Charité oingt,& peché poin&: Pro. Charitie com-
etch Jiane afflitteth. . g
rivaris: m. A publicke defamation,or traducing of,
a foule noïfè made, blacke Santus rung, to the fhame,
and difgrace of another ; hence, ani


dow of an old dot, the
young wanton,in mockerie of them both; a
of catching or killing of Stockdoues by night.
Charivaris de poelles. The carting of an
perfon,graced with the harmonie of tinging kettles and
fiying-pan Mufcke. ’
Charlaide. Stout, valiant, warlike; refemblingsor bol
ding of,Charles; (a name,wherein the French (by rea-
[on of the worth of fome kiags of theirs) dovery much
lorie.) :
Charlatap: m.4 Mountebanke,a prise drug-feller,
a pratling quack-faluer,a tatler,babler, foslifh prater,
mmender of trifles. ais fi Wo
ye ae 3 008, ih 3 P
Ccoyenbge pee cing,
chsco,
Svifting ying; extreme commendation of a trifle,there-
by to makes the more faleable. == §
GERS: QUES aT
arlaterie: f. Charlatifine; or as Charlatanerie, -
Charlot: m. A Gurlew. - : es


Charme: m. The Yoake tree,Yoake pluie, arn PO


_ Witch-bafell,Hard-beame; alfo,a Charme, Spell, Incan-
tation,Enchantment ; alfo,a Stuble ground.

Channeau: m. A young,or little Yoake tree,
darme-cœur. Rawi/hing, heart-charming, thoughts-


CHA


Charmereffe: £ An Inchauntreffe witch,or Wizard.
Charme-foing. (are-inchaunting, paines-allaying.
Charme-fouci. Comforting, care-charming, cark-ap-


eafing.
donnes : m. A Charmer, an Inchaunter, a Wi-


zard. !
Charmeufement. charmingly, inchauntingly.
Charmoye :f, A grone of Yoakes, or of Horne-beame
trees.
Charnag
eaten; alfo, flefh,or fl : k
harnalité : € Senficalitic, flefblineffe, carnallneffe.
aut: m. Flefh-time ; the feafon wherein flefh may
¢ eaten.


Charnié: m. A flake, prop, flay, pole, to fupport a


Vine.

Charnie: £ .4 Plaine, Downe, open, or vninclofid,

round.

Charnier: m. .4 Churchyard, or chanel houfe ; a
place wherein dead bodies are layd,or their bones kept;
alfo,a little flake,pole,or prop; aljo, a poudering tub ;
and bence ;

Plus rouillé que la claveure d'un vieil charnier;&,
Le vifage leur reluifoit comme Ja claveure d’un
charnier. Sceke Claveure.

I fera trembler le lard au charnier. He will doe
wonders; er,bewill terrifie them wonderfully, (Ire-
nically.)

Charniere: £ 4 bindge; alfo, a knuckle, or turning
ioynt; alfo, a certaine Deuice, or Engine , whereby a
700) leg, or arme is made to moue; alfè, as Char-
donnereau.

La charniere des genoux.The whall-bone,or whirle-
bone,of the knees.

rio m.ué: f. Flefhie; groffe, corpulent, quarrie,
thicke.
Capeau charnu. The fea Nettle.

Charnure : f. Brawne, flefhine/fé, fülne[[e of flefh, the
De boneleffe flefh; the flefhie parts of the bo-


La charnure d'herbes. Their pith, or pulpe; or the
knottie, or big felling of (fome of) their flaulkes,
and rootes.
Charongne: f. A carrion ; a flinking carkas ; putrified |
cj.


e: m. Flefh-time ; the feafon wherein flefh is
efb-meat.


arongneux : m. eufe:f Full of carrion; Rinking o
veined putrified, flefh. = Biking of
Charongnier: m. ere: £ Affecting, or feeding on,car-
r30n ; as Kjtes Es PC.
r . To boyle one fort of liquor nine or ten times
oner;(a word moft ufed by Syrrop-makers.)
ee rit To cut,backsbew ; as 2 Carpenter doth
jim cr.
Charpentaire: £. 45 Herbe au Charpentier; a, the


a-Onyon. |
arpente: f. A frame of Tymber (for a boufe, &c,) :
Bois de nte. Tymber. |

té: m, ée : f Wrought,or built,by a Carpenter;
made, or framed of Tymber ; alfo, cut, or hewed, as
Tymber bya Carpenter ; and hence; backed, flafhed,
led, or wounded (in manie places of the bo:


die.)
Charpenter. To play the Carpenter, worke Carpenter
iio ret tra
hew as 7 Tymber ; and bence; to backe,
le,or wound in many places of the bodie; al-
fo,to rumble, ee ee
=. Se


2 ~ Cha- |


7
+ THERSHIO'STATE LINE ER
See


CHA


Charpenterie:f. Carpentrie, Carpenters worke ; the
trade of a Carpenter ; ArchiteËlure of tymber.

Charpentier: m. 4 Carpenter, a À
Herbe au charpentier. Prwell, Carpenters-hearbe,
Sickle-worte, Hooke-heale, Selfe-beale ; alfo, Kib-
eu Lambes tongue, {mall Plantaine, oc, Looke

erbe. À
| Charpi:m. Lint,or downe (of linnen.) Looke Char-


y.

Charpi : m. ic: f. Tofed,or towfed; uncluttered,or pul-
led out (as a thicke locke of wooll ; ) alfo,dravne gent-
D,as woull, in the fpinning ; al[o, batchelled, or backel-
led ; refined on the hatchellyor flaxcombe.

Charpie: f. as Charpi, Lint.

Charpir dela laine. To to/é,or tow/e it; to pull out, or
afunder,the thicke locks thereof, alfo,te draw it(gent-
Ly) in fPinning.

Charpir du lin. To backle,or hatchell flax ; to refine
it,by batchelting,or on the flaxcombe.
arpy: m. Lint.
Charpy de Nature. A Cobweb.
Charrau: m. 4 Cart-way; Ruti-way.


made ; alfo,a little twelue-footed water-worme, much
hunted after by Trowtes, and therefore ufed by fifbers
as a bayt for them.
Charreton : m. A little chariot.
Charette: £. A Chariot; «Wagon, > "
Chafle à la charrette. is by Chariot (and the driuek.
thereof couered with leauie boughes) whereinone lyes,
readie with a Peece, or Bowe, to {hoot at Deere, while
they caxe at the fight, Ÿr flop at the noyfe, of the
wheeles.
Mangeur de charrettes ferrées. A terrible cutter,


all he fees,and eat allbe kils.
Charriable : com. Carriable; which may be carried on
waynes or in waggons. )
Charrié : m. 4 Bucking cloth or Nafb-clotb.
Charri¢: m. ée: f. Carvied,conueyed by cart,érc.
Charrier: m. 4 Charrié, i


Chartier. To carrie,or conucy by cart,waine,chariot,or


WALLON. Looke Charier,
a as Carriere. =
arron: m. AWaggon-maker, Cart-wright, 1
maker; afo, a Waggon-man, Wayne-man, or Carre-
man ; one that drines, or goes with, a Cart, Wayne, or
waggon ; whence ;
Bon charron tourne en petit lieu: Prev. À good
carter turnes ina narrow corner ; a wife fellow quits
bimfelfe well in time of extremitie, or, i
ea/ily out of an exiremitie. : '
Chatronnerie : £. Cart-worke,Cart-making; Carre-di-
Ps driuing. on 1
arroy:m. Carriage, Portage Waynage Wagonna
the aie ing of things fat cats or Waggon;


a


” acart,er other cariage; alfo,a Chaviot-load,
- or Wagon-load of.
Charroyer. To carrie in, or tranfport by, atayne, or


Char "The finit
fruage: m, rniture
he m


belonging to a plough;
eeres ; alfo,tilledor tent S Le ü fime

Droié de charruage. as Suittede difime, * | 3
Charrué:£, 4 Plough. 1s Sate C3
Tournetla charrué contre lesbœufs. To doe things | _ the other is moft c a a e, alone;

prepofteroufly, | + | chafcun le voir; à part,&c.

Charruë de chien ne vautrien: Prov. ‘The plough ‘A chafque mercicr fon panier: Pro.Every one mufl
looke to bis owne charge; or, beare his owne burthen.


that a dog drawes is not worth the driuing.


Charrée: f. Buck-afhes, the afhes whereof Lye bath bin-


Swacgerer, bugbeare, fvafhbuckler pone that will kill |


Jofis bimpelfe


fe |


CHA


Charrué: m. ée: f. Tilled,plowed.

Charruër. To till,eare, plow. ‘

Charte : f. #5 Carte; alfo, the Charter of a Towne, y
Corporation. — te

Charté: £. as Cherté. Deereneffe,e>c.

Charté: m. ée: £ Having a Charter, bolding, or beld
by Charter.

Chartée:f. 4 Cart-load,or,Cart-full of.

cpartie : f A Charter-partie, or bill of la


ding.
Charterie: f. A carterlie,or churlifhstricke ; alfo,a Ho-
Hell to fet carts under. ment”
ier: m.A Carter,Carreman;Waine-manWaggon-
man.
Hliure comme vn chartier. He fweares like a Car-
ter; (we [ay like a Tinker.)
In’eft f bon chartier qui ne verfe : Pro. The beft of
them Jometimes ouerturnes bis cart ; or,(as we [ay)the
beft Cart may orethrow. ;
Chartil : m.The frame of a Cart,Wayneor waggon;witb- À.
out thewheeles.
Ch mers Chariot-driuer.
arton: m.AWaggoner,or Chariot-driuer.
Chartre: f. 4 Charter (ec as in Chartres) alfo,a Pri-
Sonsor,the darkeft,or wor|t roome in a Prifonsthe Hole,
or Dungeon ; alfo,a Confumption; whence ;
Detienir,ou etre en chartre. To fall into, or be in, a
confimption ; to languifh, pine, wafte,or wither away ;
(Metaphorically, from {uch as baning beene long pent
ina clofe prifom, looke, for the moft part, moft piti-
on it,
es: f. Charters ; auncient Rolls, publike Records,
Pleadings,Deeds,Infiruments,or Euidences,concerning
_ either the Crowme , or Countrey; or, a Comminaltie, er


Corporation.

Trefor des chartres. The Rolls.
Chartrier: m. A Laylor ; alfo,a prifoner.
Chartulaire: m. A Terrier or Coucher-book?.
afvi. Looke Chervis. -
Chis: Looke Chaas.


Chas. à chas vn ; Scarce ome, but one,onely one.

Chafcun: m. une: f. Eerie one,all,each ; Looke Chaf-
_Chafcun a fa guile. Every one ashe likeseoc,

? Eben af user Euery one bath bis turne,

cour[e,time.

Chafcune: f. Chacunerie.

Chafcunerie,or Chaftuniere. Looke Chacunerie.

Chaferet:m. 4 Chefifitor Cheefe-fat.

Chafereux: m. eufé: £ Belonging to the chef fat.


Chafier:m. A cheefe-preffejor as Chafiere ; « Cheefe-
hecke.
were: f. A Se hee 4 the long andronndracke

whercon checfe is dryed ; and the great,or grated Saue
bung,by a pulley,to the top of a Dayrie-boufe, or Store-
boufe; and feruing to keepe cheefe, white-meates,and
other belly-timber in, igs,

afliét : m, A Bedflead.

te: f. A Cafemate in fortification ; a murthe-
onfe placed in the ditch, to plague the affaylants,


CHA
Chaffable: com. Chafèable ; fit to be chafed, purfived,


hunted after. ne
Chafle: f A bunting; a chafe, purfuit,or following of;
4 fearch for, inquirie after; alfo,a chaft at Tennis; al-
{0,4 Millers walkesor circuit, wherein be may lavefilly
fetch grift vato his Mill; alfo, (in water-workes) that
which forceth the water ont, or giveth it force to burft
outs any violent expulfion, expre
wing out ; alfo,a Shrine for a Relicke,or other (beld) fa-
cred thing ; alfo,that thing,or part of a thing, wherein
another is enchafed; and bence;
La chaffe d'un Raifor. The bandle of a Rafor.
La chaffe d'une Rofe. The greene fprigs on the bot-
tome, or backfide,of a Rofe.
La chafte des fouldes. Looke Soulde.


Arbalefte de courte chafle. That carries, or fhoots,
deuell but a tittle way.

Harqueboufe de chaffe. À fowling peece.

En chafle. 4 bulling; as a Cow thats wanton.
Marquez bien cette chafle. Heed well that paf
Sage, marke well the point, whereof 1 baue informed


you.

Retourner fes chaffes. 4 bauke,when {he bath flown

out,at ber Coie come in againe.

Ceft vne Chaffe ou leveneur eft prins: Pro. Said

of theill (but deferued) fucceffe of a fulfe Accufation ;

or of any Enterpri(e, that proues burt full to the under-
taker,or deuifer of it; wee [ay of fuch a one ; bee bath
made a rod for hisowne tayle. |

I n’eft chafle que de vieux levrier: Prov. An old

de bunts furef, bites foreft, bolds what be catches ,

kils what be reaches.

Chaflé: m.ée: £. chafed, purfued; bunted after; put
to fight ; driuenaway ; reietted, or caft off ; expelled
CITÉE :

Chafle-boffe.tearbe-willo or rilim-bearb, oof
fivefe. | Ù

Chafle-chien: m. The Clarke,or inferiour Officerof a

_ Church; who (befides bis authoritie ouer dogges) dia

© Pributes the holie-bread, and begs for the (majfing)
Priefl.

Ch corheille: f. A kind of {malt fowling pecce.

Chafie-crainte: com. Feare-expelling.

a ta Saint Johns worte , Saint Iohns
gralfe. j

Chasse-ennui. Er A HA À

e-erreur.Error-expelling,zealous of truth,

Chafle-fievre: £ Germaunder, Englifh Treacle ; an


Le

Chaffe-mal. Mifchiefés-expelling s ill-things out-dri.
uin }

Ch -marée: m. À Rippiers j

Chuff-marée fA Peur D e that


oes off by a fire-locke, and is charged with Qua
to ele; fo tearmed, becanfe frp mof
e Religion. TE
Chaffe-montftre : com. Monfler-purfuing(an Epitbite
for Hercules.) 4
affe-mort: com. Preferuatine,death-expelling,
afic-nuê. Pian; à 6
-ordure : com, Cleanfing, purging, filtb-expel-
thine[[e out-driuing. +
as Chaffe-tnefle. (A word deuifed in the
5 cares-excluding ; as


Challespene. aie À


Go gle


putting forthdri- |:


La chafle d'un trebucher. The fhrine of a paire of |
gold weights ; the hollow wherein the Cocke,Tongue,or
Tryall playeth.


CHA


wine, and gold, ec.
Chafle-pefte. fubftan. # Chaffe-boffe,
Chafle-pefte. adjeét. Plague-expelling. ;
Chafle-poulx. wild blacke Ellebor e,or Beaves-foot.
er: To chafè, or drine away ; to expell, rerebtycaft
off,or put mans 3 alf6,to bunt; or;follow after ; 10 pur-


vfhesor ginechafevnto. .
Chaffer apresles mouches: To fpend the time moft
vainely idly, foolifhiy; to as little purpofe as may be: or,
to loofe time altogether. iy
Aurant vaur celuy qui chafle & rien ne prend,
comme celuy qui lit&rien n’entcnd:Pro, As good
bunt and take nought,as read and vnderftand nought.
Chafle-rage. The bearb wild Cre(Jes ; or, Dittamie;Dit-
tander,Pepper-wort. «| eis
Chafle-rat. A certaine harmelelfe Serpent, called fé,
becaufe {he,commonly, feeds on Rats,
erefle: f. À buntreffe:
Challerie: £ Hunting, aching
erie: f. Huntin: 34 i. yank
Challerot:m. ote: Eich neni $
teron. A verie fall ¢ coffer of wood.
Chaffeton: m. A Scrichowle ; alfo, alittle chef of
. wood. tr Be sd
Chaffeur: m. 4 bunter, a chafer; one that feeketh, or
traceth, out, others. sterit nck
eur de mouches. A kill-flye; a Braggadechio, !
alfo,a vaine or idle fellow.
À y à dechaffeur. A large, or great; breakefaft
eaten.) ;
Mefle de chaffeur. A fhort,or foone-fayedyMaffe.
Chaffie. Lôoke Chacie.
Chaifieufete: f. Extreame bleare-cyedne(fe:
Chaffieux: m. eufe: f. Bleare-eyed ; whofe eyes doe
ranne continually.
affis: m. A pee of wood for a window; ( hence)
alfo, a woodden, paper, or linnen, window ; and, the
bands,or borders that are on either fide of a dove,gate,
or window; alfo,a Printers Tympane.
Chaffiffé. Feneftre chaffilsée. 4 window that is
conéred with Paper , or Linnen cloth, in flead of


glaffe.

Chaffitier: m. A maker of woodden, or paper, win-
dovses ; or of frames, for paper;or linaen,windowes,
haffoire: fA Carters whip, or whip to driue bor-


fès.
Chaflot: m, The Gull, Bull-bead, or Mikers thumbe ;
a fifh. è us


: D e:f. À Chefnut.
Chaftaigne chevaline. The horfè Chefut;or;zhkind
of great blacke Chefnut ; rounder and fiveeter,büt leffe

- fauourie,then the ordinarie one. .. Stet
Chaftaigne d'eau. The water Nut, Saligot; water


x Caltrop. : S
Chattsigne femelle. The finall oy wild Chefnut..
~ Chaftaigne marine. The fea Vrcbin (a little fhelt-
5) (ome alfo call (o,the water Caltrop.
emafle. as Marton; the great,or dome/-
| Ghee pie de csc. efx Prob 2
mer. ea vicom. DL
Chaftaigne de riviere. # Chaftaigne d'eau. -
Il en plumera ve Hee will finart ; or
deerely , for it; it will coft bim deevelp ; : Séeke
Plumer. à
Chaftaignerayes £4 Groue,Plot,or Orchard of chef-
nut trees, - : tial
:m. A Cheffen,or Che, oe
“ CARE Chatte:


it +
+ AE 28,


ES
STE sr A


C'H A 1


Chafte : com. Chaf, lufileQe continent benefit of bedie;
pure, undefiled; ta net diftained with filth,or
any (unlawfull) Veneric. :

Chafteadun. The chiefé towne of the Countie of Du-
nois ; whofe inhabitants being as rafh, as quicke ppiri-
pe or beginning to the pronerbiall phrafe.
Il SeChafteadun. He replies too baftily; be is too
quicke of conceit ; prefuming be vnderflands all ones
meaning by one word he often miftakes all. :

-Chafteau: m. 4 cafile (is properly, a boufe furnifbed
with towers, incompalfed by walls, and ditches ; and
Sirengthened by a Mount,or Donjon in the middeft; yet
the French Courtiers tearme fo any houfe of the kings;)
alfa,a Rooke at Cheffe..

afteau deuant. The fore-caftle of a fhip.
Faire deschafteaux en Efpaigne. To'build cafiles
in the aire (fay we;) to minfé be knowes not about what;
to beftow the time in frinolous contemplations ; to bee
full of wandering,and vain imaginations; to propound
unto bimfelfe,or cthers,mofi idle,er impofible exploits;
(for there are but few Caftles in the main land of Spain;
or if more were to be built,who bath to dowithall but
the Spaniard?)
Chafteau abbatu eft à demi refai&t: Prov. 4
Cafile once throvene dovene is balfé repaired.
Bon chafteau garde qui feait font corps garder:
Prov. A good fort guards be, that bimfelfe can
ward. i
aftel: m. as Chafteau; alfa,a kind of Peare where-
of excellent Perrie us mage oie, achatiell; or, fluffe,
ods; moueables,
eniers chaftels. Looke Chaptels.  «
elain: m. 4 Lord Caflellain ; the Lord, or ow-
ner of a caflle, or of a fortified boufé; or of a ter-
ritorie, unto which Caftle-like Iurifdittion, and Roy-
alties, belong ; infériour to a Baron in ranke (though
in few points of Rights) and the meaneft Lord of dig-
nitie that is; alfo, the Gouernour, Captaine, Confla-
ble, or ludge,of a Cafile, or of a Towne that hath, er
bath had, a cafile in its: fuch as be, at this day, Les
aftelains des villes de Dauphiné, Auy:
and Poictou ; as alfo thofè of the conntrey of Fo-
refts (wherein there be Indges of this name, who


Iuvifditlion exceedes not matters of threefeore il. |


ele


lings value;) And as nov in thefe Ayn kes
Chanel are, enen [à beretofere i yong
were, but Officers, (Captaines, or Iudges) placed by
Dukes, or Earles (thathad large Territories) within
their principal, and moftremote Bouroughes, to con-
taine the inhabitants in obedience, or to adminifler
Jäfice unto them, in ordinarie matters (for they were
allowed to exercife no other then baffe luftice in vil-.
tages, and moyenne in townes ; ) Thus bauing the
commaund of Places, and being farre from their
Lords,they incroached, by degrees, on the Inheritance,
‘sand Seignorie thereof, and À beck of Officers,ab-
Solute Lords ; turning all duties, and rights, which
© formerly they yeelded unto their founders, into a bare
Tenure ; or or me fe or tenants) arid
them, which at ‘as Miniflers, or Deputies
held under-them : And afterwards ae on
“> with La Balle or moyenne luftice, they ufurped La
> hautes.and (more then that) all fuch extraordinarie,
- or two-fold lurifdiélion as the Barons of thofe times
© shad and beld it ontill she yeare 1573. (Laoke Droiét
de Bailliage;) 4/9, the Iudge,or Stewed aia
Caftellains Courts, SE. _ HUIESISEET
Grand chaftelain. À Lord Baron; called fo in many


1


Digitizedeby Go. gle


Chafteneraie: £. A plot, or ground full. of chefinut.


CHA


Places, from the conformitie that is betweene the E-
Sates of a Baron and a Chaftelain, whe bath uferped
Da Baron-like Rights,and Royalties,

Chafte in: m, aine : f.. Of, or belonging to, a Cafile;
caf laickeor Caftleward,

dtelainerie: f. as Chaftellenic ; or the Steward-
of a Lord Caftellains courts.
im. Alittle Cafile, Fort, or Hould; alfo, a
Court,or Auditorie, of luftice; a Guild-ball,or (ordi-
navie) Se boufè, within a citie, wherein both ci-
wile, and criminall caufes are heard, and determined
bya Lieutenant, or Prouoft (royall) and certaine Affi-
fant Confeillers; al/o,a prifon ( for great ‘perfins;)al-
as childifh game Cobnut ; or (rather) the throwing
4 Ball at a beape of Nuts, which done, the thrower
takes as many as be bath bit,or fcattered.
Le ws Chaftelet. The name of a prifom.

Chaftellain. Looke Chaftelain.

a zm. é¢:f. Caftellated (a tearme of Bla-
on.

Chaftellenie: f. A Cefile-wicke,or Caflefbip; the Te-
nure,or Honour ef a Cafilefhip ; the rs
on, or Dignitie of a Lord Cafiellain ; a kind of Seig-
niorie thats held of fome ether then the king, or not en
retily of the Crowne, and bath all ( fubalterne) Iurif
diélion annexed vato it, (In refpeci whereof, Toutes

~ Tes luftices ayans plein Territorie, & entier com«

ement font appellées Chaftellenies ; and in
= old Law-bookes this word often fignifies, L’ enclaue,&
» diftroi& de toute pleine, & entiere Iuftice, fayes a
learned Frenchman; And though it be infériour to a
Baronnie in point of nl - fèmetimes fubieët in
Tenure (fome Chaftellenies being held of Barens)
and baue a farre leffe Territorie belonging to it (for a
Baronnie fhould containe at lea three Chaftelle--
nies) yet doth it refèmble itin all Priuiledges and Roy-
alties ; except that of the walled, or fortified towne; in
_ flead whereof, the Lord Caflellain may baue a ca-
file, or fortified boufe ; and bath power to debarre any
one from sores, Li another within his Tervitorie,

: Pa the King baue grawnted the other a Licence to

eu. ; 1,


D ide haftellenie. Sie Droiét de Baillia ge
called int “te 0 of Meaux ; becawfe it belongs vn-


hallement. chef conti, bony, mod,


trees,
Chafteté: f. Chafitie,continencie lufilefnefe.
Chaftiable: oon Chafticeable ; fit to be sed.


#


; ié: m. ce: f. Chaflifed, punifbed ; correc:

ted.

Chaftier. To chaflife, punifh; corredt,
Qui bien aime bien chaftie: Prov. He that foxes
throughly,payes home when be punifhes. em
Qui ne chaftie culot ne chaftie culafle : Prov.He
that capes not {mall faults ouerfees great Onesser,be
that willnot amend finall faults, cannot amend great
OMES. ae :


Chaftieur : m. 4 chaftifir, Purifher 3 Correc-
Chaflimenc:m Chaflicement, puniflament, core


Chafti-villain. 4 whip, feourge, or cuccell fir à
_ Anaue 3 alfo, a Cafile, ar Citadel in, or necre, a good
» Towne. Ye on


Cha-


Original from
THE-OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


s


C-H A à C H A


Chaftrable:com, Geldables fit to bee gelt, heyed, or
dd.


Cc alice : m.€0: f,Gelt, peyed,cut,lib'd, played.
Vn arreft chaftré. Pale whereof is reuoked by way of
interpretation, or declaration of the Court that made
itz


Pore chaftré. 4 bog,or barrow bog. :
Chaftrement :m. A gelding Jibbing, fpeying, (playing.
Chaftrer. To geld,lib,cut,fpey,fplay.

Chaftrer les arbres, To pierce them at the {foot ,ther-

he to make them void th'ill bumors which are in their


10 lay the whole blame,and fhame of an offence, on.
wre la campane au chat. To begin aquarell, to
Yaifè a brabble, make a iarre, fet at oddes, er together
‘by the earcs sxe fay alfo,in the fame Sence,to bang the
bell about the cats necke. ;
On ne prend pas tels chats fans mouffles.(Sayed of
4 flrong tovwne,or flout perfon ;) they will not bee fora
ced.pr fetched in eafily ; they will {evatch thofe that of:
fer to catch them,and therefore go prouided for them,
Vous l' cuffiez fait pafler par fe trou du chat. You
bad made him doe wonderfull matters ; or any thing,


- flocke and branches;alfa,to difcharge them of noyfome (ironically,)
elie pina ES rr Se Chat efchaudé craint l'eau froide : Prov, The (taul-


Chaftrer les moufches à miel. To drive a bine (of


Bees,
Chistes le parc. To cull throldeft fhecpe out of a
flocke,and fisrnifh it with as many ‘yong ones.
aftréur :m. 4 fgelders liber, fpeyer.
Chaftrure: £. as jaftrement; Al/o,the art,or manner


of gelding. ; |

Lachaftrure d'un faulx. ‘The fuperfluous buds, or

twigs which baue beene cut,or pulled, from it.
Chasuble: f, 4 chafuble, a fafhion of cope thats open

onely in the fides ; and is worne at Maffe beth by the
= Prieft (whobath it round) and his affiflant Deacon, |

and Subdeacon, whobaue it fquare, in the bottome.

t: m. A cat,a puffe.


ded cat feares water though’t be cold,

Lechat a faim quand il ronge du pain:Pro. The cat
is bungrie when a cruft contents ber.

Auchat cendreuxiamais netomberienen gueule:
Prov. An idle boufé-doue nener gets eferment,

Au chat lefcheur baton fouvent 4 gueule : Prov.
The lickorous cat hath many a rap. -
‘A bon rat bon chat : Prov, Two knaues well met, or
matched. — è ) Te
Celuy a bon gage du chat qui en tient la peau:
Prov. Hee’s füure of a cat that hath her s A

C'eft belle bataille des chiens, & des € ts,chacun
a des ongles : Prov. Looke Bataille, *


Les rats fe pene Paife Là ou il n'y a point
Chat fourré. 4 Pertifogger ov paultrie Lawyer. de chats : Prov. where cats ave wanting rats in fiee-
/Chat garanier, Lroke Chat-garanier. dome walke,


Occafion trouve qui fon chat bat: Prov. we fay
(with fome difference) à man may eafily find a flaffe to
beat bis dog. .

Tant dort le chat qu'il fe refveille: Prov. See Ref.
veiller.

Trop tard ferepend le rat entre les pattes du chat:


Prov. when punifhment’s infliéted repentance comes
too late.


Chathuant, 4x Owle, or Madye-bowlet ; Leoke
hat-huant. < ?

Chat de mer, The finallef (kind of) Dog-ffb.

au Chat,ou, de chat. Nep,or Nip, cats Mint,
“Herbe aux chats. The fame ; alfo, as Ortie puante.
Oeil de chat. Calues-fnowt, Snapdragon(an bearbe;)
alfo,a certaine white gemme ; (Looke Ocil;) alfo, a
eats-eye ; or fight that is as good by night asin the day;


’ uting eye. | Chat-chaftel,ou chateil.A defenfive engine of warre,
~ Parte de und rie, cats-foot, aleboofe,tune= Somewhat refèmbling the Roman Teftudo, and grown
boofé,Gill creepe by the ground. © = :


‘as it) altogether out of vfe.
te:f, 4 fhe-cat,or doe-cat ; alfo,a certaine Engine,
wherewith fifh is (forbidden to be) caught,
Chatel: m. Achattell,or mouable : @Norm.
Chatemite. An hypocrite ; « counterjeiter of bolinee,
religion, deuotion. …
atemiterie : Édpocrifie; à faining of xeale,a coun-
terfeiting of bolineffe,religion,or deuotion.
Chatemitiquement. Hypocriticall.
Chateinitte, Looke Chatemite,
Chatcpcleufe :f. 4 corne-deuouring mite,or weeuell,
:Chat-fourré: m, 4 Lawyer s or Pettifogger (whocom-
monly weaves a gowne fürred with witd cat: qRab.
hat- garanier: m. APolecat ; or,a kind of wild Cat
that baunts warrens. : à
Chat-huant:m, The great (rough-legd)Oxle ; alfo,the
Horne-coot,or Horne-owle, - a
Chat-huant plombé. A/mall, and leaden-coloured
leyvery commen in Lorraine. ~~
er chat-huant.4nOwlet,or the little(rough-legd)
Owle.
Chuatillons im. Small frefb-water Lampreyes ; called fi
atT A RENE
Chaton : m. The Beazill,collet, head, or broadeft part
of a ring,érc, wherein the flone is fet ; alfo,the 6,
or flower of a willow; Looke Chatton.
Chaton de l'oeil ; as Orbite,


Pied de chat. .A kind of port,or vpfet ofa bit, made
like a Cats foot. prank
Poil de chat. whitlow in the finger; alfo, the fefte-


ving fore tearmed a cats-tayle,
Poire chat. The name of a wholfame, fiveet-finelling,


and -tafling peare, . ne
craint Er i a certaine tricke done
by Tumblers, and vaulters vpon a table fet aflope a-
geinflawal. se
. Acheter chat en poche,ou en fac. 1 fay, t0 buy a
IAP. = AND
‘ler da ned comme vn chat maigre. Tobe light,or
fot a safe read ight ec, hy gn
yt a. on egs, rs ‘ :
Avoir vmoeilà la rpg Toheed as
well what will decreafè, as what dot b -encreafe, bis
aire.“ vets). 201) a
Fons À manger au chien, & au chat. Tokeepe 4
plentifisll boufe. - =". St
Entendre le chat fans dire minon. To bane a good
conceit,quicke apprebenfion, readie underflanding; to
dow without telling what is to be done,
mEfvciller le chat quidort. To iacenfe an angrie bodie
Woben be is at quiet ; 10 fèt th'ill minded on mifchiefe;
druba hidden fore ; 10 remember a forgotten fault,
$ efveillé qu'unchat qu'on fouctte. More quick,


or ana whipped cat. Chatonnet: To kittle,or bring forth yong cats, ws
Icéter le ch: M LL To caft an imputation, oft A mgfistakecer pie


Original:fron


mM +2 ;


k CHA CHA


a


pranke ; alfoth'art of pilfering,or nimming.
Chatouille:f, A (certaine) fifbatbas verie full of fall

bones,and therefore dangerous meat,
hatouillé : m. ée: £ Tickled; gentiy,er with pleafiae,
; toluched ; alfo, flattered ; footbed, pleafed with pray-


Il a les pieds chauds. Hee is luftie,linelie, gamefome
frolicke,wanton ; alfo, be babbles or papers acy
Ine trouve rien dechaud; Or, 11 ne trouve rien
trop chaud,ny trop pefant. He will take,or under=
take any thing ;notbing (whereof profit may be made)
comes amiffe vntobim,
Chaude: f. vnechaude. Abeating, as of yronin the | -
fire 5 alfoya fierce onfet,a violent affault,
‘A la chaude.tn a chafe.jn beatin choller,
au:m.d Caudle ; or warme broth.
Chaude-colle: f. Salneff , leacheroufneffe, geere-


ue
‘A chaude-colle. Hotly ; Looke in Chaud,
haudement. Hotly ; ardently, feruently; angrily,
Siercely, ficrioufly; eagarly,earnesily,vebemently;round-
lyin ball,in great heat.
auderon: m, A Cauldron, or kettle,

Le chauderon machure la poifle; one friend, or
+ ogee defames, difgraces, or detraëis from, ane-
ther.
Convercle digne du chauderon. Like maifter like
man ; or bad intertainment for à bad gueft ; the pu-
nifhment bis lendneffe deferued.

Chauderonnée: £ A cauldron-fil of.

eronnerie: f. Flefh(or fifh)thats ordinarily boi-

led in cauldrons,or kettles.

Chauderonnier :m. 4 Copper-fmith; Kettle-maker;


fis.

Chatouillement: m. 4 tickling ; a pleafant, or gentle
touching, a delightfill moung ; alfo, flatterie,a foo-
thing, praifing,fmoothing.

Chatouiller. Te tick/e.to touch gently, ; to glad, or io

by touching; to moue with plealure,to prouoke with de-
hight; alfoco flatter,claw, fmooth, praifè, pleafe with
faire words,
Se chatouiller pour fe faire rire, To flatter, and
pleaft himfelfe with fond hopes, and vaine imaginati-
ons ; alfo,to forge idle, and unfeafonable ieafis fr bim- |,
felfe to laugh at if others will not. =

Chatouilleux : m. eufe: £. Ticklifh; tickle ; quaint,
nice,daintie,precife ; loath, backward ; odde, prepofte-
vous ; waiward, froward'; keene, fone cutting, dan~
gerous to be touched jll to be bandled,bard to be dealt
with,

Chatouilleux à la pointe. Quiche om the fpurre,or,
quickly anfiveriag the fpurre.

Chatouilloir :m. Any ticklifh part of the bodie, efpeci-

. allythe fide.

Chatrin :m, 4 Goaler (an old word.)

Chat-rocher. 4 kiad of Doggefifh.

Chatte: f. A {he cat,or doe cat,

Toute chatte a fon febvrier : Pro. Eerie manhath
bis madding fit; or,a [eafon there is wherein many wo
men may be woed,if not wonne.

Chattement : m. A kitling; a breeding, ot bringing
forth kitlings ov yong cats.

Chattemiterie. Looke Chatemiterie.

Chatton:m. 4kitling,or pong cat. >
Des chattons. The Catkins,Cattailsagletalike blow-
ings,ot bloomings of nut-trees,@ce

Chatus. 4 kind of vine.

Chauans : m. Howlets,little Owles.

Chavaflme:: f. 4 meafire,or quantitie,of land,contai..
ning in length 120 foot, and in breadth 30; an Oxe-
gang,or dayes worke for two plough-Oxen ; alfo, the| —
end of a clofe, or furrow, where the plough turmeth,

Chauce. as Chauffe. .


et: m. A warme place.
Chaudiere: £. A great cauldrom,or kettle.
Chaudot : m. 4 heat,or bot thing.
Chau : m, Akettle,or cho 3 Looke Chaude-


ron.


Enr mines A kettle-full of.

Chaudronnier. Looke Chauderonnier.

oe a for Cheneviere. A bempe-yard, or bem-
ene y
auet. is flead of Cabuét : ERab.

€: m, Feveell ; beating fluffe, or fuffe to beat | --


with; alfo,a heating.
aufta


Chauceaux.Taxes paied, or feegyallowed, unto fome s3(ca
Lords in Henault, for the mai € of the common lie women ufe to warme their netber parts before fuch
bankes,or caufèyes. poore chimneyes;) or 4 floue; füch a one as a Dutch

Chaucée. Looke Chauflée. woman, in Winter-time, fets betweene ber legs as foe

cine Looke Chauffage. FM di

uché. Troden on; troden downe; alfo, trodenyas a iffe-dos:m. A fafhion of fmall and low chimney,
benne by a cocke. which bath but abole, in flead of a fimnell , for the


Chauche-mare. The difeafe tearmed the “Nigbt-


mare.
Chaucher.Totread,as a cocke doth a henne; & hence,
totread on,or cates PT à
:m. À beat, bot feafon, ce. :
mee À : m.de :f.Hot ; feruent ardent; alfo,teaflie cho-
| clericke,in a chafe,in a fieme ; alfo, vebement, violent,


voiding of fmoke.
auffe-pied : m.A fiot-floues a little and low fine
that fèrues to keepe the feet warme. ;
Chauñfer. To beat warme,chafe.
Chauffer la cire. To endure a long expectation of a
benefit sor fauowr;promiftd :
Je cognoisbien de quel bois ilfe chauffe. Ihrow


> “fierceeagar,earneft ;baflie, firious, bim as well as be that made bim ; Lknow well ynough
ES À mal. 7 eatiaal ales 0: burning A- + pp bat be svonld bane, when


e trop pres fe chauffe qui fe brufle: Prov. Hee
flands too neere the fr ther barnes bimtife

Pel fe cuide ch qui fe brufle: Prov. Some,
ig but to warme,do burne,themfelues.
rerette, or Ch :f 4 chafing-difh.


re Ch ©
ir dés Chauffourter,


Cheadibi Ed el cial Fromil over satin
… Saving pan into the fire. ss


Original from
THE-OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


CHA


Chaufiousres- ee alii Wetsmnere dshcnre, bifincare;


Cha te m.A LA lie bite; a hole wherein lime bath
| memes the fuffe that makes it bath bin
igged.
Chat: :m.A lime burner, ire maker ; alo,
one that works onely with lime,and chalke.
CEA CRent ain
Chauguette. as Efchau Awatch-tower.
Chau. id. Looke Chaud. errs
Chagoo Chaude.
mulictes f, A plot, or bed, of cabbidges in a Gar-


Chaulmage: m. The cutting,or moving of firaw , 07


bble.

re a a :f. Straw ; or the flemme of corne.

re = ae picke,or Hist up Cap ;
mow, fis

Chaulineur : m. A gatherer, or picker up,of firaw ; a
cutter,or mower of fiubble.

Chaulfepot. A certaine little bird,

Chaulx :f. Lime.
Chaulx mecallique . 15 made (efpecially that. kind
whereof Ennamel 15 compounded)of two parts of lead,
and one of Cornewall Tinne, well calcinated together
in an ouen of renerberation,

ory ee mye: f. Alufliemouliie, unfeafonable :

C

re emoeye Chaulmer; &,as Chommer.
haumes. Defart,or untilled,grounds; lay lands; oras
Terres Chaumieres,

Chaumier : m.ere:f. Strawie,of fIraw.
Terres chaumieres, Stubble grounds.

bb + : mine: £Stubbliemade ofor,couered with


aumine :f. thatched cote or cabbin,

aun im. Ba into a cornet er.
then , a i ut into Theat
ry ve nee wee € pie or cold


Chauffag €: m. Shooe=money ; expence in fhooes
Fa boleh Jalfè,bofèn.or pre espece fine sal,
Chauffant :m.ante:£ Shooing putting on fhooes,
Marroquin chauffant. Gentle, yeelding yetching,
Came if, Abofé; a flocking, or netherfiocke (Bas de
Chaufle) al/o, a breeke,or breech ; (in which fence it
is moft rey plurall) Haut de chauffes,
Chaufled'un ayfement, The bottome of a te the
roome,or bole whereinto the ordure ils
Chauffes à la do bien Lonke Bigotte.
Chaufles dla bougrine. Strait Venitians without


alfo,ta cut, or


DE SNS
+ aa ala ace, <i Gregges, or Galloga/-
= Chauffesdlag ed ition cf ait
ans; @
- Chante sate fier PR LOS
that er is dif


Chauffes en poire Peeces of cloth wit
— tage c


Chautes: à queuë de merlus, Round breeches with
cannions ;bauing in the feat a apres like a fifhes
tayle; and wore by old men, {cbollers, and fuch like
necdie,perfèns.
hosp
£sbreeches ; or the


tin


ifie their fjropes ; ufed in flead of the |.


ing, or out-firone.
ound bofè, whofe panes “


GRA


rials the outfide of a Taber.
Braye achaufle. 4 kind of fifh-net made fomewbat
like a wide bofe,


Courtes chaufles. women ; (belike, becaufe of
them weare fhort breeches, and few of them long hoc:


king,
Tete chaufles. To kickeupthe beeles; to make a


4 courte chauffe longue laniere: Prov. (So that
_ wants in the one may bee fapplied by the o-
er.)
Le vin vafans chauffes : Prov.wine weares no bree-
ches;a gen coñceales nothing.
Chauflé: m. ée : f. Hofed ; fhod ; that hath bofe, or


char ye
A woman that weares breeches ; alfo,tbe
éaufey, banke,or damme,of a pond.or of a riuer ; alfo,
the leuell,or [ip dpcrficies of the sah, whereout a wall
Pp tg aboue ground; ee eRez.
Tel mur eft abbatua rez de chauflée. 15 over-
throwne. made leuell to threarth.
Chaufle-pied :m. 4 fhooing-borne.
Chaufle-pot. Looke Cha
Chauffer. To fhooe, to fed, to Peru, fer farnife witb
fhooes ; ue bets to put on, or fit with, bofes or
y) gloues.
re er les ailes aux pieds, ou, les efperons aux
talons à. To cowrfe, or giue hard chace vate; alfo, to
make to ftud, runne,or flie a mayne ; alfo, to make for-
ward, or carne i in purfuite of.
Ime chauffà bien les efperons enuers le Roy. He
made me,by the tales 1heard be bad told of me, bye me
towards the King.
ly chauffa bien mal fes lunettes, He miftooke ex-
ceedingly, or was much ouerfeene, ther ein.
Ime chaufle 4 moins de poin@s que. He makes
as iia unta ; or makes leffe to Fires my turne


Chaultetier: :m. dorer hofe-maker.
Chaufetrape :f. A Caltrop ; or iron engine of warre,
foure A pe or “sys ps whereof one,
bowfüeuer, it is caft i aie ard; alfo, the
forest ; (called (all) 0) i Calthrop) alfo the wa-
ter Calthrop, water iat 3 Saligot ; alo, a Trap-


ai

Poy os ess . The fame

Chauffettes : Sherk linnen breeches dravers;or vn-
. der-bofe.


Chauffettes à eftrier, Stirrup fiockings.
Chaufleure:f. 4 hofing or foooing; alfa, bofin, or
fers: ; Looké Chauflure.
Chauffon: m. A ble bales ai € fiche
Chauflure :f .4 bofing, or fhooing ; alfo, hofen, or


gag joka sardine ces

met? ¢ cir or t met

their matches; Hs onttrouvé ch: &c: The fame. —
Levin n’a point de chauflure: Pro.Winé exer hg
bare breeched ; the drunkard diftouers all thats
meso, bim ; 3 any man may fee ae
haue a mind) bis arfè.

Ce :com.Bauld, bauld beaded,bauld

uve d'efprit. ited : that

ski sep is bead,

Chauver. To wax bauld.
Chauverdes oreilles. To clap downe the earessas a
horfe,or affe doth,when be is angrie, or intendeth mif


chieue ; alfo,to make A ign will the canes,


np > little


Originalstrom
THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSE


CHE CHE


Chauvefouris : m, A Batt,Flittermoufe, Reremon{?.
Chauvefouriffier :m. The bat-wing bone(in the lower
part of the beadjfo called ,becaufe it jpreads.or ts made
like the wing of a bat,
Chauveté: Ésauldne fe bauld-patedne[fe(and hence)
alfa,the bar ene|[e of a place whereon nothing growes,
| Chauvir.To wax bauld, ;
| Chauviflantwaxing bauld ; alfo , finiling, or fmoyling.
| Chauvifler.as Chauvir; Al/o,to fmilé,or fmoyle.
|


tolanguifh, grow leane,wafi,pine,or fill away tbr
Crime ace paid, vw


cher. Tow .

Cheinier : m,The eldeft,or chiefe beir e in a difcent;who
is to do homage,and fuch other primarie dueties for the
whole land that is difcended,

in : m. A way; a trator path to goin; a fireet,
or canfcytotrauellin; a road; rut; page ; cowfe,
1raine ; iourney,
Den chaftellain (de Boœullenois. ) Is 20 foot
road.
Chemin de Clermont. Is 32 foot bread.
Chemin d'efcole, The loz ge ft,or fia theft way.
in forain de Boullenois. Is fificene foot
broad,
Chemin S. lacques. The white fireake in the shie,
tearmed,Viala&ea,or,the Milkie way.
Chemin Royal. The Kings high-way ; which by the
cuflomes of forme places may be made 60 foot br oad ; ia
others itistobenarrower ;455
Chemin Royal de Vallois. 15 but 30 foot broad in
arrable grounds,and 40 in woods,
Chemin


Chaux : f. as Chaulx; Lime,

Chaziere : f. Looke Chafiere,

Cheant. Faling,or tumbling downe.

Cheau : m.4 whelpe,or cub.

Chebule. The biggef kind of the Mirabolan plumme;
(is long, and fomewhat like a peare, or a frnall ley-


mon.

Chedins : m. The chizfe,or bead men of the parifb; cal
led fo by the barbarous peafant.

Chef: m.The bead(ofa man or woman;) alfo,a Chiefe,or
Generall ;'a bead,er principal Commaunder ; alfo,the
end of a place, time , or bufineffe ; alfo, as Chef
lieu.

Le chefdes armes d'une maifon. Is, the eldeft bro-
ther of ahoufe, or the moff ancient houfé ina familie,
which qiucs th’armes thereof without any difference.
Chef d'oeuvre. 4 Maifter-peecesor Maifters peece;
any principal peece of worke, or of workemanfhip.
Fief en chef. A Fief held in (hiefe,or in (apite.
Lapiece du chef. A French coyfe.

‘A chefde piece. In ib’end, at length ; alfo, as one


vicomtier ( de Boullenois.) 1s thirtie


Chemin voifinal 15 to be eight foot broad.
Le ga chemin. The ordmarie bigh-way ; (which
by the cufiomes of Tours, Lodunois,and ether places,
muftbe fixteene foot broad; in fome countries much
More; as;

* Legrand chemin de Boullenois, A4/ be fixtie foot


would wifh it. x broad.
Venir à chef d'un’ affaire, To compaffe, finifb, or o- | Legrand chemin deBourgongne. Is to bee thirtie
uercome, a bufinelfe. foot broad. ;


Venir à chef de fon intention. To obtaine,or attaine
to, bis purpofè ; to compaffe, or accomplifh bis de-
Fy |


fire. ‘

Venir à chefd'un mauvais marchand.To fetch over

or preuaile again(t,an euill cufiomer.

Le pied faifit le chef. Looke Pied.

Chef Chiefe, principal ;capitall; paramount , Hence;
Chef cens ; cheflieu ; chef mets; cheffeigneur,


&c. Pe}
Chefcier : m. The Threafurer, or keeper of a Vefirie,
Chef gros: m. Shoomakers thread, 0
hef mois: m. À chiefe Mannor boufe : ©
Cheintre: f.4 baulke,or fivatbe of gr
orhigh-way. |
Chegros :m. Shoomakers great thread.
Chelhydre.tsoke Chelydre. DEEE
Chelidoine : f. (elandine; (an bearbe;whereof there be
two ta) ME
Chclidoine la grande. Celandine the greater, com-
mon Cclandine, Tettarwort , Swallowort, Swallowes
bearh,
Chelidoine mineure. Little Celandine,or,Celandine
the leffe,Pilewort, Figwort, ~ x)
Cheline: m.4 knaue a shellam.


jou ahd Maine, muft bee fouretcene foct broad.
e grand chemin Royal de Boullenois. 15 fxtie
foot broad.
Le grand cheinin Royal de Clermont. Is to bee 64
foot broad.
Tout d'un chemin, All underone,
Batre les chemins.T¢ way-lay,or lie in wait for,pof-
Sengers ; to rob onthe bigh-vway.
er cheminà, To barre, flop, croffe, preuent,
“Gaignerchemin. Tomake [peed,go fafl,ride bard,rid
\ @wayapace. =|
- [nous fautdefpefcher de cela, comme d'un mau-
= ais chemin. aff rid that as wee would an ill
way; we muftrid our bands of thatas we would our
feet of ill way ; fuch worke fhould as quickly be vid off;
ts i way would be vid our,
ae &venirfont le chemin peler : Prov. Secke


Le grand chemin peageau, by the cuflome of An-


D
À =
ro


a hedge,


Ine fe tort pas qui va plain chemin: Prov. Hee

goes not much awry that pene the bighrocd way.
uiaflorin, rouffin, & Latin par tout il trouvele |

chemin : Prov.He that bath flore of money,a learned


Looke Ch eet if = tongue and a good borfe, cannot miffe bis way.
Chelydre..4 moft ps linking Snake.or Ser- Quits 0 “hatte en cheminant, en beau chemin
pent; reugb-féaled, broad beaded and of a darke taw- re: Prov, Hee that goes ne failes in a

ze colour, :


aie colon. tae ame. fread fil cat fr
Chetnage :m, The paffuge toll, ov throughetoll, thats | Se & du vin paffent chemin:Pro.Shooes,and
at Sens, | CINE EL des CORRE
chere gale shed, pr 1 L Fe - | Cheminant. walking , wending, iourmeying, tranel-
ning aveay by thought 51 ES 72 HE + |
Che El about two fpoone- | tropfehafteen cheminant en beau chemin


; fuls. . : RTE = = ‘fe fourvoye: Prov, The ewer-baflictraueller miffes a
-Chemer. To decreaft,or be (as the Moone)inthe want; | a plaine way ; we [aysthe baflie man feldom és


= RE 75 Se
{ Élu


Original from


s : bone 5 : Me à
D OS gle THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Cheminier : m.ere:£. Of, or


Chanife : € A fhirt,or finocke.


C'H'E


CHE


(now a greater woe than the mil[e of way cannot befall
him that bath canfe to make hat.)
Cheminé : m.ée : £ Walked, went,gone,trauelled,jour-


neyed,
Cheminée: f, A chimney ; alfo, a chimney-peece of Ta-
" piftrie ; or of Malons worke. -
or &bas la cheminée. Chimney-fieepe; the crie
chimney-fivecpers.

Licentié fous la cheminée, .4» valearned Gra-
duate ; one that does bis aéts in venebris, or fleales a
degree: :

En petite cheminée fait on bien grand feu : Prov.
In little chimneyes good big fires are made.

rape To walke, wend,go ; trudge, iourney, tra-
nell.
Cheminer en pas d'Abbé. Looke Abbé.
Autant chernine vn homme en vniour comme yn
Limagon encentans : Prov, Aman goes as far in
a day as a {naile in an age;fome men can difpatch more
bufine[f[e in one day than others in many.
emineux : m.cufe: f That walkes much; alfo, be-
longing to a way ; orto a chimney ; or full of chimneyes.

babopier to, a Chim-


Chetnife de cloche. The mould whercia a bell is


caft, À
Chemife de drap. Awaftcoat. IR
emife de neceflité. An inchaunted fbirt which(as
Some füperflitios people imagine) preferues men fiom
all burt in battailes, and eafes women in their tra-
uel, t
Avoir fa chemife. 4 woman to baue ber flowers (for
tachée de fang eme ee
leur porta vne chemife blanche:He brought them
a cleane {birt viz. bee vaifed them with amifcbiefe,
roufed them with a vengeance; be gaue them a found
camifadoee, Slight


Tl m'en fouvient autant [a ma premiere che-
€


mile. 1 remember it as well as the boure Iwas borne


in. | bei
Torcher à autruy le cul de fa chernife. To gine one
a pig of bis owne fiw ; to affoord him belpe out of bis
owne meanes ; (we underfland by the aëtion expreffed
in this phrafe,the doing of a good, and a bad turne to-
pra becaufe though one thing be wiped another is
erayed.)
Il - difcerner la peau — chemife: ati Pate
mul? diftinguifh things which bee neere, @
mr A “hr “4 E S
Plus pres eft la chair que la chemife: Prov. Looke


Chenevilles :£ The broken flaulkes | or flemmes of
empe.
Chenovette: f, A hempen flaulke,or flemme.
il sm. 4 dog-kennell.
illaux : m. Yong Caterpillers.
Chenille : f. 4 Caterpiller.
nille de mer. .4 fea Caterpiller ; (of two kinds,
roe a verie great fifh,th other, a fmall, and footlesje
infect.) | |
ille de pins,A little,veddifh,and hairie worme,
that breeds in the tops of Pine branches,
nilles veluës. Certaine great, bairie, and deike-
ved wormes, or caterpillers, that feed altogether ten
the roots of corne, and bearbes.
ille de vigne.The little bairie and many-feoted
worme called the Vine-fretter.
nille : m. ée: f. Ofor belonging to, Caterpillers ; al-
So,Caterpiller-like ; alfo,full of ot wrought with,Cater-
pillers ; and bence ; L


d be
Taffetas chenillé. 4 kind offript, or waned, Taffa-


ta, =

Chenillier : m. Aninfirument wherwith Gardner's pull
downe Caterpillers. s CAD AN

Chenin : m. 4 Chenil; 4 dog-hennell.


Chenin :m. ine: f. Dog-like; of, or belongiag to, à |


dog.
Raifins chenins. A kind of great red grapes, fitter for
medicines than for meat.
Taiflon chenin. 4 kind of Badger, that is footed, nad
Snowted like a dog, and willingly feeds on flefh, and
carrion as a dog.
Chenu : muë : £. Gray,hoarie white-beaded,old.
Vin chenu. Muflie wiae.
oir. To fall; to tumble dovene; alfo,to bappen,chance,
or fall vnto,as an inberitance,or efcheat.
Ceft rout vn de cheoir,& de trebucher:Pro,4 man
had as good fall outright as fumble.
in’y va n'y chet: Prov. He that climbes not fals
not ; be that ventures not failes not.
Qui plus haut monte qu'il ne doit de plus haut
qu'il ne voudroit: Prov, He that climbes bigh-
er than befhould falls lower than he would.
Qui rien ne porterien ne luy chet: Prov. He that
carries nothing loofés nothing ; or, nought falls fiom
bim that bath nought, \ :
e:m. A Goaler ; or,Goalerfhip.
Chepier: m. 4 Goaler.
r:m.ere: f Deare, leeftwell-beloued, beft-affec-
ted,much efteemed, verie acceptable,or precious unto; À
alfa, deare, cofilie, of agveat rate, or price, for which
much is paied. RS
l'aimerois aufsi chet. 1 had.aslewe,l would as fone,


Chair, LE Ser
Chemifette :f.4 Little Site ré 1 could be as willing; plus cher ; rather, fooner,with


i “, alfo,a coueri ab . a better will. 40 fon -
c ON Chemiflant. whi à Shipearieg sel ks Fille trop veuë,robbe trop veftuë, Fa med
| Chenal: m.A-channell or gutter. ee Si eit: da Amajd oft-fiene, anda garment oft
Chenant: fleur de chenant.4 certaine flewerwher- | _ worne are meanely alike efleemed of. = rei
f ou Co LE rar 8 "LORS ee éC:f.4 hind of earth-Alpi ‘or maori af
enarde :f. wild Si 2 rchage. feeking,or fearchi 3 an inquirie af-
{| Chene. as Chaine. A chaine; afo, a Corbell of flome- | ter. = Let ne Cu
worke. À | Cens acherchage. re Dr à
| Chenets : m. Andirons, 2 Cherche ralongée. Looke Cerche.
el: m. The name of a certaine frefh-water | Chercher. Looke Cercher: A
3 Chenevt: Hempfted Cher re fa nu AE
| m. Hempfted, +f e:f. The face, countenance, fauonr Jooke,a
+ Cheneviere:f. 4 bempe-yard, or bempen-clofe; alfo,a TE) Vitale iutertainment
> bempen flaulke; alfo,a bempe countrey,or place wbere- the teeth, DU: ROZ
in much ; AIT Stas zis lie. Seeke Lie. 2 Ni =
. * LU :
€


We Ve Original froma 5
aus by GOK gle THE OHIO. SJATE-UNVÉESR= Se


CHE


Faire bonne chere 3.70 intertaine kindly ufe friend-
ly, welcome heartily,make good cheere peng
Faire grande,ou ioyeufe chere: 70 be paffing merie;
7 lue moft pleafantly, and plentifilly ; to make great
cheere.
Faire mauvaife chere. To fiowne, powt, lowre, fell
fowfe,hold downe the bead ; alfo, to line barely , feed
meanely ; make put poore,or courfe cheere.
Belle chere,& coeur arriere : Prov.A willing looke,
and unwilling beart.
Belle chere vaultbien yn mets: Prov. À beartie
welcome is worth balfe a feaft.
La belle chere amende beaucoup I hoftel : Prov.
The ill-fauoured houfè is much amended by the well-
fauourcd owner.
Aujourd’huy en chere demain en biere: Prov. To
day glad,to morrow dead,
Il n'eft vie que de faire bonne cherc, mais la fin
n'en vautrien: Prov. The life fpent m good cheere
bath a faire beginning but a foule end.
Cheret. To cheere,to cherifh,erc ; Looke Cherir.
Chereté.as Cherté.
Cherfueil : m. The wood-bind,or bonie-fuckle.
Cheriflable: com. Cherifhable, fit to be cherifhed.
Chennaye : f. 4 wood of fearlet oakes ; alfesas Char-


moye.
Cherme, The féarlet oake, or (Carlet holme oake; alfo,
as Charme,

Chermes. The (Carlet-berrie,or fearlet graine.
Chermifin. as Chermes. |
Chennine : f. The fruit or berrie, of the [carlet oake,

erpi:m. 4 rag,or clout of linnens or as Chate
i


pie.
Cherquemmage. as Cherquemanage,
Cherrée: f. Buck afbes ; ore von |
Cherfpdre. An Adder; or (more efpecially) the land
« Adder, j
Cherté : f. Deerenelfe, dearth , féarcitie, want of.
Cherubin :m, A Cherubin. ;
Rouge comme vn cherubin. Red-faced, Cherubine-
oe |, bauing a fierie ret like a Cherubin,
tvis: m, The root Skirret,or Skirwicke. : ”
Chervis grand. 4 Parfnip, x ;
Chervis fauvage. The wild Parfaip; or wild Skir-
vet. wes are eS
Petit chervis. The ordinarie Skirret root,
Chefaux :m. The rubbifh of decayed boufes ; or, (the
Plurall of Chefal) manfions,houfes.


DT deen + > Ï towant;
| ine, languifh ; decay, fall away. CA

| Chefia e:f. A wood,groue,or thicket of oakes.
Dei in. de cs Ars


er forchu. The landing on the bead : qRab.


he vert, The barren [carlet oake,bolme oake,or


French oake ; a tree thats euer greene.
ment vie hs bearbe Germaunder,2Englifb Trea-
[4 LA
Petit homme abat grand chefne: Prov. À little
gaan fells agrealoake ; (fo may a meane perfon ruine a


inc

esneau vn. kind of water-fnake, môrtall enemie
HOSARes ; als Jon oeke. Li sie gpsl ze
é - im, A little yong 0: gite +, ert.)
Chefnette: fas Petitchefne ; Germauvder ; alfo, a

litle chaine, rat by’, FE yet: SAE 2
Chefheux :m. eufe :f.0foake; or, fullof eakes,
ne ee peer? til»


+ Cheval de lowige. Abackaey.


| —Bheril de potte.a Poche al adhae Jbcock


CHE


Cheftivement. wretchedly, miferably, unftrtunately
rely, needily bafely, beggerlys alfe, fcarcely, pe
3 with eo thet ad pinching ; alfo, knawifbly, :
catty fr wall} ; badly, naugbtily, lewdly; cayhue= |”
Cheftiveté:f. Miferie, wretchedneffe , unfirtunate-
ne(fe or, a forlorne eflate; Catt pe bare-
nef, needinefe ; alfo, want, {earcitie, pinching, fcan-
tinelJe ,alfo, curfineffe, knanerie, fhrewdnefe ; bad-
ne(je, lemdneffe,naughtinefe.
eux: m.eufe : f.Poore,miferable.in ill array,
on. as Chetron, |
Chet-doux.Gently-falling.
Chete:: £. The beight, or depth of a flip from the upper
ae to the keele ; Hence ; Le navire a tant de pieds
dec Fe x gia pap ve ;
Chetif: m.iue:£, aitine, wretched miferableunfortia
nate, ferlorné,poore needie,bare,beggerlie,alle,fearce,
little, paultrie,fcantie , fall; alfo, knauifh , curft,
Shrewd ; naughtie, bad lewd ; and hence ; ¢
Qui envoye chetif à la mer, il n'en rapporte poi
fon ne fel: Prov. He that fends a badfeiuant to fea,
bath {mall veturae of bis venture.
hetivement. Poorely,barely; wretchedly, miferably,
as one that is forlorne ; alfo,badly, lewdly , naughtily ;
ae curly, firewdly; alfo, {cantly fcarcely with much
1B. rage .


Chetves:r» pine, make wretched, bring to want ;
miferie,in flu pouertiejon, abe me

Chetiveté: f..Léoke Cheftiveté.

ivoilon : £. #retchednelfe,miferie poucrtie,

on :m, The till of a coffer,or chef. ;

Cheu : m, Cheué: f, Fallen, tumbled. downes in the
lapfe; alfo,happened,chanced,fallen vate; alfo,fbr unk,
diminifbed ; growne leffe. Bs

Gheyage. An yearely duetie, fne.or fee of x2.d.Parifis
paicd'iotbe kings ufe, within the invifdittion of Ver-
mandois,and elfewhere, by euerie baftard firanger,
forreiner, and affranchifed perfon, whether be be, or
haue beenc ynaried, ,


Cheval: m, 4 bor/é. PAPER Mach ols sate
Cheval aquatique. 4 certaine beaft that lines in
ine rbis backe,mane,and voice,rcfembling a


fe,and therefore (6 tearmed,

aux de couble, Bue, or couples of boïfès ;
Coach-horfes rc.

eval courant. 4 running borfe ; whence;

al courant eft vn fepulchre ouvert : Prov.(Se }
much danger is bis necke in that rides bim.)

Cheval fondu, A kind of play like our truffe.

Hongre,ou chaîtré. 4 gelding.
eval de haras. 4 Stallion,


val marin, ou de mer. The Sea-borfe (a great
and long-footed fifh; alfo,a kind of fmalifea Infeti, or
gone & foreparts are fomewhat like aborfes.
heval de paille. That feeds on firaw in flead of bay;
whence;
Cheval de paille cheval de bataille: Prov.For fach |.
cf ecommonly the hardeft,andbardicf.
al qui porte derriere, À double borfe,or double


ov loggerbead.
~~ Cheval aux quatre pieds blancs.  bor/é that bath
=  foure white fret; A marke which diners utterly miflike;
and hence ;


| Creftle cheval aux quatre pieds blancs, Hae


CHE


es much thd performes little ; or be failes ava'pinch;
rune


TT
Chovalderisiere riviere. Thewaterberfes Oe as Hippo-


b Chévaldefelle. A Saddle barfes Ory reads br ;
: in eer RER re backed ,


Cheval e fervic. A great bonfeorborf Te


‘Vata oi a Sin cheval de fervice, One that enioyes, or
holds by,a whole Knights fees
_ Cheval fcmmier,ou de forme: A sige bof
Cheval tefte de more. Aroane, or borfe
ee: a blackifh bead.


val detraié. A'draë- be bebe part
horfé, coach-borfe ; one ce "


Chevauxtraveifans: Looke Traverfant: / +
Cheval de trompette. Oxe thats not afraid of fha- |.
dowes; ane whom no big, nor bugs words can terri-


fe.
Cul de cheval. The ouglie ffhcalled à Sea Nettle.
Dragée a chevaux. Blocke-wbeat, or bolimong ;


ial. A horfe-fbooes «li hind of axfeed,
À be fal pl cat bo À fe


a oe! bli


1} à honcniltion ‘cats-
alo ae haw ;


SR vias Queué,
ent. |
‘fon ese oN ip queué, To goe = caer


: towarke; or,to do a
Fa che cor IS


x bien. eras |


Jn'eft fibon cheval qui n
would anger a owe sade the befi man that lines, to À .


n'ewdevierideols qua, de


Troie Tofwagger exece-
ce fe ft tearmes; to “ys prefently on


; Pacers cheval Telpeate pen othe be 5)
as one that e ter
(ben fi, Reef à


the top \
vpon aduantage,on ne


. ALES cheval se tana To werké es
., ders, doe great mater, perme (alanpt) ee.


Cheval fait, & valet à faire: tok:
: pig de : de Ra 2 k


Cheval faidt,& femme À faire:
. Cheval Roigneux n'a cure qu'on on Betis Prov.
… Afcabd horfe loueth not the curricombe ; (nor an infe-
‘ os heart, prete ): ="


Pr ad Prov. A great bore,
qui mene fon cheval p arla
+ Prov. Troubles are bt-teifits cae them,
be Sea,


‘A ieune foldat vieil cheval : Prov. Looke Soldat.
Apres bon vin bon cheval : Prov, The pot hath
made bim valiant and of a free bumour ; now tbat be.
‘bath drunke bard be ans Pragecr with ‘an man, ot
cenfire.cuerie man.

-"‘lneft cheval qui n° ait fonmethiain : Prov. There
> BMo creature perfétfiencrie one is in i fome parier point
| faultie or defeétine ; 3 The like is; :
In'eft cheval qui n’aicfataré: Prov: &; *
In'ya cheval f bien ferié qui ne glifle : Prov. The
beft-fhodboi[e doth flip fometimes.
~~ Tamais coup de jument ne fit malà cheval : or.
When women flrike men it is wot to burt them ; or, men
Sfildome-times catch burt by womens blowes.
Ine faut pas hee! les ri avecles chevaut: Pro.
‘smuft not be tied up: On| és 5 nor ee
: thie nas tees 3 nie ty
Les maladies viennent heels & s'eñ retour-
: neue pied : Prov. seeke Maladie.
‘ Les mouches vont rousjours aux chevaux r mai
es: Prov. Flies ave euer moft bufie about leane lor
s; fo are er rs no wi tbe e poore?,
ke of peoples -®


or tea power,
On touche tousjours fur le cheval qui i dre! Prov.
We [ay, folke alvpay call on the horfe she will carties
the willing ct are foref laird anto.
Oncques bon cheval ne devinrtoffe: PK. Sel-
dome hath a good horfe turned iade a wortbie fellow
will neuer prooke coward ; nor Knane ; no age can
weaken , no daunger appalt, no paine afflitt, no offer
infect bim,
Ouvrier mediocré a cheval: Prov. Seeke Ouvrier.
‘Qui n’acheyal ne chariotil ne charge pas quand
il veut : Pro. He cannot do what be would that wants

» wherewithall, beggers muft not beichufers.
Qui nes ’adyenture n’a cheval ny mule: Prov, He. |
that haxards nothing) winneth nothing; fant bears ne |
ner nrg fs die.


Qultcop adventure per cheval & mule: Prov,
pers venturer,
ap prefler fair le cheval reftif: Prov. To take too
much of, or prefume too much ona friend is the way to
psd hs loath Jo andt tomake you loofe him ; or, as

in Prefler,

Chevaler. To watch epic, obferue, or dog; to bunt, or
follow after ; alfo, to esis chide, reprooue ,fcboote, |
| covrfes alfa,in pl bras cavalaro borfeto
“_ lapone leg ower another '

Chevalereffe. Kaigbies este; alfiaf sor belong.
ing to,a. Kzigh [A i

Chevalereusement sian, calor auf dnghtiy,

mail) cour agen knight-like.

-Chevalereuk: m. cufe: £ .Chewalrous ; deughtie,

: se ge valiant 3 Couragious, manfull, tae


eee border of Knighthood ;
Chale: do tine! ; Tapes nr al
pe Fe beld 1 attempt, bardie enr mar or gallant


Aide dC Hevaletie: asin Aides eve.
_. Droi& de chevalerie. The priniledge of Knighthood,

or being made a Neus due vnto fine Officers; and

Fee ee here Unto the Lord Maior


Cheyalet : m. 4 Nagge or Little borfé boïfé s allo, ihe
fa vat À Gc; alfo, the woodd en
LEE Tarner ferapes. bis bides; ( wee

it, bis beame'; )- “ie; a Ponies Pas


or man of Armes; ) but particularly,and more common-
bya Knight,or Cavaleere;(In France the titleofChe-
valier 3,often,a bare title of honour , and ordinarily
conferred on great Officers (whether of the fhort, or
long,Robe,) and on the Lords of great,and meane Seig-
nones; All which may qualifie, and file themfelues
Knighis, as well as ordinarie Gentlemen may tearme
pont lues Efquiers :) Alfo,adaintie water-fowle,as
re 4 Stockdouc, and-of two kinds, the one red, the
ther blacke ; Alfo,the Knight-apple fèmewbat bigger
thes an eece,and fireaked all ouer. with red; Alfa, a
pr #7 finall beap of earth,or.of clods; a ridge made
vadling labourer, that fetches, with his mattock,
af the carth betweenc his legs tofuch abeight, that
be feemes on borfebacke ; alfo, a final whitifh crab,
Somewhat {potted with red, and fo fwift, asa ‘footman
can hardly owertake her.
Chevalier Bachelier. A Knight Batcbler ; Looke
Bachelier.
Chevalier des bains, 4 Knight of the Bath ; fo cal-
led, becaufe bathing is the principall ceremome of bis
admittance into that order,
alier banneret, Loake Bannerer,
Chevalier de Cornovaille, A Cuckold,


ey ———————-—. -- SC rrrti‘i‘iéC CCC... CC lh  e—__eeeeee ARS ae
|
.


er au drappeau quarré.4 Knight Banneret; Éenhate: 1, - ridi


called fo in mockage.

Cheyalier errant du Royaulme de Logres. 4

Rog srvent of England ; or ner King cArtbures

Kriçghi ns,

Chevalier du guet, The Captaine of the watch; as in
uct,


PaALCe aw yt
3


any one che orders ; Looke Honoraire.
peor pier: désloix, A Lawyer , or meere Scholler
ighte

Chevalier de $. Martin. The little potted fie, cal-
led Ladie-benne,or, a Ladie-cow.

Hier vachier,huy chevalier : Prov. Prov. Laoke Vachier.
Pour l'amour du chevalier baife la Dame I

a Prov. The Ladie kiffes her man for bis Maer


cheval: :m, ine: f: Of, or belonging toa Los.
Beles rolevelines Hotfes mares, or Coults, of what


kind foeuer.
Chaftaignes chevalines. 4
| ee are good for


Se the blades thereof in the Spring are good to
| chee ‘Thebearbe
e:f. The bearbe called Hetil foe.
sii be
= re mec pa eee
pe Le sal come of Cielerlandsoetb aon ne j.s.
Chevance: =f. Cheuifance, igi,


evaichable: com. Rideable; cafeto berid ons fe
toberidin.


nées |
as a er


pei
Che

Chevecharest : €. The Veflrie ; oryas Chevecerie.

Chevechi


meer


1 :- Efto


CHE C H:E
7 alfoakind of racke,or flretching torture. Terrecheyauchée eft a demy mangée: Prov. The
Cavan ene 3 To Act: reuenucof land thats often rid unto fz baie confined
aleureux. Looke Chevalereux. Chevaushgeck es.
Chevalier :m. Sign fies properly, a borfeman; one that viding trauelling, iourntying,a road
rides,or is, on borfe back(aud bence,alfo,a Gendarme, oF cour, pp art to and fro,on borfébacke ; (bence)


alfoa Princes ja
amount e
Les chevauchces des des Prevofs des Marefchaux de
France. The roads made by them ouer bills, through
dales , narrow palfages, and other fufpetted places,
thereby to cleere the countrey , and high-wayes of
rogues, and robbers, whom as foone asthey sake à they


udges circuit; rc 3 alfa, a


- truffe up.


Droiét de chevauchée. Looke Droid.
auchement : m.A riding ; or as Chevauchée.
aucher, To ride,or beftride a borfé; to wavell on

Sh 3 alfo,to make a road,or iourney with fixces

— foot, againfian enemie; alfo, to fwine a


Chevaucher fa charge. To ride civcwityas a Judge,


Gonshisi chevre en la vallée, To undertake
4 dangerous ero or matter which be 1s most like to


ms
een la corde. The ball(at Tennis) to bit the
Cs to LE ouer it (but with much ad doe.)
er à la generte. To ride with vevie fort


Po urine on borfébacke with legs drawn


3 a fwiuing, q
vaucheur : m. Aber/eman ; ape alfa Pofr-
maifler, or one, that kecpes poft-bor/e es; whence;
Chevauc heurs d’ efeuyrie. Pofles for the Pac-


gent sache. A certaine Officer ia the
kings forrefts.


Chevalier honoraire.ta difference from a Knight of cran Achevauchons. 4 frradale, firadling,


or befiriding yas a man,a borfe,

ecerie : f. The Vefirie, ov Treafurie of a church;
“the place wherein oe ornaments ufed in it,
are


Chevehe: of ne th'ordinarie


U


Keeper,or Treafurer ofa Vefirie;


ier. as Chevecier.


Chevecier :m. The Treafurer, or Keeper of the Veftrie


"ma Cathedral, ot Collegiat Church; an Officer that
bath charge oft thewax, lights, and met ufed


therein,
Chevedage. feu ,& che. Adwelling boufe , or bag.


hevalines. 4 kind ofwimer barbie ; called | Cheyeil.sChevel. |
; aa tad Chevel. chief. pnd: :


Norn.
Aides cherche s. Looke Ai
Fiefchevel. 4 zoble iaberitance beld in Capitesand


_ capable of iurifdiétion.
Lieu ch 4 Manor boufe,or chiefe he ;
° priser fprighesto 1004.07 put tha hain


ve Fs baivelce 5 ay « drifine of |


+


elu: m. ué: ap mugged with


sf ble
Eftoille wore grins
‘Loy chevelué. 4 Law Ut ni to were


‘long baïreexceptthe Princes of the blond, and their
‘pofleritie;


, CHE. CHE
a ;
my mangée: Proy,Th jtie : I was made by bi ° FOR PE a od Y lai a a
j ; by king Clodion the bairie good upon; alfo,te tame,reclaime ouerrule bring in or
dome ba confie ied fear. King Pepins time, and then difeannul- . under; MTS compound make an end, come to an a=

PA led, J : gZrcement with,
cling, iwrmging rad | Chevelue :£ A/ucker; a/inall imp of a plant fringing | : Yen cheviray bien. 1 will bring bim to reafon

: ; ) [pring a .1w: 10

0 bor ebacke (bene emtherebt oo or of it fap sod bent,unto my will; 1fball do well ynough with rate
es cincuityehe le Chevelure : f. Ahairie bufh, or locke ; bairineffé, long Is ne pouvoyent tous chevir en la maïfon. They


à des Marefchauxd haire ; alfo,the fibers or bairie threeds that bang at the


: roots ef plants.
mener bis, Chevefche : £. An Owle ; as Cheveche.
br (ed place C e :m. The Cheuin,or Pollard-fifh.
yy aid highesvayes of Cheveftre: m.4 rope,balter,coller for the head;a head-
one astey tae they flall,or bead-ftraine(e(pecially for a com,calfe,eoc; for
Dri =~ is more proper to borfés mnoylesec,and more v-
.)
px pres Cher col chevetreux. Bisdinger firayning
aberfés to navel az À
do iowa wi ices Chevet : im. A boulfter(for the bead.) ‘
emit; ti, de fat à pe le yn pty “ye pat . things
to bid more for it,or value it higher, than before.
ie cruise Jul cific im. A Captaine, Commaunder , Leader ; a
iefetaine.
alé, To undertake Chevetain: mine: £ (hiefe, commaunding ouer; a-
mosh like 0 boue,or ouer others : &Norm.
2 . Chevetier. Looke Chevecier.
a Tennis) tit the + ben J, wy ah ets x womans bead; alo,
wert ft Cheveux de Venus. venus baïre, our Ladies baire,


true maidens baire,blacke maiden baire ; (anbearbe.)
Faire les cheveux a, Topewle , barbe,trimme; cut
the baire.


e will legs drawn


i f ah Pof Vouloir rendre vn homme ras par les cheveux. : tis fet againft ; alfo, aleauer pointed like the foot of a
sa Le To bope for more from aman thanbee bath meanes to | goat.
3 ihe Pac et,or thother to gine, _ ‘Verdde chevré. A-käyd of fand whereof Painters
es fr Cheuk ae Cheuif, An old word, ST 2 make their greens, ÿ }
a the Chevi:m.ie:£ Compaffed , prenailed witht fbified | — ‘Ala chevre morte. with beeles,or bellie xpwards,
e Offer 18 withall done goood upon; tamed reclaimed, fübdued, | ‘A pied dechevre. Aflipe,or bias.
s brought in or vader; alfo,compounded,or agreed with- Cheuaucher la chevre cn la vallée. To undertake a
add, fradlints Cc et ‘ ee dangerous taske,or “neh = a ee which 4 ve-
illage : m.A pegging,or pinni innage. rie Lke to faile in; (for he that rides dovene a bill ona
wie of a cd; Chaville? f. A pegsor ns mood aia barch # a goai(e beaft that toops,and bath fhort legs before) can
sweats fd, vere, dly come, without tumbling,to the bettome of tt.) ~
: Cheville du pied.Th'ankle-bone. Iluy a misleschevres enfa court. He bath put bim
bords Compter des chevilles. To au long im hope of a x a been aon ‘ LE
er. ood turne,or preferment promifed ; See Compt rendre le chevre.To take pepper in the nofe;to take
of a Vents foie fon ase à foible cheville. To as ed 4 thing in dudgeon,or in fauffe.
nice of a foole,almes of a begger;or;to truft inor depend Reprenons noftre e à la barbe.. Let vs re-
eceric. on;vaine hopes,weake helps. k _ | turae unto our former difcourfe , worke, matter, bufi-
: ‘A chafquetrou vne cheville: Pro. For ewerie fault |. neffe.
f the fre an excufè, for each obieétion an anfiver ; for any mif | ‘Alachandellelachevre femble belle: Prov. Hee
officer that chiefea cane 4 ar that chufes a wife by candle-light,or by other eyes thaz
ments fed - A tel pertui cheville: Prov.Saidofany thing | bis owne may perbaps be fouly deceived. si
thats fre, or fiited in it kind. Ou la chevre eft liée faut qu'elle broute: Prov.The
ar bot É :m.ce: £.Pegged, pinned; faflened with pegs, | goat mufi brouxe where fle is bound ; where a man is
a j ith pinnes. vay fetled he is to fècke meanes to liue.
La tefte d'un cerf bien chevillée.A Stags head,wel | Tant gratre la chevre que mal gift: Prov.He keeps
bed, fet, pinned, Se SG Jabal a de inibes a mich ados bewell, that be is
’ Viller. To peg,to pin 10 ftftem, ioyne, or clofe with | theworfe ie Inold time a certaine goat painfully
pires 6 25,07 pines, ; PCR feraping 1 rte gt be a ch
ape” Chevilleur :m. A pegger ; alfo,a forcerer, that holding ned vp a kaife, wherewith prefenily after ber throat
bis finger in a bole, and muttering certaine fuperflitis | . was cutin a facrifice ; (This prouerbe is fittef applied
I bie ous words swillbinder a man from piffingyumtill bis fin | unto fuchyas ruineor incommodate thifelues by being
rh, - be remoued. ae too rufa too curious,in ue fôeuer.) ’
Chevill eure : fA pegging; a faflening with pegs, Chevreau. A Kidjoryong Goat,
psf Chevilleures. The broches of a Deeres beads allthe.| Chevreaux. Certaine flarres which rife about the
4 with the two loweft. ‘ _ eight and twentieth of September, and get them gene
le "hs Chevilleures, againe towards the cuening of the nine and twen-
Cheviniau:m. A Chenin, ; tethe mt tet .
wot Chevir. Tocompalfe, prenaile with, foift withall,doe | Chevreau fauvage.A Roe, _ eee
7 ; i Rj Chevre-


could not all be lodged, or there was not roome ynough
of themall,in the boufe. :
eviflance : f, An agreement, or compofition made ;
*anend oy order fet dowanc , betweene a creditor, and
debtor.
Chevoléc :f..4 fprig, twig,or fmallimp of a plant; al/o,
a fiber or baire-like thread growing vato the root of a


lant.
CHERE To fprig to put firth fprigs, or baire-like
berssas the roots of plants do. :
Chevre:f. A fhe-goat ; aljo,a bag-pipe ; alfô, the engine
called by Architeëts,&c,a Fearne. ;
Barbe dechevre. Meade/wort yneadefivect,.Queene
of the medowes (an bearbe.) |
L’ herbe aux chevres. Shrbetrefoyle, milke trefoile,
Citifus bufh,tres trifilie. 3
Laiétues de chevre. A kind of wild lettuce , called
Lambes-lettuce,and coine-fallade,
Ocilde chevre. Aa eye fil of white (pots: or , one
that bath too much white ; or a pearle in it; a wall


eye.

Pied de chevre. The end of a gaffle of a croffebow;
alfa, the flay, or prop of a ladder , whereby tis both
beld fleadie, and kept from leaning too bard on what


es Ul wer. ‘ (ite
CHE CHI
Chevre-fueille: € The wood-bind or bonie-fuckle. Chiaffe : m: Droffeydregs, froath,of mettall.
Chevre-pied. (louen-booued, goat-footed ; an Epithite Chiafler. To fhite; alfo,to be too curious.
IT Chic. de chic à chic. From little to little.
vreté:m.ée: f. — ; fallen as a yong kid ; al- Chicam 3m. The luffe-blocke ; a long, and thicke


fo,enraged,borne-mad,a

Chevreter. To kid,or bring forth yong kids; alfo, to be
in a rage, almof wood, or borne-mad ; to grow madde
with anger and defpights (from a goat, which in bis
time of beat is madde for lufi.)

ette:f, A little goat; alfo, a wild goat; alfo, a

great prawne ; alfo, alittle and low andiron; alfo, a
Robinet,or finall peece of ordnance, of a fixe betweene
the Fauconnet and Arguebure a crocke.

Chevreul: m..4 Roe,or a Roe-bucke; alfo,a wild goat;
(which is alfo called; )
Chevreul fauvage. À Shamois or wild goat,

Chevrie : f 4 bag-pipe.

Chevrier: m.4 Goat-beard,one that keepeth,or looketh
unto, goats,

Chevrin : m.ine :f. Goaties goat-like; of a goat.

Cheurme :f. Looke Chiorme.

Chevron: m.4 Kid; a Chevron(of timber in building;)
a rafier,or fparre.

Chevronde. Looke Severonde,

Chevronneau: m. A finall rafter little chevron.

vronot : m. The fame.

Chevrot:m. 4 Kid; a yong, or little Goat; Roe; or
Shamois.

Chevrotin: m, Kids-leather,
Tirer au chevrotin.To eat,or drink exceeding much;
alfo,to vomit(by that excelfe.)

ere :m. The breeding,or bringing forth
of Kids.

Chevrotter. ‘To breed,or bring forth (as afhe-Goat) a


Ka. M

Cheuflon : m. A corae-deflroying mite,or weeuell.

Cheute :f. 4 fall,a lapfe san ouerthrow. 4
Cheute de l'oeil. The fall of the eye ; is ,when it is
cleane out of it hollow feat ; efpecially,sfeither an iffue,
or blow bath beene the caufé thereof.
De grand vilain oat cheute: Prov. The grea-
ter a bad man is the more féandalous, and burtfull are
bis vices , and therefore, the more headlong,and in-
Ra at fil. L

Chez. chez moy. with me,at,or in my bonfe.
Dechez moy. From me,

Chezal: m. 4 chiefé Manfion,or Mannor houfe.
heze: m. The part or portion of an inheritance of
courfè belonging unto the eldeftheire, ouer and befides
bis fhare in the veft; which is by the cuflomes of Tours,
the two Arpens of ground lying next without the wals,
and ditches of a Gentlemans cafile , or, chiefe bouf? ;
and foure Arpens folying about the caftle, or of
an Earle, Vicount,or Baron; by the cuftomes of Lo-
dunois it is otberwifé called, Le vol d'un Chapon;

and isas furre as a Capon can flie.from the chiefe Ma-
nor boule of a Gentlemans and the three Seprerées of
ground lying next without the ditches of a Barons


‘Chezeau:m. À Gentlemans chiefe bonfes boufbold,or
is Cis ic, PE. EAN
pe
PA ras a che te DAT ENS
iappon: m:A kind of port in the mouth of abit; as
CET aw odie
| dre a féaraie companion. Motte


…


“Gena ier. A fbepheards cane.


peece of wood, wherennto the forefayle, and (prit-
pr le are fifened <p ip goes “grd à
«To wrangle,or pettifog it; to [Poyle,or perple
acaufe with craftie, and litigious po or te
write a verie faft band.
icanerie : ÉWrangling,pettifogging; litigious or craf.
+ tie pleading ; the perplexing of a caufe with trickes; or
the peflering thereof with (fubtile, but) impertiment,
words.


Chicaneur: m. A wrangling Atturney, or Pettifogger;
a bufie, craflie, litigious, and verball, follower of cau-
es,
Chicaneus ; &, Chicanous. The fame,
. as Chiche.
Chicharou: m. Baflard Mackerell : Saintongnois.
Chiche: com, Miférable, niggardlie, niggifb, neere,
pinching, (paring,bard, firait-banded,
Vn chiche. 4 wretch, poet ps pennie-father,
couetous bildine ; one that would not part with the pa-
ring of bis nayles.
Autant defpend chiche que large : Prov. The
wretch confumes as much ns the great fpender.
Ce que chiche efpargne large defpend: Prov.
That which the michez (bares the wafler fpends .
Homme chiche iamais riche : Prov. Looke Riche.
II n’eft banquet que d'homme chiche: Prov. wee
Say, there isno feaft to the mifèrs ; and by amifers feaft
we meane, a plentifull, though a rare,one,
Chiche-face: m. 4 cbichifive, micher , fneake-bill,
wretched fellow; one out of whofe nofe hunger drops.
Chiche-maille. 4 dodger, niggard, pinch-pennie pen
nie-father ; one that will and! whole houres hagling a-
bout abalfe-pennie.

Chichement. Miférably, niggardly,bardly, couetoufly,
with a firait,or clofeband. ;
Chiches: m. cicbes,chiches,red cich, fheepes-cich-pea-
ie ja EX thats fomewhat lef[e than the ordinarie

mall peafe, =.

iches de belier. Small blacke ciches fafhioned like
Rammes beads,and thereupon called, Rammes ciches,
and,blacke cich.

hiches colombins. white ciches.

Chiches de montaigne. Milke vetches, moustaine
ciches,
Chiches noires. Rammes ciches,blacke ciches.

iches rouges.Red ciches,&c; as Venereiques.
Chichesfauvages.wild ciches ;alfomilke vetches.
Chiches venerei | weg ciches(the moft luft-prouo-


Kent thems
Chicheté:f. Niggardlineffe, miftrie,bardneffe, pinch-

ing, too much dodging, necdleffe parfimenie, thrift, or

aving.

i hote: f. Succorie ; Looke Cichorée.
Chicot. 4 ftub,or flumpe ; or as Chiquot.
Chicotin. The hearbe Orpin,Liblong,or Linelong.
eS oH ess
of. C0 ipall,capitall, Leoke
jenn: m, A dog; al/a,a bafe, fbie, or frameleffe, fil
low; r Sia ofa Piftoll, —

Artois, A Terrier


Chien cerf, A bart-bound,
© Chien de chaff. 4 grey-bound.
Chien couchant. 4 /eiting dog. de
x re


C HI
Faire le chien'couchant. To play the coward,or bafè
fellow; to bumble, or deiett bimfelfevoo much in the


prefence of another.
ien courant. A great bound,bucke-bound, barri«


et ; any bound,
Chien dedamoifelle, À pupjie, little dogge, filling
curre.

Chien dogue. 4 mafiiffe.

Chiens ee he, as Bauds,

Chien de S. Hubert. A kind of flzong, fhort-leedye>
deepe-mouthed bound,vfed moft for the bunting of the
Fox,Badger,Otter jcc. 3

Chien de mer. The Sea-bound,or Dog-fifh thas(fome-
what) refembles a Lamprey.

Chien de metairie, 4 bandog,or countrey curve.
Chiens muts. ae a wants Bauds, tearmed fe,
esaufè being cro a change, they neuer open ti

they light poy hit game, ens 3
Chiens d’oifeaux. Spaniels,

Chiens publiques. So sere in old time thoft called,
who had the letting , and fetting of the fubfidies gran=
ted, and taxes dueyvnto the king. ‘
Chien terrier. as Baflet ; A Terrier.

Appetit de chien. 4 moft vnfaciate appetite; a fio-
macke which, though it lay in unto vomiting , flill
would baue more.

Chofe de chien. A paultrie thing ; a matter of uo
valuesor confèquence; a trifle ; trafh,trumperie.
Chou de chien. Dogs Cole, wild Mercurie,dogs Mer-
curie.

Couillon de chien. See Couillon.

Dent au chien. Harts-borne Plantaine, Crowfoot
Plantaine; alfo.(and the more properly) Cooch=graffe,
Quitch-gralfe,Dog-graffe ; Looke Dent.

Dent de chien. Cooch-graffe, Quitch-graffe; Dogs-


” gr Bs al a aa ee Priefis crowne,
2 3alfo evepinning, ill meaning,
. Dents de chien.” rs 1


mans tuskes, or tufhes; on either
fide two,next unto the foure fore-teeth, .
Difnerde chien.A meale made onely of bread,@-wa-
ter ; or wherein there x nothing drunke but water.
Efguillettes de chien. Courfe leather points, made of
a dogs skin.
Herbe achien. Dogs-graffe , Cooch-graffe, Quitch-
graffesor,(as ome interpret it}the hearbe Dogs-tongue,
or Hounds-tongue.
Langue dechien.The hearbe Dogs-tongue, Hounds-
tongue ,Hounds-piffe,
Mort Le chiens. Medow Saffron; alfo, the bearbe


s-bane,
Mouche à chien. 4 ti


- tie,
Oignon de chien. À baflard kind of the flarrie Ja


cinth,called,Dogs-lecke ; alfoyas ;

Porreau de chien. Leeke of the vine, wild Leckes,
French Leeke dogs Leckes. GA ,
Ris de chien..A difloyall, or treacherous, ieering; a
laughing on bim whoft throat bewifhes cut.
Ronce de chien, The Hep-tree; Looke Ronce. .
Tefte de chien. Calues-fuowt, Snapdragon ; alfo,
Fleawort. /

Tefticule de chien. The bearbe Dogs-flones, Dogs-


» cullions Dogs-tefticles, Standle-wort, Stander-graffe,
baftard Satyrion.


Entre chien & loup. In twilights,or cock-{hoot time,
(when aman can hardly difcerne a dog from a wolfe.)
"A vn autre chien avec cet os. Make that offer to,
beftow that kindne/fe on, fome other.
Aufli lun chien auroit fauté vn efcha-

i. 2 a


nh emer y ‘


_manin prefence of,and for an example unto, the migb-
tie.


_ that barkes much bites little; a great prater, a weake


, fortunes 3 or , the verier knaue the better lucke.


CHI


lier. As fôone as dog would have leaped ouer adoore.
fil; or,as in Efchalier. À
Batrele chien devant le lion. To punifh a meane


Donner à manger au chien & au chat. To keepe a
bountiful boufe.
Dormer en chien. To fleepe faflingin the Sun when
it is at the bigheft ; oï to fleepe immediately before din-
ner,or fiupper.
Teéter fon lard aux chiens.To fpend bis fortunes idly,
vnworthily,waflfiully; to beftov much on bungrie bafe,
and fcuruse people; to lauifh it vnreafonably, to fquan-
der all away,
Il veut beaux chiens à peu de pain. Hee would bee
well attended on for little wages.
Ofter les chiens pour venir à bout du troupeau.
Troupeau. ;

Perfonne ne luy demanda, es tuchienes woup.
No manfaluted, eyed, refpeéted,bim ; no man asked
bim what,nor whitherbe would; no man [poke tobun,
no one tooke notice of him. :
Tirer du foin aux chiens. To vomit, fpue, caf, fell
oakes, pull bay for dogs, :
Tout d'une venué comme la iambe d'un chiensve
Say, All of a bigne (fe, like a poft; or a churne.

hien enrage ne peut lon uement vivre: Proy.4
madde dog cannot long time liue.
Chien efchaudé craint l’eau froide : Pro.The féaul-
ded dog feares euen cold water; (fomewhat like our,
A burnt child dreads the fire.) 3
Chien hargneux a troufiours les oreilles defchi-
rées : Prov. 4 common brabler comes by many a knock;

uarelfome lads are feldome without blacke eyes, bro-

it pates,or feratcht faces. |

hien qui abbaye ne mord pas: Prov. The dogge


? ’
Chien fur fon fumier eft hardi: Prov. dog(we fay,
a cocke) is valiant on bis owne dung-bill.

‘Abon chienbonos: Prov. 4 good dog defèrues

; good bone ; a good feruant good intevtainments
aut ;

‘A vnbon chien n'efcheutonques bonos: Pro. A

good dog neuer lights on a good bone; or,the worft bones

ener fall to the beft dogs fue; the boneft man bath

fill the worft lucke.

De touetaille bon chien : Pro, There ave fome able
men of all forts,and fixes. \

Deux chiens ne s'accordent point 4 vn os: Prov..
Two dogs neuer agree about one bone; churles will not
eas part with,any thing.

uvais chien iamais ne veut compagnon en cui-
fine: Prov. Greedie,or ill-natured people cannot in-
dure competitors or companions. aa

Mauvais chien ne trouve ou mordre: Proy. No
place affoords-a lining toa curve; the flothfull knaue,
or bungler,thrines no where,

‘A mauvais chien ne peut on monftrer le Joup:
Prov. Aniil dog hates to loake on a wolfe,

‘A mauyais chien Ja queuëluy vient : Prov..4n ill
weed gromes apace.

Souvent À mauvais chien tombe vn bos en gueule:
Prov. An vmworthie fellow oft lights on wortbie


‘A mefc hien’ lien : Prov. A froward
eure ul be fed fbortsacurrip flow LE filtered;
(fo will they doe leaf burt.) SS
| R iÿ am “A petit


Qriginal from


THE OHIESTATE UNIVERSE 5
+ i ” Sue oes Se PS EX


at ee RDS,


ht Éd NE 2: “ou » eT


CHA.


‘A petit chien petit lien: Prov.Weake paffions need
but weake reflraints,

‘A rude chien dur lien: Prov. Violent bumors muft
be flopped by bard curbs ; churlifh people awed with
curf} vfage.

Vn vieif chien iamais ne jappe en vain : Prov. The
old dog neuer barketh (aged experience neuer adui-
Seth,)in-vaine,

Il n’eft chafle que de vieux chiens : Prov. There is
20 bunting to the old dogs ; or,no dog bunts like the old
one,

Charrué de chien ne vaut rien : Prov.Looke Char-


rué.

Enli& de chien n’y a point d’oingrure: Prov.Looke

not for ciuet in a dogs kennell,

‘A chair deloup face de chien: Prov. ‘The beft

Sauce for courfe meat is hunger (or) the fitteft intertain-

ment for a knaue,a cudgell,

C'ef belle bataille de chiens & des chats ; chacun

a des ongles: Prov. Looke Bataille.

D’ oyfeaux, de chiens, d’armes, & d’amours, pour

: yn plaifir mille douleuts: Prov. The pleafüre Ee by

= bawkes,bounds, loue, and armes, are deerely bought

with millions of barmes.

| Eau,& pain eft la viande du chien: Pro, Bread and
’ water is meat good ynough for a dog (though not for a


man.)


En fin les loups tuent le chien qui tue les loups: .


Prov. At length the bufie bodie comes vato bis bane.

Nature fait chien tracer : Prov, Looke Tracer.

Pendant que les chiens s’entregrondent le loup

devore la brebis: Proy.while (burchmen brabble,Sa-

tan feeds on foules, —

Quand vn chien fe noye chafcun luy offre à boire:

a When a dogs advowning enerie one offers bim
rinke,

Qui a le loup pour compagnon porte le chien

fous I’ hocqueton: Prov. Let bim thats matcht with

a knaue go well prouided for bim.

Qui aime Bertrand aime fon chien: Proy.Loue me

lone my dog’s (fay we.)

© Qui fe couche avec les chiens, fe leue avec des

puces: Prov. They that lye downe with dogs rif? up

oa fleas ; In filthic companie what can one gaine but
lth?


Qui veut avoir bon chien il faut qu'il le noutiffe


| bimvell; be that defres à good feruant mult vf bim


. well,
~ Qui veut batre fon chien trouve aflez de baftons:
rena es Safe wherewith to
- a . .
Qui veut tuer fon chien luy mer la rage fus : Prov.
: When a bad Prince would be rid of a good fubieét, or
ruant the tricke is,to lay treafon to bis charge.
Marais DES de
(So gets the knaue admittance where othenwife b
Soon be excluded.) : :
1 3 que le chien chie le loup s'en va: Prov.
Pili dagfeummers the wolf Linco
| Tandisque le chien crie le loup s it: Prov.
While the dog bawles the wolfe efcapess


chien: Pro,tike mafter like man,
¥ eet re :
=


‘


bien : Prov. He that will bane a good dog muft feed


CHI
Chien-cerf. Abart-bound,


Chien-dent. cou ’, Quich-graffe, Dogs-graffe:
ely blinkers alo, dior ds


Chien-dents.as Dents de chien; The tufhes,

e:f. Dogs; abrood,or number ; the kind,or na-
ture of di à
dien-lict.A fhiteabed; a fhitter fellow, beafilie compa. \
non , filthie fcoundrell , linking iacke A Soa


mate, ‘ '
Chienne : f. A bitch.
Chiennée: f.The bearbe Dogs-bane,or,medow Saffron;

alfo,a litter of whelpes,

. To whelpe,

Chiennerie : f. 4 dog-boufè,or dog-kennell,
Chiennefle: f. Dogs; a brood Jlitter,or number; the kind

or nature,of dogs. .

iennet : m. A little dog.

hienneté. wbclped.

hienneter.# Chienner,To G 4 De
Chienneterie : f. Doggifhneff ; the kind, or mature of


dogs.
Chiennetier :m. A dogge-keeper ; yeoman firterer,
Groome of the Hunt , one that lookes vato bounds,
Chiennette : f. A yong,or little bitch. .
Chien-rage. The bearbe Dogges-bane; or medow Saf


von.
Chier. Tofhite, cacke , feummer , untruffe the points
oe 10 Oe peck ; doe that which no thai can doe


x bith. 5
Chier dans Je panier, pour le mettre fur la tefte.
To difgrace a thing, of purpofé,to obtaine it the eafier ;
tointertaine on neere tearmes that whereof one bath
formerly giuen mo(t vile tearmes.
Autant chie vn boeuf que mille moucherons:Pro,
As much dungs one oxe at a thoufand flies ; one rich
‘man may (pend more than many poor e ones.
Tandis que le chien chie le loup s'en va: Prov.
Whikt the dog {cummers the wolfe efcapes. 3
ietins.as Theatins; An order of Priefls , in cre~
dit about Pepe Clement the fenenths time; and
ofmore antiquitie , by fome few yeares, than the Iefi-


ates.
Chifctier : m.4 feller of old ftuffe clothes clots; or one
~ that cries vp and dovpne fico trumpevie to bee fold:


@Norm, é
Chiffe: £ A clout,old vag, oner-worne,or off-caft , peece


Chifflantsrhizxing; bifing; whiflling,

Chifflement. : m. À whizzing ; whifiling; biffing.
Chiffler.To whiftle ; biffe,or whixze.
Chiffon : m. A little clout, rag,or peece, of oner-worne


iffre.as Chifre; Alo, an engine to catch fifh with
* forbidden.)
Chiffrer. Looke Chiger.
Chifre: m. 4 Cypher; a figure,or number; the figures of
1525340 3 alf0, a flrange cavatier, figure, or forme
of writing,not(eafily) underftood by aay but bim that
inuented it,and fuch as be bath acquainted with it.
Le d'un Prince. AE , OF Sa r' ‘
= Princes Cypbers,deliuered (and expounded) untofuch |
2 ne bane tovnderftand bim,


; eres moritten im cyphers, or in |


“frange and vnknowne caraëlers; alfo, calculated, or


«+ examined,as an accempt by cypbering.
Chifrer, To cypher; to write in cyphers; 10 expreffe
bis meaning in flrange, and viknowne ¢ rs;


alfo,


:


Original from
THEIOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


GT à
eu p — ns “LEA


C HI


ying, Re


Chignon:.m, The Chyae, or c eece of the necke;
aa knot, or knurre Der or Tym-


(id hig LOS : m. Shoomakers thread ; or, a tatching
L Chi as shies.

e: f. A choler-pur ging medicine.

4 Chile? te The Chilus or. we er (of fdifeeied meat)


whereof our bloud commetb. Looke Ch
. | Chilifier. To concoét, difgeft, or turne Sep Ti or
white iuice.
Chiller. To feele,or fiw up the eyes; as pai
bi oa lleure: f..4 { feeling,or fowing vp of of the eye:
: Chilonique. à la Chilomaque Briefly, fuccintlly,
compendioufly ; (from one of the Grecian wifèmen,
Piet who all his fbeeches, and writings was verie
bort.)
Cer: f. A wry-mouth, dre. Looke Sima-


Chimeres: :£.Chymeraes,idle conceits,frinolous thoughts,
’ Sond wifhes, fruitle[Je maginations, cafiles in the ayre,

things that neuer were.

“Chimeric: m. ique : £ Imaginarie, altogether in fan-
_ciesthat neuer was nor will be, onely in conceit.

Chimie: f. Melting ; or Extraction ; the fecond part of
Alchymie.

Chimique: com. Chimicall,or Alchymifiical extrac-


M Chimolie. re chimolie. A kind of Ra. that is
‘ood againft burning,and bot impoftumes.
! Chinage. as Chemage.
| à ue dei ae nes Sr beaft,
ons. averie wholefome,skin.
| Chine; f. A reds gin Indian root,good againft


Chinfreneau: mm. A flampe jert wipe thumpenocke,
Chinon du col: m. The nape of the necke; or as Chig-


ya i Chingue.7 To quaffe, fivill, tiple, caroufe, drinke ex-
’ treame

5 Chiolé: m.é¢ : £ whelped.

| Chiorme: f. A banke of Oares ; or,the whole companie


,R G. he
oe re opens asa nae — ten
shomekeie weighing of AFS boifing up of fai


=o Chiot: m. Aaieeben
Chipault. il eft rout “hipaa He is all to be ragged,


: and vent.
— Chi epi md ele sre «


“a Fin cee ES d S
" rer; Ets i re ate


Re: A barke,or {bip; ao, at old clout, ragge, or


ae patch.


IT Pa!


i : peuplechs. Craftie
;: wrangling or litigious


off quanous. er rt.


alfo, to calculate,’ or examine anaccompt, by cyphe- |


C HO


Chiques. as Chiches. gui
re f. Afillip; flirt, or bob giuen with the
nger,or nay
Grin nok m, €e: f, Fillipped ; flirted; bobbed
with the finger |
Chiguenauer To fillip ; to flirt,or bob, with the fin-


C iquehie. as Squenie.
Cane. Cutting,fhredding,iagging; cutting into
sgafhes,iags.
iqueté: m.ée: £ Cut, gafhed,iagged backed.
Chiqueter. To cut ; gafb,iag backe.
Chiqueteur: m. À cutter.
Chiquetteres: f. Cuttings,iagsor fhreds of cloth.
iqueture: f. A cutting; a gafb, cut, garfe; a laun-
cing, foredding, flitting.
iquot:m, A fcale in the root, or end of a nayle;
pu a fprig, or fhoot of a tree; af, the flumpe of a


chiens 5p Sift, fearch,or fecke out ; alfo, to faste,

with a kni

Chiragre: £ Hand-gout;; the gout in the bands.”

Chiroacte. Nimble of band, quicke fingered. sib.

Chiroaine.Looke Ciroefne.
irographaire. Creancier chirogr ie pp That
bath Jr bis affuvance a Bill;or Note under the debtors
hand

Chiromantie. Palmiftrie ; a guelh effing at ones fortune by
the markes,er making,of bis

Chiromantien. 4 Palmifler,a SE

Chiron. as Ciron.

Chirurgial: m. ale: f. Belonging unto Surgerie,

Chirurgie: € Surgerie..

jen: m. À Surgeon,

Choc: m. Afhocke,a brunt ; a bufiling,or hurrying to-

gether; a violent iacounter, or coping of armed, and


angrie, fouldiors.
Choc «45 Chocquailler.
ve ierre.À bd ere Bullfinch,that feeds
the kernels of Cherri
C ailler..as Choquer;(e/pectally in the laft fence)
to drinke siplesquafi, Ce


Chocquer. Looke Ch ras we
Sone porteurs de choenes. So doe fitrueyors and
meafierers of land call thofe that goe before them, and
carrie their lines,or chaines, and rods wherewith they

_ meaftres, (

Choerin: m. Afhoate,or barrow pig.

Choéur: m. The Quire of a pit alfo,a rounding,
or troope of fingers, or dauacers; or of Auditors, or
Spetators oft tbofeser the like Exercifes sak be
Enfans de choëur. Quirrefters. 7

Choier.Looke Choyer.

Choine:m. Tee oF white bread. «Nor,


Choig. Looke C
Choi: m. PER eledin picking, or culliig out;
holt abundance, G ods plentie, good choice. a
Choifi: m. ie: £ Chofea, eleéted ; culled, pic
from others ; alfo,feene,or difecrned, a fare off.
a i ; cull,or picke out ; aire fer
Cerne,a
Une choifit pas qui ‘emprunte ; Prov. Borrowers
muft not be chufers.
Qui avec fan iene mange poires, il ne choifit
as des meilleures : Pro. Looke Poire.
:£ tunitie, occafion; alfè,as Foifon.
sm. A loafe of white bread. Norm. -; |
pogue: f. The thin, or ae gut, ig hens


Ch 4 {ñe:
pot


- ek ae ae:


;


C HO


CHO


Chilus thickening beginneth toreft; or (adieëtiuely) of,
or belonging thereto.’
hole: £ c oler anger, gall gre.

Cholere: £, Choler,anger, fuming, teftineffe,chafing, flo-
pe à (UE LS lfo,the complettion,or humorstear-
méd,choler.

Ronger vne cholere en fon efprit. To fret.
olére : com. as Cholerique.

Cholereux. as Cholerique; or full of choler.

Cholerique: com. Cholericke, angrie, teflie, fuming,
chafing, pettifh, ivefull, in a rage, as bot as a toaft.

Cholique: f. The Collicke; a painfull windinelfe in the
bellie,ar flomacke.

Cholique pierreufe. A paine like the Collicke, and
caused by the Stone in the Kidneyes.


oliqueux: m. eufe : f Full of; or mach troubled


with, the Collicke.
Chomer. Looke Chommer.
Chommable. iour chommable. 4 day of ref,a play


ay.

Chommage: m. A ceafing from worke, a refling, a
making iehday, a lying id er out of ufe, bp
which 1 not currant, '

Chommer. To make beliphaceele from worke; play for
want of worke ; reft, lye idle, and out of vfe 3 alfoyas
Manquer ; or,to want ; whence;
Nous en chommerons encor de pareil . wee hall
not haue the like in half.
hondrille : f. Gum-Succorie.

Choner. as Chommer,or Chopiner. @Rab.
honquetage : m. 4 Round gone about, or View ta-
ken. of, the Kings Woodfales, by the principall officers


of bis forrefis, thereby to come to the knowledge of the


Offences (if. amy) committed by thofé that baue been put
in truft withall,

Choper. To trip, or flumble ; to be faulties erre, or miffe
in footing.
Qui chope & ne tombe, adjoufte à fon pas : Pre.
He rs flumbles without fallmg , gets the more for-


ward.

Chopine: £. À Chopine ; or the Parifien balfe pint ; al.
maf as big as a à one; (At Keg org in di-
uers other places about Paris, three of them make but
one pint.) * / (A |
Approbation faitte fur chopine. Anallowance gi
uen,or pa[ed,ouer the pot. $

Chopiner. To tiple,quaffe, fill, plie the pot,drinke all
day,or whole dayes, long.
hopinette : f, Afmall cup,or Chopine,

oppe. Poire choppe. which by ouerripeneffe grows
fn 4s almoft unfound at the core. x

oppement: m. A flumbling;a tripping,
hopper. Looke Choper ; alfà, a peare to grow foft, or
almoft vnfound at the core. | -

Choquar..A Chough; or, Cor ni[h Chough. Trée,

er. To gine a fhock; violently,& with a burvie to

Î cope,knocke,incounter bufile,or ioyne battell,togethers
© alfo,to quaffe,cavoufe,tiple,toffe the pot.

fi la muraille,


4 uer fa tefte contre vunne bis

im. A keeper of Players garments, -

See Corde, = RSA
rdé. a Cordé. 1e 2 UT
Ore: m.A companie ersjor dauncers; any num-

ber alfembbyo whole cmpaniesas he Choris be
eucrie A M a Tragedie. = eae
Choreal: m, ale : £ Frequenting, or belonging to, a


Choret: m. Afhote,or barrow pig ; a young bog.
COTES : m, Queeremen, fingingmen,qui refiers.
on. as Arrierefaix ; or, the outmofi of the three
skins whereof the Secundine confifis.
Chorifte : m. 4 Chorift ; a finging man ina Queere.
Chormes des naufs. The Saylers,or Mariners. Locke
Chiorme.
Chofe: £4 thing ; a matter; = meane ; cafe, af.
e,deed ; alfo, fiuffe, geere, fubftance, goods, pofef-


Chofe accouftumée n’ eft pas trop prifée: Prov.

We prize not much the thing w' ave vfed unto. ;

Chofe bien donnée n’eft iamais perduë : Prov. 4

thing difcreetly ginen is neuer loft,

Chofe faitte confeil prins: Prov. when a thing is

done aduife comes too late; a thing once done cannot be

undone ; the care is alreadie taken.

Chofe qui plaift eft à demy vendué: Prov. ware

that doth pleafe is halfe fold (when tis feene.)

Petite chofe de loing poife : Prov. we fay,Light

burthen farre beanie ; a little thing borne farre growes
al


beanie.
Chou: m. The hearbe Cole,or Coleworts. c
ou blanc. as Chou cabu.

Choucabu. Cabbage, white Colewort, beaded Cole-
wort leafed Cabbage, round Cabbage Cole.

cabu rouge. Red Cabbage Cole.
Chou de chien. Dogs Cawle, Dogs Mercurie, wild
Mercurie.
Choux crefpus.curled garden-Coles,ragged,crifped,
wrinckled Coleworts.
Choux fteuris, fleurs, & floris. The Collyflorie,er Cy-
pres Colewort. ’
Chou grifeaftre.A kind of gray-leaued Colewort that
Seldome clofes,and 1 of little worth. ‘

ou marin. The fea Cole; (the Re Withywind, [ea-

Solefoot, and Scottifh Scuruie-weed is tearmed fo by
verie manie writers ; but moft improperly; fur the vight
Sea Colewort differs verie much from it,or anie kind of
Bindweed.)
Chou naveau. Therape Colewort, :

noir. The or {wart Cole.
Chou petit. The fmall, and flender Cole. ;
Chou pommé, ou à pommes. The ordinarie Cab-


. rouge. The bitter red Cole; or,the garden red
Colewort.
+ Choux de Savoye.Ruffed,or curled Sauoy Coleworts;
(there is alfo.a finootb kind of them, tearmed, Sanoy
Coles.)
Chou fauvage. The wild Colewort , or, wild fea-
Cole. ‘
Choux tannez. wild red Coleworts ; (fitter for me-
~dicine then for meat.) :
oux verds. Wrinckled, or ruffed greene Cole-
worts.
Petit chou.# Chou petit. i/o, puffe-cake,or loafe,
made of butter, cheefe, fine meale, and yolks Ms es;
(There be two kinds of them; one round, an ‘plompe


Like an apple ; the other alfo round , but much flat-


ter.) %
chou. One good turne for another,
Hors € pas vn chou. pi


ro


m- |. mot;1care not for it; would not gine arufh,c figge,a


© chip, for twentic fuch. -
Il en fait fes ch


tas; Hee gets well by it.
makes bis aduantage die fathers bi neuf
RATE - LEE.
Souffler .


ip


rrr Ss,


CHR


i de | |
Ge young bog, Souffler les choux en dormant. To puffe in flee- ning,in a countrey.
hla te ping. baile ines ” ton queur : m. A Chronicler, Annalift, Hiftorios
€ outa ofthe bre ee le chou pale le cep le vigneron meurt de EE
fits. foif: Prov. Looke Pafler. nifte. as Chronicleur.
man ina Quetre, Chou. An Interieétion expreffing a fence of a fuddaine | Chronographie:f. A deféription of the times.
,0t Mariners. Locke pres spi sa 3 alfoya voice wherewith we a ogie: £4 Chronologie; a defcription,or num-
riue away Pulleine, ring, of time.

ts meane; cafe, af Choiian: a A Poklard,or Cheuin fifh. (Angevin.) Chrono: ifte: m.A Chronologift,or Chronicler ; a de-
lance, goods Poff Choiians: m, as Chauäns. (criber of times.

? Choiiart. winfing, kicking, fluiffing, flying out; and | Chryfocolle: fGold-folder;Borax, greene earth (wbe-
op prifée: Prov hence ; ther artificiall,or minerall) as Borrais.
iden. | Maiftre Iehan Choüart. 4 mans yard. focome. Gold flower, Gods flower, Goldylockes,


Chouca. 4 Chough,or lacke Daw.


erdué : Prov. 4 Chouchette: f. The Chugh Cadel, Dar.

was hag & Chote :m. ée: f. Difappointed, fruflrated, decei-
. ued. ;

mce dene connet be Chouëtte: f. An Owlet; or, the little Horne-Owle; (a


am night-bird;) alfoya Chough,Cade[Je,Daw,lack-
ay.


due: Prov. Wart
ge tit Chavèste rouge. The Cornifh nv 3 tbe red-legd


Cho
Choul : m.# Chou. cole.
Chouquet : m, 4 biocke.
Chouquette: f 4 Chough,Cadeffe,lacke Daw.
Chou-rave. The rape Colewort.
hourme: f. Looke Chorme,or Chiorme.
uzer. To fivyue; (a countrey word.)


Choyer. To fpare,forbeare,faue, not to ufe; to refraine,


me farregranes


beaded Cole-


curie, wild ffaine, withhold bimfelfe from ; to preferue, cherifb,
baue a great care of.

edcrifped, Chraies: f. wild Pe boake Peares.

Chran: m, A fina the fifh Glaucus,couered

ritor Of- | para little fhining skales of a golden blew colour. Mar-
illois. =~ :

+ that Chras. as Chraies

i e. See Crefme. ‘

refmer. To æmeint with bolie oyle.
Chreftien: m. A chrifti t

Poire de bon Chreftien. 4 great r Peare,cal-
led by fome,the Eufèbian Peare. Looke Poire.


Parlez Chreftien. Speake plainely, or [à aswee may
conceine you;deliuer your mind in fome language which
eee id, 6. chr. fa chrif
ien: m.enne:f. Chriflian ; of a Chriftian,pro-
ing Chriftianitie,
ftiennd: m.ée: f Chriflened,baptifed.
Chreftienneimeént : m. A chriftening, or baptifing.
Chreftiennément. Chrifianly,chriftsanlike
{tienner. To chrifien,or baptife.
eftienté : f. Chr or Chriftianitie,
le. as Chryfe |
Baume de Iefus Chrift. Looke Baume.
Herbe de Chrift. Blacke Hellebore, Chrifis wort,
Chrifis bearbe. EN
Paulme de Chrift. Thebearbe Kicke,Ricinus; Palma
Chrifti. : \ : ee
| Chrifte-mmarine. Sampire, rocke Sampire, Crefima-


Chriftianifine:m. chrifianiie,
Chriftianizé. Chriflianixed, chrifiencd, made a Chrifii-


an.

Chriftodin: m. A sew Chriftian,poore Chriftian, fimple

Chronique: com. Temporall, or, returning at a cer-
tame time. :


TH


Chroniques : f. chronicles , les ; gener:
yearns of the chic mater wed ap


[T1


< LAC


FE HO V


golden Stechados (an hearbe.)
Chryfogone: com. Gold pdering-
dlaine: f. Orage,Orache,goldenpearbe.
Chryfolite: m. 4 Chryfolite ; a kind of 1afper of a gol-
dén lufiveor colour.
Chryfopale: f. A Chryfopafe; a greene precious flone
that yeelds a golden luftre. :
hryfopatie. The fame.
Chuat: m. 4 whelpe.
Chucas. as Chouca; a chough, |
Chucas rouge. À Cornifh Chougb.
Chucheté: m. ée: f. w pee
Chucheter. To whifper in the care.
uchoté. Looke Chucheté. +
Chue: f. 4 chough, Daw,Cadeffe. (Savoyard.)
Chupper.To fup,or Cor
Churle:f. The white field Onyon, or Starre of Bethe-


lem,

Churquette : £ Amoufè-trap. Pic.
ut. as Cheu. ;

Chyle: m. The (hylus,or white iuice of difgefted meat;
the matter whereof our bloud is made : (The word
originally fignifies, a iuice concoéted by heat vato a
confifience that boldes beth of moifiure, and dry-


neffe.)

Chylofe: f Anexpreffion, confettion, or difgeftion of
‘ahs orinice ; alfo, a thicke, or creamie fap, expref: |
€


Cc ique : com, Fond, vaine, imaginarie, onely in
conceit, Chymericall, Chymera-like.
mie: f. The fecond part of Alchymie; melting ; Ex-
t¥aélion ; (much vfed for Alchymie it felfe,)
Chymique:com. A Chymift, or Alchymift ; a Melter;
or an Extrattor,of Quinteffences. oy:
ique: com. (hymicall; melting ; extraëtiue,
etcraiqueSeltmal ofthe quintet
chymique.s. e of the quinteffence,or
fubtande,of sm) thing. 7 nee, fre ]
yt meet com. (hymiflicall, quinteffentiall.
Chyft. as Kyft. 7; AY
Ci.‘Here,jn this place,in this matter.
Ci pris ci mis. Done fpeedily, prefently, incontinently,
quickly,out of band ; as foone done as fpoken,no fooner
faid but done. : :
Ciané: m.ée: f Azure,bright-blue of colour. |
Ciathe: m, A finall cup,or meafüre,among the auncient
Romans containing foure fpoonefüls : about the weight
of it Authors difagree ; fome faying it was twelve
drammes ; others, that it was but tenne; and others,
(the moft probably) that it was two Cartats and fifteen
graines (of our weight) more then tenne.
Ciboile. as Ciboire. Mr
-Ciboire:m. A Pix; the box,or cup wherein the Sacra-
ment is putand kept in Popifh churches.
Ciboule: € AChboll;or Leche. :  :
Cicatrice: f. A Cicatrice,a skarre ; a skin bred upon
: a


Original.fron EE
OHIO. STATE-UNIVERSI RY |


ge ne TS


CAC | ChLiG


a wound, fore, or vicer. ; dead (ulerage.
Cicatricé. Looke Cicatrizé, : Cidre: m, Outer, drinke made of apples.
icatricer. as Cicatrizer. - \ ic, for Scie; a Saw.
Cicatrifatif: m. iue: £ as Cicatrizé; alfa, cicatri- | Ciel: m. Heanen; alfo,the Skye,welkin,Firmament ; (in
ung, skarre-breeding, skinne-bringing. pe te err icux) al/o,a canopie for, and,the
Cicatrizé: m. ée: £ Cicatrifed 3 skinned ; skarred;al- Ti and Valances ofa Bed; alfo,the canopie that


So, fall of skarres ; that beares about bim the markes of
many wounds.

Cicatrizer. To cicatrixe; to skimme ; to skarre; to fet a
a skiane make a skarre on ; bring to a skinne, beale vp
toa skarre.

Cicerolles: £. small Cichlings,or Chicblings ; fmall pet-
tie Ciches ; In Latine they ave tearmed Cicera, which
Gerard holds to be,yellow wild Fitches.

Cices: f. Cichgs, chiches,red Cich,Sheepes Cich peafon;
Looke Chiches.

Cicharou : m. Looke Chicharou.

Cichenie. Looke Sequenie,er Squenie.

Ciches: f. Ciches,chiches red Cich,Sbeepes Cich peafon;

._ Looke Chiches.

Cichorée: f. The hearb Succorie.

Cichorée blanche. white Succorie; alfo,garden En-


is carvied ouer a Prince as be walkes in fate; alfo, the
inner roofe of a roome of State ; (In all which fences,
ec, the plurall is,Cicls.)

N: m, ine: f. Heavenlie of beauen,dinine ; alfo,be-
longing to the Firmament ; or to 4 Canopie,Teflerne, or
upper feeling.
ler. as Scier. To fave,

Cierge: m. A big wax candle. Seeke Poinête.

Cieure : £ Saw-duft. Looke Sieure.

Cigale :f. 4 thicke,broad-beaded, and mouthleffe fre,
which ordinarily fes on trees,c> fings (after ber skrea-
king fafbion) both day and night ; lining onely of the
dew of beauen,which {hee drawes into ber by certaine
tongue-like prickles,placed on ber breafi;fhe hath both
old, and cold countries; and therefore we neither bane
ber,nor name for ber :


ime.
Cichorée des champs. Field Succorie, wild Suc-
corie.
Cichorée de lardin. Garden Succories or, as Sca-
riole,garden Endiue.
Cichorée iaulne. Yellow Succorie(a wild hind ther-
f) alfo, Haukeweed ; al{o, Dandelion, Succorie Dan-
lion, Piffabed. :
Cichorée fauvage. wild Succorie ; whereof there be
diners kinds,
Cichorée verrueufe. Gumme Succorie ; ora kind
thereof, that bath a blackifh, and Rampion-like root;
and takes away warts, beingeatenin Salades.
Cicle: m. A Sheicle ; an Hebrew .coyne, or weight of
two drammes , worth about foureteene pence fler-


Cigale de mer. 4. d, thin-fhelled, white, and
Chen or ent fi (of the kind of Creuifès or In-
Ses of the fea) bauing two crimfon, and eye-like fpots
‘upon ber (broad) tayle, and on either fide of the upper
part of her bodie three feet,befides a long arme,the c
whereof is [à bard,that picktooths are dis


Babillard en cigale. Pratling like a Parrat ( {ay


we,
A igales.To pie time in triflessto take
upon bim fost bufineffes ; to labour vainely, or in
vaine,


Cigale. Yo chirpe,fing,chatter like a Cigale.
one: m. A Swan.
herbe du cigne. The Swans bearbe ; growes (by
Cardans report) im a Scottifh lake tearmed Morania, | |
Ch eu oa du fing bis laff Mi
anter l'hymne du cigne. To fing bis laft,
can: m, anne: D of a Swan.


king.
Cicle du Sanétuaire. Was twice as much as the ordi-
marie one ; foure drammes in weight;in value,two fhil-
lings foure pence fterl.

Cicle: m. A Circle,Compaffe,Round.
Cicle Lunaire. The Golden Number ; or, full courfe,
or compaffe of the Moone, performed in ninetcene


eaves. M EEE
Eide folaire. The rewolution, or full courfe of the
Sunne, per formed in,and conjifling of eight and twen-
tie yeares. |

Cicogne: £. A Sterke ; alfo, a Swype,or Scoope to draw
Bec decicogne. Harbe Pike ede Stores

ec . Hear e 3 2.

Cranes-bill,Héarons-bill. RES
Contesde Ja cicogne. Idle hiftories; vaine relations;

_ tales of a tub,or,of arofted horfe, =
Copain A young Sterke. ©.

| Cicoigne; &,Cicoigneau ; as Cicogne, & Cicog-
Cicotrin. The bearbe Orpin; Liblong, Li


Cigué: f. Hemlocke,Homlocke. 4 arbe Bennet,Kex.
il:m The brimme (or the fingleranke of baire that
ves on the brimme) of an eye-lid ; the baire of an
eyelid; alfo, the Cooney, dirait of the.
ee 3 and fometimes (but leffe properly) an eye-


Cil. (vfed fometimes,in flead of Celuy) be, that fame
hat verie man.
indre: m. A Kowler; a round and long infirument of
wood, wherewith busbandmen breake clods, and Gar=
deners finooth their alleyes,e>c. te beck
ent: m. LA winking, twinckling, or beckening |
with the eye; alfo, a feeling, or eotioinking of the
*


eyes.
Ciller. To winke often ; to twinckle with the eyes; to bec-


elong. | 3 0 , by mooung the eye-lids ; alfo, to
: Aloés cicotrin. The beft kind of Aloes; of a cleere, porbelm ro anal og AREA ae
__ Jhining, and browne-yellow colour, reared fo of the ee Whofe eyes are feeled;or fowedvup; a
- tora,mwhence it comes. | feeled Hauke. BEA BATE
Sle «Looe Cicrotiné. +41, .To féele, or for up the epe-hds.
Cictotings méer Pere a eee FT RTE WAUES.
A aire: f, : | -_@Rab, : ès Hé : |
ee ai Kexsalfo,Hem- | Cimbale: f. 4 cymball.s bale. |
lockes. Gitnest rhe por ore: Pla: | if


t. Cement; a flrong, and cleaning me


Originalfrom


HE; OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


CHE


fm comma of Tyles, Pot ds, Flint, 6 8)
ed ree ns besa te pipe
2 Lo Dec ae greafsrofrsand water.

An excellent Cement,or Solder,vfèd
by Gal Goldin


3 (heretofore Mintmen compounded a
Cement for the tryall of gold,and tearmed it fo.
Cimenté:m.ée:f. Cemented ; foldered, clofedyor ioy-
ned by Cement.
Givi. To cement ; to folder;clo[eor ioyne together
with Cemeat. .
imet: m. as Cime; the top of plant,or tree.
Cimeterre: m. 4 (cymitar,or finyter:; à kind of fhort,
and crooked, fword, much in vfe among the Turks.
Cimettes. Looke Cymettes.
Citnier: m,..The vpper part of a rampe of Beeft, ac,
nextor necresunto the chine,
Touér du citnier. Toleacher..
Cimitiere :m. A Churchyard...
De nouveau medecin cimitiere boffi: : Prov. An
Fm sie Phyfitien fattens the Churchyard.
Veau mal cuié, & poules cruds font les cimnitieres
ee 2 Raw Pieksaad Chickens make fat church-
yards
Cimmerique. Tenebres Cimmeriques. Cimeri
an (viz. perpetuall,or continnall) darkne[e.
‘Ci inolée.se terre Cimolée. as Terre Cimolie.
ie. terre Cimnolie. Fullers earthsa kind of chalk;
in lieu whereof (at this day not found, or not knewne)
men foift in the thickened grounds, or bottome of the
water of Grindleftones.
Cimolienne. Terre Cimolienne. The fame.
Cin de bois. À knot,or kaurre jn mood.
Cinabre. 4s Cinnabre. ; Vermillion ; or, a
ae Miserall,redder xe Vermillion. Look


Cinabrin: m. ine: £ Red, ruddie (as Vermillion:

Cineinatule: Rs nt frixles,or I
bis fe whofe bead is frizled, or runt We art;)
any {uch effeminate re

Cinéture. D CURE A,

Cine m f. (re fame,


Cine er. To gird aise pet alfo,as Cintrer.
n:f A reducing into, à burning unto,


ge Ein the eas
ler. Looke Stages
ces m. st lib ird called,a Siskin.


eae : Ve Sanguinaries
ther soar (a el bat te fad
Mines) or artificial (the more common, and better

sane. Sulpber, and Quickfil-


| Ciné if. Gananiningd’, fivectened with
ane.


Dee the true Cinnamon of the Ancients (being
and wot,as ours,the er a tree) ishardlie


pts is day; and that the rinde, or barke,
ly bold to be Cinnamon,is much in
+ so ms rather be een Calltnand


q: Fine.
Cinguaines i cans a coma iit that


» Gow gle


indré af tin; aff, fpotted ; alfo, feppor-


:m, ée: Engler elects Ge


2 (Some learned men are of


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSE


CIN


thriues not ina moift fayle.
Stones Fiftie.
uantenier: m: À certaine Officer, or Magifirate
in Paris,that fomewhat refembles sn bis authoritie our
dharma: Deputie; af, a Captaine,or Commaunder;
of fiftie men,
Cinquantiéme. The fiftieth.
uener. Toyeeld fine for one.

Cinquiéme. The fifth,or fift.

Cintre:m. 4 (entriesor Mould for an Arch ; the frame
of wood whereon it is built, and whereby it is upheld
in the building.

Cintrer. To mould an Arch; to build it on, or (in the
puidins) te uphold it with,a Centrie,or frame of tym-


Cinturin. Looke Ceinturon.
Cion. A great tempefl,or bios the fea; alfo,


as Sion,or Scion.


Cipres: m. The tr Cc
ip ic (om Compo ded D Years warden ta Ci.
Ipit £ as€


Circée: £ A ater 0 if Nightfbade , that beares manie
finall blacke flower's (not eafily found now-a-daies.)
Circombilivagination: f 4 circumbilinigation,cir-

cular.motion ; ; going round,wheeling about.
Circombilivaginer. To turne, goe round, wheele a-
bout ; and (in difcour{e) to ufe many circumflances.
Circoncir. To circumcife.
Circoncis: m. ife: f. Circnmcifed.
Circoncifion.circumcifion,the cutting of the fore-skins
alfo,the nation;or generation of the lewes.
La Circoncifion. New yeares day.
Circonference: £. À circumference compaffing,or brin-
ging a bout.
Circonflex. Accent circonflex. Looke Accent,
Circongirer. To turne,twirle,wheele about.
Circonjacent : m.ente : f-Lying about ; fitwate,or a-
bording,on each fide of.
Circon


tion: f. À circumlocution ; a tedious para-
porafe or defeription ; a going about the b (in


Chon cript: m. te: f, Circum/tribed,limitted,boun-
ded ; appointed ; veftrained ; made briefe , fort, fiuc-
cinkt; ; al/o, deceiued, beguiled, fetcht ouer; alfo, aboli-
fed,yaced,put out,

Circonfcription: f. A circumféription; limitation,

meafuring;bounding ; reftraintor prefcription of com-

paf ; alfo,guile,deceit,coufenage.

Circonfcrire. To c €; to refiraine, or bold
within certaine limits ; to limit, appoint, oF meafire
_ Ont “cas unto; alfo, to cheat, beguile, deceine, fetch


ion: f. Circum(pettion ; beed,aduifement, |

sors a vigilant confideration, adili-
ren + out. = ;

Circonftance : f. A circumflanc

Circonftancié. pos fied with circum.
flances ; or,compaffed as with nces.

Circonvenir. Te cnairan.gr icon ; and hence; to
circumuent, fetch in,or ouer; to beguile,deceine,coufin,
en dar Les with great fleight.

Circonvention:£ Circumuention, deceit, confenages
an intrapping, bepaling vylie compaffing, or fetching
Omer.

Circonvenu: m.ué: £ Enuironed,inc


about ; 5 af ircummented eid nr rene,
Circonyoifin: m. pres Pele nai hed |
, |


Original from


a Pe 4


Crr R Gils


| bylying cloft unto,neere adioyning to.
Ciconvoluion: f. A circumuolution; a wrapping,


Grex. rene tofeare ; to dreffe,couer, clofe,or mingle


; alfoya rowli tumbling about, La ong The nameof'a certaine Pear lds
ag sit ponts ça goe about;al- excellent Perrie. + eae =
rs to imwrap,infould inclofe. Cireux: m. eufe: £ waxie; of wax; fallof Wax.
Circuit: m. 4 circuit, compaffe, going about ; a round : im. A Wax-chandler,
courfe or race. Cire: m. ere: £ Waxie,of wax.
Circuit: m. ite: f ur in about; e: f, as Gyrine.
alfo,imwrapped ,infoulded jnclofed. fne. A Seare-cloth; or any plaifter, or oiatment


Chaton: £ A circuition ; a circular courfe, or moti- whereof Wax, Rofin, er "Gummes, and Wine are the
,Principall Ingredients.
‘On: m.. A Hand-worme.

: Mais dont me vient ce ciron icy entre ces ee
doigts À lena der ou vtr betweene theft

. two fingers ? ( Aknauifh queftion “as kna as
attion De pat the the fore arom ~~ Fam a och
firfl, and fecond finger of the réa under pretence,
that a worme makes the place itch, but with a pur pofe
mid bornes at the partie er inde ur qul

Cironnier. Main citonniere. À hand thas is full ofor

troubled with,wormes.


Cirop: m. paris
Cirque À place in = de ay the a fate to be-


Cire: zm. A tuft, or locke of curled te "ali the fea-
rol hed eae Pub beads of ‘fome birds; al-
bearbs (as Withywind,e>c;)
rase thee a bufh of baire ; alfo,the bairie fubfiance
pe unto opflers.
Cirfotomie: £. The cutting, or opening of the corrupt
veines called Varices.


Cia : £. The clipping of coyne prefim after the
Cifaillé: m. ée: £ clipped,or cut with fheeves,or po


Circuicion de paroles. 4 cireumlocution, para-
» ph. iy dead circmmflance of words ; 4 going about


Gireulsire: . Round, circular, orbicular, compaf-
fing about , Wa ring; "belonging to acircle, round,
ring.

Cautere Circulaire. See Cautere.

Circulairement.Roundly,orbicularly,circularly,with a
compalfe,in a circle.

Circularité : £. Circularitie, roundneffe, orbicular-


nee.
Circulateur: m. 4 1eafler,lugler,lmpofier ; one that
delights,or deceines with fables tricks,and fleights,the
people gathered about him.
irculation: € A circulation; a fubliming, or extrac
ting of water, or oyle by a Lembicke ec; tearmed fo,
becaufè the vapour, before it be refolued into either,
; fèemes to goe round,or circle-wife.
1 Circulatoire : com. Circulatorie ; circulating; 5 fubli-
ming ; extratting, or feruing for extraétion;
Vaile circulatoire. 4 Lembicke, Stillizerie,


Cité: m. ée: £, Circulated ; fublimed,extratted;(ex-


actly) diftilled.
Circuler. To circulate ; fublime, extrabt, or difill (ex- o.whefe fle Fra off with hot pincers.
aétly.) Cifailler. To clip, or cut with fixars, or fheeres; af, to


Ou fe circulent les humeurs. wherein the bumors
make many a circle, before they producesor be refolued
into,at water ec.

ire: f, Wax; alfo,a combe of wax in the pena

Cire d'Efpaigne. Hard-wax; orasLact

ee gomméc. Wax mingled with Rond’ Turpen-


Cire jaulne. Yellow wax is ofed onely in the Chaun-


nip.or pull the flefh with bot pincers, :
Cifailles : f. Garden fheeres ; a Gardeners clipping
Sheeres ; any great fheeres,
Cifé: m. ée: f. Carued s wrought with a che, or
grauing yrom.
Gauss oa À Launce, Launcet, or fre
Incifion ; chifell,or gra ron,
Cifeaux: ng apenas le) oe
Ledrap,& les cifeaux luy bagtelivres: Prov. The |


|
;
|


ceries of France,
Cire minerale. Piflafphale à is called fo in fème “Sub ie is pit unto bie; all 5 at bis owne difpofi-
Places. tion, or in bis owne band ; be may now be bis owne


Cire verdes Greene wax ; ns o>.


| Cie ta now both partand chufe.
other difpatches of inferiour Courts 5 Palau Leg :m.ée: f a graven with a chifell; aff,


ters, Perpetuities, and general Pardons gr heed i cut with fixe
the kigre feald. : 4 ae oie ite witb chifells alfo, to clip; or
Droi& gn is ‘eighteene pence Tourn, in euerie | eat with fixars.
. pound aboue twentie,given,or. tre tel me | Ciflet: m.A little frar,or cbiftll.
fale; due vnto the King inregard of the lights which | Cifeleure: £. chifell-worke sor as Cizelleure.
are (id to be) fpent bib the bargaine is in ma- | Cifellape: m. A clipping with fhceres,or fixars.
king.  Cifte: m. The plant called Ciftus,and Hollie Roft.
‘A yeux de ce Tender ; eafily meliing, ¢ or quickly Cifteaux: m. Aa Order of white Friers (inflatuted in
 theyeare 1090) whovnder their (upmefi) on habit
a he nt fi roid agers re


._Yneare.

ftern
, parie à To plie, or applic a thi {ter

= oe ie any , mw “i 3, :


Original from


Biatizea CO gle ee FHE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


GC. WT:


ferues both to defend,and to curbe,a cities.

Citadin : m. A Citizen, Burge(fe, Burguer, freeman in a

citie, inate nog

Citation: £. A Citation,Summons,waraing to appeare;
alfo,a citing, adiourning, fummoring. -

Cité: : . ow: - verge Ds Towne, 3
ing the feat. a, of a Bihop. auing a Cathe-
drall Church within it. «

Cité: m.ée: £ Cited, fummoned, adiourned;warned,to
appeare ; alfô,alledgedor cited as a Text.

Citer. To cite, fummon, adiourne,warne, ferue with a
writ, to appeare ; alfo,to cite,or alledge,as a Text.

er as Zedoare ; a certaine root verie like to

inger.

Citoyen: m. A Citizen, Burguer Burgelft,freemanof a
Citie. 6

Citoyennerie :'£ A Citixenfhip , the freedome ef «
Citie, ’

Citre. The wort kind of Pompion ; blacke of colour, and
continued in gardens,onely for the feed, which is medi-
cinable; the reft is throvwne unto bogs.

Citrin: m. ine: f. Of a Citron,citron-like,pale-yellow,

as a Citron.

Concombre citrin. À Citrullor Citrull Cowcumber.

Couleur citrine. À Citron coloxr,pale Orange colour;

pale-yellow.

Myrobalan citrin. The yellow, or Citron, Myroba-


lan.
Citrinité: £. Pale-yellnvnefe; or pale yellow.
itron: m. A Citron,Pome-Citron.
Citronne: f. Baulme, fiveet Baulme (an bearbe.)
Citronnellesf. 4 kind of {mall Baulme,of a faire greene
colour,and veric good ina Sabet, |
Citronnier: m. À Citron tree.
Citronnier: m. ere: £. Citron-like ; of a Citron.
Bafilic citronnier. Citron Bajill yniddle Bafill.
Citrouille: €. À Citrull; a Citrull Cowcumber, or Tur-
kifb gourd; a kind of great Melen,in colowr;and forme
refembling a Citron. SE
Citrulle. The fame. io
Civade: £ The Shrimpe,or beard-fifh;alfo,Oats,or Pre-
uender for horfes.
.Civadier : m. The fourth part of a Quarteron, qLan=
gu LI A .
Civadiere: £. The fprit-fayleofafbip. .  :
Civé: m. A kind pr va fauce for a Hare.Looke Sivé.
Cive:f..4 Scallion; or onfet Leeke.


Civelle:£. 4 Lamprill; the fimall, or frefb-water Lam


prey. Lyonnois. À
Civets. des c, Slices of bread toafied, then foaked an
* boureor bvoin water andwine; then firained, and


fice put to them; an excellent fauceswe may call them,


Pas | LÀ
Civette: f. Ciuet ; alfo, (the beaft that breeds it) a Cimet
cat ; alfoya Chine little Scallion.or Chibol.
ivettien: m, enne: f. Perfumed with,or fmelling of,
Ciuet, “agi ; weimtet>
Civiere: f. A band-barrow ; (to carrie mucke, cc, on)
alfo,a Beere (to carrie a dead corps en.) i +)
Civiere à col. A necke-barrow, or Beere-like {hr
whereon Images,and Relickes, are carried in Procefft
ons, dc. | ;
En cent ans civiere en cent ans banniere: Prov.
See Bannierc. .

Civil: m. ile: € ciwill,courteous,gentlemannerliewell-
behaued; = HA pe rg yee towne-bred,
orb ; alfo,politicke. cuil.


0, ”
Caufe civile. "A privat cant; Or,fuch a one,as is nei-


ine,


TL el a a


CLA


ther Ecclefiafticall,criminall nov capitall; but concerns

a mans efiate. à

Frui@s civils. Arefwchas are gathered, or taken by

the courfe of vight,and without any belpe of nature ; as

hire for boufes,wages for offices,arrerages ofrent,érc.

Tour civil. The ciusll day; continues from Sunne-rifing

to Sunne-fèt. Looke Jour.

Lieutenant civil. See Lieutenant.

Nuit civile. Begins when the day ends, from Sunne-

fet unto Sunne-rifing. | et

Partie civile. A prisat man; one that is lyable to any
* abtion; alfo,an ordinarie Suitor,or Client.

Partie civile & formée, ou intereflée. He that fil

lowes acriminall altion,only in refbeétofsor to get fome


~ amends for,a wrong done tohimfelfe. . .
Requefe aile Seeke Requette,

Civilement. civilly,gently, courteoufly ; in 4 good fafhi-
on, decent order,comelie manner’; alfo, mildly, quietly,
temperately; alfo,according to Order, Inftice and Lav.

Civilifé : m. ée: f. Ciuilixed ; made ciuile ; framed,or


trained vp,to cinilitie.
Civilifer. Looke Civilezer. she:
Civilité: f ciwiitie, gentlene[fe, bumanitie,courtefie,al-
fo,modeftie,mildnes;quietnes of difpofition,and fafhion.
Civilizer. To ciuilixe, bring to ciuilitieymake cils to |
tame,quiet reclaime.


Civilizer vn criminel. To change bis Indiétment into |
an a€tion; to turne a criminall into a ciuill,caufe.

Civois: m. A bed of Scallions ; or of unfet Leekes.

Civot: m. 4 Scallion ; or vnfet Leeke.

Cizaillé: m. ée: £ Clipped,or cut,with fixzars.

Cizailler. To clip,or cut with fixxars,or fheeres.

Cizailles: f. as Cifailles.

Cizelé: m. ée : f. Carued,or grauen with chixels.

Cizeler. To fafhion, carue,or graue with a chizell; alfo,
to cut,or clip with fixzars.

Cizellage: m.as Cifellage. ;
izelleure: f. Chixell-worke; caruing, or ingrauerie
with the Chixel. |

Clabaud : m. <A name for a bound; alfo, the barke,or
barking,of a bawling curre.

Clabauder. To barke ; bawle,raile at; (pightfiully to ac-
cufe,or fpeake againft. .

Clabauderic: f 4 barking,bawling,rayling ; an enui-
ous accufing,a [pight full sep ocbing:

Claboffer.7o ps toffe up and down;alfo,to bedafh,
or beray,with durt.

Clac: m.: A clicket, or clapper; any jus that makes a
clacking,or clattering noife ; bence ( moft properly) the
clacket that frights away birds from fruit-trees, oc.

Clache: £ A certaine Engine wherewith (mall) birds

pete cage fifi “ie Ft ve
uet:m.The name of a faire, fappie,@r fauorie apple.

Claigner. AT ;

Claim: m. A publicke demaund, or claime; a pretence
of title unto land, ec; ao, a Declaration, or Bill of
Complaint put.or preferved,into a Court. —

Clain: m. as Claim; alfo,an Arreft,or feifure of a deb-

tors goods,vpon an Execution ; alfo,a fine of xx dor
threefolz' Tourn. due vato lufiice for the feifure of
beafts damage-fefant ; alfo,a penaltie ( Rent. ces,of
xx d. Tourn. in others,of xxx d. Parifis) inflicted on
the partie that yeelds by confeffion in Court before the
it come to conteflation. ‘ |
air:m.æ Clarté; ora cleere thing ; whence; |

Clair dela Lune. Moone-light,or Moone-fhine.


a ire:f. ceri og righ. On |


CLA
Clair-coulant.cleere-gliding,cleere-fireaming running


cleere.

Clairement. Cleerely,brightly; euidently, plainly.

Clairet: m. ette: € Semenliak cleere,bright,or [iining.
Eau clairctte. A water(made of Aquauite,Cinnamon,
Sugar and old red Rofe water) foueraigne againft all
the diféafès of the wombe. È
Via coter Claret pe mee ma cent cre

red grapes mingled,or growing together.)

Clairins 1% A pr Order of ton eliers, or Gray
Friers.

Clairon: m. 4 Clarion; a kind of finall firait-monthed,
and fbrill-founding Trumpet, vfed (commonly) as a
Treble unte the ordinarie one.

‘A pain, & oignon trompette, ne clairon: Prov.
Hard fare,poorc dyet, courfe Acates require neither
State in the feruing,nor Muficke in the eating ; or, the
found of forraine Trumpets is but feldome beard in a

e,and barren State.
aironner.To found a Clarion;alfo,to fqueake fqueale;
frets frilly, finally, or with an effeminate voice.

amable : com. Claimeable,challengeable.

Clamant: m. A claimer, a challenger ; one that makes
title unto land, @rc; alfo,a Creditor,that feizes bis deb-
tors goods upon an Execution. :
amant: m. ante: f, Calling, crying out; alfo, clai-
ming,or challenging.

Clame: f. A fine leuied,in fome places, vpon theft that
deferve the payment of their debts; alfo,the fine payed
nto luftice,or a Lord bauing invifdittion, for the feifure
of beafts found Damage fefint; alfoyas Clain,

Clamé: m.ée : f. Claimed ,challenged,demaunded; cat
led,or cried out ; fboken aloud,or with abigh voice.

Clamer. To call,criefpeake aloud,or out; alfo,to claime;
to make a claire 10,or lay in a claime for; to challenge,
demaund, pretend a title unto; alfo,to arrefl, or ftize,
bis debtors goods.

Clamer en garend, ou en garieur. To demaund a
thing by way of poffeffion, or of propertie; or, to com-
plaine, in Court, of the wrongs which baue beene done
him thofe wayes. i
Clamer à futtice. To exbibit a claime, or demaund :
or,to preferre a Bill of | int unto a Court. —
Clamer fon fabieét de condition qui fe veut
advouër d’autre feigneurs c'eft,le sous ,
a putain. He called, or cleaped, bim

efon. |
Se clamer en Cour fuzeraine de Cour inférieure.
To addreffe bimfelfe, for the more expedition, unto a
Superior Court, though be were fummoned by an inferi-
“hi 4 et


our.
Clameur: f. À clamour;criesoutcrie,exclamation.fhout
roarings alfo,a claime vnto,a challenge,or demaund of,


a icke fuit for a thing.
lameur d’Haro. Looke Haro. ett 543
propane Ebaby oe vo pane
unto bim t ifure Dama
| Sete within be Tarif. ein Des
_* Forte clameut. Looke Fort. recta 5
Gamer :f. A. ced Cloke,Pelt,or Gabardine.
anporte. as Cloporte. CAN NO .
ch =: f. The latch of adore, PAG T he
CE LE
ir huggar mite np tlle sender bend,
angers 4 ren rio ri i


C L A
CI :m rf. Shrill, skriki i}
pay ee eufe: f. Sania tnt rein,


anponniere. as Clapponnicre.
Clapies: m. À Clapper of Conies; a beape of flones,erc,
reims they retire themfelues ; or (as our clapper) a
walled about, and full of neafis of boords, or |
lone, for tame Conies ; alfo, a Rabbets neaft: (1m old |
time sora boufes ous - ee) f
or vicere, inus, bofomes, or angles o,
an ar 5 the many creffs,ot enertlawari boles where.
init putrifies as it goes.
og m.A botch in the Groyne,or yard;awinchefler


€.

ire: £ The fame,

nnice. as Clapponniere.

nnier : m. The fame.
Clappetter. To clap on with the band.


pe ee : f. The buckle,pafile,or pafterne bone of
a beaft.
Claque-dent:m. .4 laxie rogue, idle luske, 1
idlbsbies eme that wi Posaish cdot ies.
then worke to get beat,or meat. !
uer. Toclacke,to clap,to clatter ; to crafb;to crack;
to .
pg les dents. To gnafh the teeth ; or,to chatter,
or didder,like an Ape,thats afraid of blowes.
Claqu ne: The name of an Apple whereof excellent Cyder


[1 .
CURE demoulin. The Clapper, or clacke,of a Mill-


Claquetant: m. ante: £ Clacking,clapping,clattering;
: pr ro 3 crafbing; il sealing 12 es
Claquetement : m. .4 clattering, clacking, crafbing,
chattering,creaking,clapping.
queter. as Claquer.
aquetis: m, A clattering, clacking, clapping; a craf-
ing ; a cracking ; a ve, den a chattering.
aquette:f. À Laxers Clicket,or Clapper.
aré: m, as Eau Clairette.
ace. Vin claret. Claret wine,


:m. ée:f, Clarified, cleered , fined , puri-
ei ”


ifier. To'clarifie; cleeve,fine,purife.
Clariné. iar yf ae 3 gp Cow with Azur bels
ing about her necke ; our Blafonners fay no more


> butsthe bels Azur. ae
Cones f. Cleereneffe, light, brightne(fe,lufire,tran{pa-


r .
Clas: m, as Glas ; a knell,or wofill noyfe.
Claffe. ranke,order,or diftribution of people according
to their fenerall degrees ; In Schooles (wherein this
“word is moft vfèd) a forme,or Leéiurereflrained unto
a certaine companie of Schollers, or Auditors ; and


bence;

Efcolier babillard prez le feu,& badin hors 1a claf-

€: Pro. t
ClaGique: com.Clafficall; formall,orderlie,in due,or fit

ranke ; alfo, approued, authenticall ; chiefe, principall.
Clavaire : m. 4 kind of Receiner,or Officer that lookes to

the receitjof the Kings demefue, =
page . Fa ere sus ”
Claval ler. To féttlesor fircngt ‘yong, fhoots;or flips
__of a vine againf the frie of rong winds.
Clavandier :m. A porter,or key-bearer; one to whom
~ keyes are committed to be kept ; alfo,tbe chaine where- |
“on women ufe to weare their keyes. :
Clavandiere: f 4 fhe porter, key-keeper, or key-bea-
re +”
Clavarins.


—


Original fro


THE.OHIO STATEU


m


NIVERSITY


CLA


CLE


Clavarins. 4 Order of blacke Friers,which weare two
great paper keyes upon their habits. ' 1564
Claudication: £ A limping,balting ,lameneffe.
Claudition:f. 4 Claudication. : Ë
Claveau: m. The Scab among Sheepe; alfo,the Hauinfe,
or Lintell of a doore ; alfo, a clafpe, booke, or buc-


kle.

Clavelade:f. A Thornebacke. @Langued.

Clavelé : m.ée: f. Scabbedjor infééted with the ftab,
as afheepe; alfo,nayled,or faltened with nayles ; alfo,
rooted furely in,

Herbe clavelée. Paunfie, bearbe Trinitie, Hearts-
cafe.

Raye clavelée. The Rocke Ray; or,as Raye bouclée.
Seeke Raye. ‘

Clavelée: f. The (cab among fheepe;al/o,the fcabbineffe
of a horfès legs. *

Cavers: To nayle,or faften with nayles ; to fettle,or fet,

if? in,

Clavellé: m. ée: f as Clavelé.

Claveller. See Claveler.

Claveffins: m. Claricords,or Claricols.

Clavet: m. a Clavelée. (Inthe frft a

Clavette: f. The Cannell bone, or Craw-bone; aifo, a
Spring-pinne; the little peece of yron wherwith tradef-
men keepe in the yron pinnes of their fhop-windowes ;
alfo,the Capfquire, or Fore-locke of the carriage of a
ae 3 or (more properly, that which faflens it) the


nn: : du pied. The heele, or binder bone of the

fool,

Claveure: f. A key-hole ; or all that part of a locke
wherein the key turnes, or playes; alfo, a chinke, or


cranny. |
Plus 1 rouillé que la claveure d'un vieil charnier.
- pong ruflie then the key-bole of an old poudering


tuo, : à

Le vifage leur reluifoit comme la claveure-d’ un
charnier. Their faces gliftened (with greafe) like the
locke,or key-hole,of a poudering tub.

Clavicules: f The kannell bones,channell bones necke-
bones, craw-bones ; extending (on each fide one) from
the bottome of the throat unto the top of the fhoulder.

Clavier: m. A key-chaine; or chaine for keyes, or chaine
whereat keyes are banged.
Clavier d'une efpinette,&c. The keyes of, or,a fet of
keyes for,a paire of Virginals.

Claviere: £. A key-keeper,or key-carrier ; a woman that
hath charge of all the keyes in a boufe.

Clavin: m. A little graple,or booke oy aclaw.

Claune. # Mare ; 4 Poole; of landing wa-


ter,
Clanie:€ A Claufe,Period, conclufiue fentence,or con-
clufion.
Clauftier: m. ére: f.. Of, or belonging to;a Clopfier ; li-
ui, in a Mona, i Cloyfter. q re ttsoa
a .aC


7


5 nt "à
: Prieur clauftral. The Priorsor Head of a Frierie; an


ordinarie Prior.
Claufule: €. A little clauft; end,conclufion.
Claye: £ A burdle,or lattice of (Oxier) twigsyerc ; alfo,
a(watled) gate,or yate,in a hedge.
Clayer. To wattle with rods,or with reeds cre; te com-
Paffeshedge or clofe in, make or flaut vp, with watlings,


À tices CC.
Ciéé :m? :€ Watled, latticed, burdled ; incompaf-
held das fat voit matins,


d,hedged or
'. bardles lattices ec.


Go: gle


Clef: £. À Key; alfo,a braceto bold beames together ; al-~
0,4 knot.or fcutcheon in the middeft of a vault where-
A Tymber-worke) the ends of the pofts doe mect;
“and (ii Mafonrie)the conrfe of Stone-worke ends; alfo,
a Cliff in Mufickesalfo,the middle wedge of a boot-laft.

» Les clefs. as Clavicules.

Clef d'arbalefte. The Ga fle of a Croffe-bow.
La Clef d'une fontaine. The head of a Fountaine,or


t.
La clefde la main. The wrift.
Laclef d'une porte. The Pendall, or kep-ftone of a
gate; the flone which bangs downe fimewhat below it
fellowes inft in the middle of the Arch.
Clef Ame The Scutcheor; the peece of wood,
or flone that knits up an Arch, or Vault, and hangs
downe in the verie middle thereof’; the key of an Arch
deepelie carucd.
Le jeu des clefs. 4 kind of Shuffle-boord play with
keyes,a knines-point being the marke. ;
Donner la clef des champs À. To difiniffe,diftharge,
let goe, fet at hbertie, fend out.
Mettre les clefs fur la fofle. A widow to refifè, and
waiue,the goods,or ber part in the goods Jeft by ber in- :
debted busband , by laying her keyes ont bis graue as
Soone as it is couered, and renouncing ber faid part,
in the cg re of a Notarie publicke.
Prendre la clef des champs. To get out, giue it
elfe roome, take libertie, flip, by a privat way, away.
Cleigner. as Cligner. To twinckle,or winke often.
Clematide. 2s Clematite.
Clematite: £ A third kind of the bearbe Hartwort, or
Birtwort,called,climing Birthwort.
Clemence: f. Clemencie, mildneffe, meekenefe, merci-
fulnefle,benignitie,pitie.fauor.
Clement. Clement ; gentle mild, gracious, benigne, bu-
mane; mecke ger cifitl,pitifull,cafily-pardoning, foone-


ch. f. A Gardeners watering pots alfo,an boure-
glaffe,or veffell hich meafureth boures by the running
water,or fand.thereout ; alfo, an Aftronomicall in-
ument wherewith the meafure of Starres is taken.
epfydrie: £.4 proportionable,iu/?,or limitted running,
or filling a of water out of a Cleply dre, or of fand
in an boure-glafe.
Cler: m. clerc: £. Cleere,bright light/ome, tranfparent,


* pure-coloured; 3 alfo; per(Picuows, plaine, appa-
= euident eafie to be pi | mess
Laid cler.whey. ‘

Toile clere. Lawne.
Cler femé. Rare,thin-fèt,growing not thicke,whereof
there are,or sow, but verie fem. :

Clerc: m. A Clarke panel or learned hence;

» fa, Churchman(who fhould be learned; alfo,a Clarke


in an Office; a Lawyers Clarke; and generally, any |


Penneman. : es

_ Clercs dela Chambre. The Kings principal,or domes-
ticall, Secretaries ; (tearmed fo in old time.)
Clerc des fiefs. The Kings,or any other lords,Atturney
is called fo; becaufe be keepes a Regifter of the bomages
their-vaffals are to do,and of the duties they are to pay.
Clerc folut. A lay, or fecular Churchman (Qui n'a
SD ME RS SR eftlié a! efglife) asa
Deacon,Prebend,Canon;@rc. ;
Clerc tonfuré. À Priefta Shaneling ; one thats fully
entred into Orders. *


- Pas de Clerc. A foolifh tricke, impertinent aft, fond
on pga amen ie ec


Si Vin


! he


THROHIO: STATE UNSS = re


“eo ee


ne | Ce ae


ws


Rat | VOS


¢ iB EE I
Vin des Clercs. Looke Vir Harrie-racket,or Hbid.
Clere iufques aux dents. ell red ina porridge-pot, Cligner les vein Topiakeser twinckle with the pu
an excellent Clarke in a Cookes fhop. Clignetter. To twinckle,towinke ofienand thicke.
ttement :


Le ne fut bon "ai Prov. See Dan-
cur, —
Ilen parle comme vn clerc d'armes. Hee fpeakes
ryt hs ignorantly, fimply, without proofe,or skill ; one-
yh earefay.
On croit d’un fol bien fouvent, qu’ il foit Clerc
: pour fes veftemens: Prov. Handfome,or decent ap-
parrell makes foolés oft palfe for wife men.

Tout ce que le Clerc laboure folle femme deuore :
Pro. All that the (cholter gaines bis wench confumes.
Clerceliere:: € 4 kind of courfe ribban wherwith coun-
trey wenches gird themfelues ; alfo, a firing,or chayne,

wherewith women hang their keyes to thew girdles.

Cleré. A kind of red Hypocras.

Clerement. Cleerely, brightly; apparantly, euident-
ly.

Cleres-voyes: f. Lattices,or fecret holes to fpie out at;
crofje-barred windows (of wood or yron)through which
one may fee,and not befeene.

Clergé: m. The Clergie.

Clergez. The Officers of 1uftice (who either are,or
of ould be learned) were called fo in former times.
cba m. A pettie Clarke, under Clarke, or young
larke. .
con: m. as Clergeau ; or,a Singing man,or Qui-
refler,in a Queere.
Clergeffe: f. A learned woman.
Plume clergeffe. 4 learned penne.

Clergie:f. Learning skill, fcience, Clarkefhip.
I] à des muids de clergie en latefte. { Sonvere they
wont,in old time, to fay of, a great learned man;) Hee
bath a bufbell of learninginhishead. |.

Mieux uaut plein poing de bonne vie qu’ avoir
plein muy de clergie: Prov. Better a little boneflie
then a great deale of learnin nm

Clerical. privilege clerical. The priuiledge of the Cler-
ge of his bis Clergie, or of a Clarke . Looke Clerica-


Cledesieonene. Clarkely,Priefi-like,Scholler-like.
Clericature:£ Clarkeflup; or, sees a Clarke, or
Prieftor in Orders.
Privilege de Clericature: i Ta the Cler-
ge ; whichis,to be tried before pie and not
an for e any re ludge.…


Alleguer fa clericature. To alledge his Orders, and
claime the priuiledge of bis C lp PE
a Cinile,or lay Iudge unto bis Or
Clerté : f. as a 233 "IR = d
Clefché. as


Clicq “ur £. Clickets; or jis ert à
ie ratling noife is made. See Cliquette. |
clid de:f. A wood in Engine of warre (Womoutof: vfe)
whichbolding by a qe ne
loofed,a great number of flones. : i
ia Clays «are, pe:


Clietealiest Prot ge vant; ion,

rie ri pete ;
; Rap creed Naa?
Clement eye ct the eyes. ro

wgnment des yeux: m4 mining er intl

The i ply cle dn id


m. An often winking,or twinckling
the eyes.


Clignotter a Cign lignetter.


Climaétere: com. Climatericall; whence ;
L'an climaétere. The Climaterical yeares enerie fè-
uenth, or nintb,or the@g yeare of amans life; all very
dangerous,but the
ie de 63 ans. The Climatericall, or dange-
vous, yeare of 63, at which age diners worthie men
baue died.


: m. A Clyme , or chmates, a dinifio à in tbe |
She, o Portion of the world, berweene Soutb and


Climatere. l'an climatere. See Climaëtere,
te: f, Cadmia,Braffe-oare. +

Clin d'ocil: m. The twinckling of an eye.
Clincaille. chinkes moneyscoyne. (v.m.)
Cline-mucette: f. The game called Hodman-blind;

Harrie-racket ; or,are ‘you all bid,

nique: com. One that is bedred ; or fo Sicke that be r
cannot r ee


Clinqualles eee, : lin of.

ualletie: f, 4 ing, clinking,ringing of much

ret or of many pannes ma rp a 2 alfo,
coyne,or (as we fay) chinkes.

Sont: m. Thinne plate-lace of Gold, or Sit-

Cinque as Cliquer; 4/6, a certaine ote ner

Clichuaille # Clincaille.

Cliquefoire. 4 Squirt.


Cliquer. To clacke,clap,clatter,clicke it.

Cliquet: m. The ring,knocker,or hammer of a dore; al.
Soya Lazers clicket,or clapper ; alfo, a certaine Engine
to catch fifb witball. :

Cliqueter. as Cliquer ; or as Cloquer.
iquetis : m. as ettement. |


rec with them; ilds ratileor clacke.


- 3 Pate ote betting,cleieringsclepping,


ire,
Cliffe: € À Htiosreukiaiaur, 10 fet under a difh.


on the Table; 5 alfo,a wattlesor burdle of mgernaret


"Treillis de cliffe. 4 Lattice,or Grate of wicker.
:mée: f. Made of wicker ; plaited, or watled
with oxier,or willow twigs.
Glitere See Clyftere.
‘Clitie. Or de Clitie. À Marigold.
Clitoris: m. A womans Priuities.
Cliver. To bow,leane,or bang outward, as pe Cliffe, or
fleepe fide of a bill; (anold werd.)
oaque: f. A common Sinke,or Sewer ina towne.
Cloche :'£ A Bell, or Clocke ; to ringsor fritesal-
fo, the upper part of a Lymbecke, wherein she
caer ins d refolued into waters
oe dbp wherein: Pearesare de


d,or fo
4 x $- Laurens. Grentbllerifne in th


. Coch à heat.
ree me aux cloches. Wilhyroind, Bindweed, Hedge- |
eis.


“Mettrela cloche au chat. To fet people gerber by
the eaves. M


Original from


THE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


ae iyo cl. . ABell-weather.
ochement : m. A halting.
Cloche pied à cloche-pied. Hauling,limping;lame-


Clocher: m. 4 Bell-fown
Clocher d'eglife. as Ck
Clocher. To bault,or limpe ;:te be. lame,or goe lamely, of
a legs alfo(in fome fe? toring,or toll a Bell;to make
a bell found,or ftrike
Clocher devant les boiteux. To applie bimfelfe un-
to the (faultie) bumors of others, with a purpofe to in-
deere; or deceine them; alfo, to fpeake Latine before
Clarkes ; or(more generally)to fhew cunning,ufè tricks,
diffemble, or play the knaue any way, in prefènce of
tbof that are as skilfull as bimfelfe’; (In alleebich fen-
_ ces we alfovfe the fame Prouerbiall phrafe ;) to bault
before a criple,
Clocher des deux coftez. To bault with, ov on both
fides; inconftantly to doubt,or be uncertain. whofe part
‘be fall takeswhat fide Il follow;er,to follow now
the one,then the other ee er holding touch with,
or doing good unto,ei
Te fi "bien de quel ped ilcloche.1 know bis diféafe
à Rs well well enoug,
Clotherie: :f.A pute or pale of Bells,
Clochetier: m. 4 Bell-fiund
Clochette: f. A litle Bell; «al, Withiewind, oe, as
Campanette.
Clochier: m. A Steeple ; alfoa Parifh,Borough,or vil


oe ; pere 8 (in a large fence) a Bifhopricke, or


L


In f, A care iclfire.
on: £. Any thing that pid « aed, paler
rayles ; and (moft properly) a mud
ifonneux: m. A maker of | a = sh inclofleres.
Cloifonneux: m. eufe: f. Full of,or belonging to,ynud
wals,bedges,or inclofures.
Cloiftral : m wale: f Of; or belonging to,an Abbey, or
_Cloi er.
mA Cloifter À ja rond-wealke Or inclofure(co-
“ wered ouer bead, her red pose de ick an
= Al A ee @; alfo,as Coloftre.
“Come les: £. Ta eme abe me ith
iz Beater bis Bitt.
cater rec Ta cockle, tear-


APR To es 03)


G::6° Le C OL
C'eftle fon des cloches. This is a matter that may be “oi in the way of.
varied,or turned at ple En vain plante qui ne cloft : Prov. “In vaine bee
A confeil de folcloc bois: Prov. Call fooles to clos that hedges not.
counfell by a woodden m. A Clofè,or Field inclofied.


Clos bruneau. The tayle,arfe,nock-androe.

Clos: m. clofe:: f. Clofed,inclofed ; bedged in, fout 2p;
alfo,barred,flopped ; foreflalled, preuented ; alfo, fini
Shed, fulfilled, pecfeéted,accomplifhed.

&muni de routes parts, Armed at all points ;


foret to all purpefès ; prepared againft all at-


tempts.
Eftar clos. fon eftar eft clos. The offices, or places of
bis boufe ave all beftowed, x
Ville clofe. A Citieor walled ro sa 3
‘A clos yeux. Blind fouldboodw,
Clofcuau:m. The rer et Née, the laftbat-
ched bird ina neaft. 3


Cloferie: :f An Inclofiere pr thing inclofed, R


Clofier:m.Ahedger ;aninclofer. - à hy
Clofporte.as Cloporte.
Contr ms clocke like a benne. $
offer les grains. Maay fialkes;or eaves to t
Or comie ‘ounce graine of feed. ré fon #


Cloftier. #s Clauftier.
Cone An inclofine;an inclement farine
with, hedges, pales, rc ; alfo,a conclufion, clofing, fm-
cles mtting Up ; 8,0f fheech,of accompts;érc.
ae pee au clot. To play at Harry-rackety or


Chu: m. 4 Wei od; alfoa corne (in a foot, or toes) and
bence,the Pinne (im the bottome a a Hagkes foot.)
Clou à bandes. A ffreake nayle
Cloude sig A great slate leaf a foot long 3
vfed in

loua 2459 ATentar booke.
Clou Es A free, or fheatbing rigs ufed
in

ou ‘de e. A Clone.
-Clou tees clovte Nayle.


Sa demanguiere. 4 Popper nayle; ufed in fhip-


isu 2 fouffler. 4 tacke-nayle; or the finall nayle

wherewith bellowes aremadevp,or mended.

Ie n’en donneroye pas vn clou : foufflet. 1 would
go a pinne,a chip,a rufb, for


cloux de diamant. M not to be
Paper to be prs jo fm SS


Compter les cloux. See Compter. P
Riuer es cloux à. Ie luÿ ay bien rivé fes doux. 1
baue given bim bis fill payment or, 1 bane fitted bim
with an-vnanfwerablereplie; 1 bane purled, or fetled 4
him with a found anfiver, ;
Vn clou fert à pouffer l'autre : Pro.One nayleferues
Popa


CI : chin-bole. drine tb À om un
Cor Gi Le the myers dre n Arte os
md. : Prov. He mocks that worft toe
non mens defects and yet are moft — rena keavabenn thet bat 7
cle To clofes sbedge in, al Clout, és fi fd blcke
re. To cfc med RO Coté: :m. ée: ipod, Feu id mi
to preuent.
Gone comptes. To paffe, conclude, or finifh Ac- Roc e cloiiée. Tbe roc e Ray pr buckled Raÿ.
| Clouément:in, 4
elena cer That concludes, or | Clouër. To mores to 5 joyne, or ft en, with
lution of, orend to, the controuerfie ;
| po a LE bb rire sou |
| erinan C5 Or ts
‘ ash ae fon + . ; ij Le rs LE
= © BS ale me
= ena Fe ie ee LAS had sk PA, CL OUR


C_O A


C 00C


Clouët : m, A little nayle ; a tacke nayle.

Clouéur: mi. A aajler,

Clouéure: £ A nayling.

Clouir. Te open, and produce young ones as egges that
baue bene fitten on their full time.

Clouiffe: £ as Pelardes @Marfeillos. >

as Cloffer,

Cloufleufe: £. A clocking benne, or benne that vfes to
clocke much

Cloutier: m. 4 nayler, a nayle-(mith; a feller or maker
of nayles.

Clove. as Claye. A burdle,érc.

ee as Clofler. To clocke.
aye: as Claye ; a burdle,or lattice of wicker,erc.
rar Looke Clepfydre.
& ere: m. A gijfler.
€ luy metres vn clyftere barbarin: Iwill pro-
uide for ber belie a plaifter of vwarme guts. &Rab:

erifé: m. é¢: € Clifterized ; applied as, or, made

into, a glifter ; conueyed by a ghfler vp into the
uts.

Clyfterifer. To applic a glifter; to conuey by glifler up in-
io the guts; alfo,to make,or put a thing into,a gl

oris: m. 4s Clitoris.

Côäc: m. The croaking,or crie of frogs.

Coacervation: f. À coaceruation,or heaping together.

aaa m. A coadiutor belping fellow, or fellow


Cotditnation: rf. A coadunation,gathevinigaffembling,
sboyning, together.

Coñgulation: f. A coagulation congealingo carding
4 turning vato curd.

Coaguler. To coagulate ; curd,or congeale into a turd;
to ioyne together or make to ioyne.

Coaille: £. Cour/? wooll; mot Berruyet,
äine, as Coenne, :

Coalefcer. To clof2,iayne,or grow toge ether ARR

Coar&té: m. ée: £ Strained, prefféd, or thruft bard
together ; refframed, or. brought within anarrow com-


ollie. To firaige, pref, or thruft bard together ; {te


‘aine or bring within a narrow


Coëffer. To croake,or crie as a toador
ie


._the wrecking,or Ar
äugmenté : m.éc :f rene
increafed,
Coäxer. as Coaffer. : y
Cobbir. To braife,or breakeinte peeces qRib.


te Pr Se it not
out, but fo,as it ‘one. one i
- Cobter. as Chr Cope ut
Coes. SeeC a LA Fur à nr
sm. Amice don fancie
ene proud,or forward M ee See Coquard.
arde. bonnet à la ct nc dir


—"


Front bien coché, That és high on both fides of the
im
es cochées. A certaine compefition o of Pills,


wbickp purge the bead verie fronglie.
elin: m. ;


ches,
in fome parts i ae a nen) ound les
Cochet Contes Cutcbaneale wherewith Skarlet is dyed.
ierre.A bird li nimes rs feeds mofion |
the kernels of cherri
Cocher: m. A Coachman.


Cocher: m.ere:f, Of a Coach,or nan:
Porte cochere. A Coach-houfe dore.
. Tonicke, nocke, or make notches as on a tally ;
'o;t0 baue to dee with a woman. Pic.)
Cochet: m. 4 Cockerell, or cocke chicke; alfo,a fhate, |
or fhete,Pigge.
is: m. The copped Larke ; the Larke that bath a
little tuft flanding on ber bead,
Cochier: m. 4 Coachman.
| eae :f. A Coach-woman ; awoman that drives «
Coach,
Cochin: m. 4 Pigge.
gorret,& cochin,vie en l’eau, & mort en
p< mia a require much wine both fir their
ge


Gras ot conne vn de (We faythe fame)as fat as
a Pigg
Manger le cochon enfemble. To complot,agree in a
Lars oabre a confpiracie together; (belie ali time
irators met to conferre,and conclude, their
LE principal ‘difhwas a Pigge.)
Ka lecochon. To repeat the words wherwith
égan; to come to the matter againe.
Cochonné: m. ée :f. Pigged, farrowed.
Cochonner.To farrow,t0 piggesto breed,or bring forth
\ pigges,as a en alfo,to cocker ,cherifh;nourifb dainti-
lymake a
Fm a a + fou, or fhete Piety prettie big


es. fm € ASows or Som-pigge.
es re


luchon.
:m. See Crocodile ; 4 Crocodile.
“Édequeec so Nutor CI of tb
4 e utor eCyprestree.
4 nde Cops egge-[hell. cca
Coc ueter. as Coqueter.
:m.ée: f. Shellie,{hell-Lkesor,as Co uillé.
Cocu: :m. A Cuckoe; alfo,a Gurnard, sur Cure. -fifb;alfo,
ose (See Coucou.)
cu cocuant. A (uckold-maker, a Graffe-borne.
Coëu cocué. 4 Cuckold,or wittall..
Brayes decocu, Covollips,pettie Mulleins,Palfieworts.
Pain à cocu. The fmallef, and daintieft red Mufh-
| rome.
Pain de cocu. Cuckoe-bread, Alteluya, Stubworte,


Pour x. Wood-forrell, Wood-fower: :
Il vane re coc quecoguin: Pro Se Co


Fe Dé naion cuckoldor croo-


Mary cocu. The ashram called fo, becaufe
Ares eee: clicemings


‘A Penfourner on fdelce pains cocus: Pro. Last:
© (get their crookednelfe at the fetting in. me.


Original trom
SE OHIO-STATE.UNIVERSITY


~
re Frs


Ta rene
pin.


COE


| Cocuage: re cating «cust


Cocuant, c ling,cucko a
Cocué : f. Henle re


Cocuye. See Cucuye,


tide, homme ¢ + A lim of the diel a
moft fellycruelor belli len,
Codicilaire : com. One tats qlee tor infiaed
into,a benefice ercyby Codicile,
spill annexed, . -


icile: m. A Codicile,
icillairesas Codiéi

Codignat: in. Codiniack,or arma of. Quince.
dignat.de four. Bread, :….

Comte : °F 4 auf, or coyfe ; ai; ya nightcap ; ‘see


oiffe..
Conte cofd; See Coiffé,
Coefter. To coyfi, weare a coyfes put on 4 conf 8 nee
Coiffer.
Coeffure :f, as Coeffe.
Coegal:m. A fellow, v materi, à one, thats in a
points equall to another, Hem
Coeliaque : com. as Celiaque.
Artere coeliaqu ue.4 aie braunch of the peat Ars
terie, fiom which it defcends wnto the Midriffe, and
Coelibats Looke Celis
at. Looke Celibat. io
Coeneux: m. eufe :£. Mirie,durtie, fiibie. .
Coënnede lard: f. The skinne of bacon ; See Coilne:
Coébpeller, To chip wood. (v.m.)
ue :m. 4 coopariner,or cooparcener.
Coértion,ou Coërétion. 4 reftraint ,compulfion con-
: training ; a keeping in fubsection.
Coefte : m. A verie tbicke,and great gloue, vied by the
auncient Grecians in their Theater combats...
on. The fame.


Coéternel : m. elle: £


Coé ée:f. dy, herifhed, ke kept

étivé: m. ée: f. Fomented, c > hep warme,

Coétiveinent :m..4 keeping warme, a cherifhing, fè-

menting,or preferuing in naturall be

Coétiver.To foment,or keepe warme; to cberifh, or pre-
ferue,in natural beat.

Coéval.fescoévaux, His equallsin age; theft that
be as old ashe.

Cocur:m. 4 beat; alfe,the heart, mind, thought, affe
fettion; inward conceit,fancie, or opinion; alfo, con-
rage,mettall, flomacke x alfa,the core. of fruit; alfa, the

Queere sis a Church; alfa, the beart-refembling cher -
Tele the French,or Spanifb,cherrie ; alfo,the vp-
per, larger , and more fencible , orifice of the fto-
macre.
pete au fin coeur d'hyuer, Ja the depth,

_ ormiddefof winter.

Enfant de coeur. 4 Quiréfierser fiaging boy.
Herbe de coeur. Heart-wort, or Heart-mint ; The
Picards call Sage, and

Par ome

without mi Sune
Mon coeur eftoufaitmalt hats
like bim a cannot abide bim

Avoir le cocur. Hale coeur afsis en bonne p

He is.an bonefi, gallant, valiant, werthie, fe. fellow. a

… Ilen aura le coeur net, He will be fully Satisfied

…vefolued of the matter.

Mettre corps,& coeur, To labour,firine, inde 3
meanes he
mit le coeur a ventre. That. cheered,
bern res them... fost, shis fo
owing es ca
pale taking heart at graf felig is ne”,


Digi : Go gle


nC:0 F


_ tobim.
Tenir fon coeur.To beare à grudge,owe a fig UM
to; Lo carrie a fpleene a long.tune againft.

:Cocur conrent,& manteau fur l'efpaule: Proy.The
“beart content, and cloké throwne ouer the fhoulders
(either becaufè the contented man weares it {0 inioki-

» ties or becanfe be cares not greatly bow bee weares
EX RER

: Le coeur fait!’ oeuvre; non pasles grand jours:

Prov, Not length of day. 3 but fivength of beart,rids |

- AA RE

l Le coeur ne veut douloir ce que I. ocil ne peut

gaat 2Prov. What the eye [ees not, the beart rues


A “Acoaur doen oeil pleure: Prov. Teares in the
‘ eyes,ruth in the be art, ; ;
_ “Apoyre coeur petit fouhait : Prov. Little things.
thee ‘low thoughts ; ae bumble heart is bumble in
le
& coeur arriere: Prov. A €,
rer falfe Wie ora froward looke , 4 fi tke,
thoughts ; one that fpeakes me faire, and wifhes my
throat were cut.
Bon coeur ne peut mentir: Proy. Anbonef beart
_ cannot diffemble ; Secke Mentir.
En petit ventre grand coeur: Prov.A great heart in
a little bodie ; great courage in a (malt corps.
loye trifte,& coeur travaillé : Prov.44/ ioy bath fad
effecisin troubled hearts.
uand les yeux voyentce qu'ils ne veirent onc-
ues, le coeur penfe ce qu'il ne penfa oncques:
rov. Viwoonted obieéts breed vmwoonted thoughts,
Qui n’a coeur, ait jambes : Prov. He that dares not
: truft 10 bis bands bad beft 1ruff to his heeles;or,be that
dares not fight may do well to flie.
Cocurer: am, A little heart.
failli : m. 4 Lazie, flothfill, faint. hearted, white
- liuered, creature; a pe one that hath not the
courage 10 end what be bath begun.
rrutniner. To mingle ioyne,or folder, yron with e-
_ ther mettalls.
Coffre :m.4 coffer, chef, butch,arke; alfo,the butke,or
cheflofthe bodie.
En coffre ouvertle jufte peché: Prov.Opportunitie
makes,or warrants, a thief
:m.ée: f.Pat into a cheft,or coffer; mr
ned,or layed vp.
. To put into a chefi,or coffer.
er aulcun en prifon. To imprifon; tocaft, and
ke in prifon ; to lay up clofe,or where be [hall feeno


Coffe: m. À casket,cabinet; forfet; a little cheft, or


C0)
im. A coffer-maker; aff > 4 Cofferer wate a
Prince. . :


Cofin:m. A coffin; a great Dee Ph or any fuch
clofé, great,and round Mie at ges
Làroupies, À w.
:m. A little coffin, te baiket, ee (aPsicte,


Co dons 3 4 cogirationthonghimaginariancon-
eration,pur pofè,proieël.
i rian cle ga
ap iat onaduifé bimfelfe,
see bimfelfe ; 5 intend 2 purpofe, determine,
ciere: £ A Dune tree, :


sf Cognation sp ffinitie , aliance, cies


One DT
THe are STATE wg zs Ee


C Oo G


Cogneu : m. euë :£ Knowne, kenned,difterned, per-


cermed; 3 noted, notable, notorions,of note;
acknow owned, adunve d,
Chofe perdué eftlors cogneué : Prov, The worth


ofibings 1 knowne when they be loft.

Coenil m. The baflard Tunnie fifh ; or, as Coguoil.
Cognoiffance :£ Knowledge ; acquaistance, famibie-
vitie with skill,cunning experience in; 4 notice, or

notion an intelli igence onder|tanding, or apprebenfi-
- on of ; alfa; a deed,or fcedule of acknowledgement, or
confeffion of adebt,erc ; alfoya badge, or cognifaunce.
noiflant.Knowing ; underfla ings sapprebending,
| perceiuing ; afb,wifè,cunning,learned;expert,skilfüll,
well feene,in,

Cognoiftre. To know ; vnderfland ; skill, wot well, or
be P affered, of; be fülly acquainted with; to kennedi if~
cerne apprebend perceine ; alfo, to confèfé, acknow~

ledge; aduow.
Hid - Cognoiftre d'vne caufe.Totake notice of,deale in,
ee imtermeddle with, a fuit, or caufe , depending in


Qu ne te cognoiftroit (bonne befte!) If 4 man
knew thee not thon would} make bim beleeue thou
wert a verie Saint; I know thee but too well,
Secognoiftre en "Medecine-Tobane infight or pret
f tie skill, in Phyficke.

£ L’ herbe qu’ on cognoift on la doit lier à fon
z doigc : Prov.( For it is moft unfafé to deale with va-
2 ‘ knowne medicines.)

4 La Maifon fait CDS le Maiftre : Prov.

the boufe one may gheffe at the owner ; by yh fin,
“ goucrnement thereof, what bis abilitie, and


On eo le diable à fes griffes : Prov. Looke

i'peu fe prifé

Dieu l'avife: Prov. whe knowes bim/ Mf himpelf den
fpifes,the felfe-deppifer God aduifes.

Cognotcitive: € The facultie of knowing, vnderflan.
De dt ana lee propertie

Coguoil: m. A fifh like unto a os a


and thicker ; or as Cognil,
Coherence :f.4 coberence,pr coberencies


rey Sex fe cognoift peu fe pot


one onto the vtber
on: if « Coërtion..


Csherti
Cohibe m.éc: craie ambed
ELA pri.


Cohibel dm reine op Jet gepee ;cuvbe oS
del fhort or und
er: m, The
fe and


4 & Norm.
an crie, or “Fr Fra ut


x Pal on a coife ; or any other wa
oie L sang egg, pa 3
oe Arr bead as the


or flicking of matters together; ‘ag
‘upon another ; a knitting, uniting,


3 Quiet, fill. - méme
| y pas en De


SRE ide


fat pannicle, Em cet ne )


d'une tour. The bi

Em OL
:m Ci Mmes :

Lai ca a, lé al
cred,or befotted with,

Cailles coi

Il eft né tout coifté, Borne rich, » forts

nate ; borne with bis kercher about his bead;


wrapt in bis mothers thet 4 [ay we; 3 alfo, bee is verie
Coiffer. To scolar oP iy coyfe vpon ; alfo, to begnile,


ull, coufe
& Colfer de efile — ions. To intertaine,or put on
rare 7 to ianfelfe,or to fill, poffelfe, or pe~
Cine: m, sers eat e tr :
Coignane “ na patie |
ring or
ca ignafle : f. 4 male Sait, or peare Quince, the


auf of Quince
Chen” Ra Rating, L acherit,Ventrie: €Rab,


Coigné: eas Wedged ; drinen, or knocked in;


d, coyne


cau.Prinet,or Primprins, called (i at impr


b

Coignée: f. Amhatchet, or axe.
letter le manche og la coignée. To throw the
belne after the hatchet ; to loofe courage in aduer itie;
or after one lof tomake wilful Pripreracke ofa
Contre co ferruréne peut: Pro. Weake locks
cannot re batchets.

Coigne-feftu : m. An idle fellow; one that [pends bis
aa trauell tono purpofé; or, one, that will nei
ther do good bimfelfe nor fuffer others todo any. - -

pat To wedge, to faften with a wedge; to drine
knocke faftin, as with a pete alfo,to ret
ry ae


litle weilge ; ‘ai, alittle Cone, or cor.
oo bind of finall, and bright-gr
3 which


ene ver-
off,and cut in peeces, the tendrels,


- andgrapes, ese
Co im. À tree,
Noir; m. 4 wedging toole ; a Wedger.
asCoing ; 4/0, the cry, or grunting off pigs, and
“Fonsi, alfo, the fpawne, row, ov egs, of fifh, Ca-


dc.
se beutre, À cake, or difh (of the ordinarie fa
_ Shion of our pound) of butter.
Coin de mer. A kindof Mallet fifh,
Se Coincher. as fe Conchier,
Coine. 45, Coënne; The skinne of Bakon ; alfo,a ck 2:
filme, or ré. fuch as is vfually on a fanding,
Coing :m. 4 des alfo, a quince ; alfo, an angle,
5 OF COTNET ; alle, | a coyne, or amp, Upon a peece


ee
pie debeurte : See Coin, :
ee moe To lodge a graffein the je clefted top |


ti fendre lebowsilévdes coings dubois mefine. =;
Bois. |
Be frappez à vn mefine coing. All made imone


ie Oe: oe


ICoOOOL


meals flamped. with one feure ; all birds of a


A erie pu noeud mauvais ve
Sayd of a fwaggering, or litigious fellow, matched
op one, in his owne kind wore ue !
Fol eft qui de fon poing fai& coing : Prov.. Heis 4
Soole that makes a wedge of his fift sas did trong Milo;
who attempting toriue affunder a great tree which
Lay ina foreft balfe ner held open with wedges,
they flipping downe it clofed, and inclofèd bis hands fo
Saftsthat be could not pull them out but quickly became
, apiay vato wild beafs 3 whereupon this prouerb calls
any man foole , that prefumes 100 much on bis owne
Strength , or knowes not the right vfe of his owne


a )
Mefchante vie quiert le coing : Prov.4n euill-lixer
would euer be lurking,
ingné : m, ée : f. 45 Coigné.
Coinguidauoa : f A coinquination,pr coinquinating;
a foyling, defiling, polluting ; defaming. «
Coinquiné: m. ée :f. Coinquinated ; foyled, polluted,
~ defiled ; alfo, defimed.
Cote Tocoïnquinate ; pollute,foyle, defile ; alfo,
| to defume,
| Coint: m. cointe:f. Quant, compt,neat, fine, fpruce,
| __ brisk, finirke, finug, daintie, trim, tricked vp,
| Cointelligent. Haning intelligence, bolding privat
correfpondencie, with, 7
Cointement. Quaintly, comptly, finely, /prucely,neat-
ly, trimly, daintily,
| Cointife:f. Quaintnes, comptnes neatnes,trimnes, f-
- | nes, [prucgnes, daintines.
cau: m. A chip.» . .
Vin de coipeau. See Vin:
Coiraux :m. Fat oxen; füuchas baue bene fed botbin
the houfe, and field, - aa
Coifine. as Coënne, The skinne of Bacon; and, th'out-
ward bard rinde or skinne,of anyfuch thing,
Coiffin : m. 4 cufhion; alfo, api
Coiftre : £ A tick for a bed. ROSE,
Coiti:&; Coitis : 2s Coitre ser, the blue-flreaked
fiuffe whereof tis made,
Coitte: f. The tick of a bed.
Caeegone: f. A Quilt, or quilted cowering, for a


re L AD |


Col du bras. The wrift.
Col degrue. Cranes-bill, Storkes-bill, Hearons-bill,
Col dun esThe mere of boxes te mdr

2% un os. of a bone; eft part
the + Samay Statens sos i part next Unto it.
co ne
round, and | ‘a goofe.
Col dupied. The =


a as nt ce re
Ps Jan g


DOTE ee D


ne et


em - av «tr, à
rompu. The neck-burft; a finall balfe-rifing in
RD LS D tie RS
Col d'une Vigne. The flock of 4 Vines or, a3
-- Courfon, is REX
Tordre le col à. To skorne difdaine, contemne, looke
CA Vie sy re EE
ac :m. The :@Langued.. -
laphifer. so ver 9 EU
Olas. 4 Deriuatine , or diminutiue of Nicolas;


‘Dieu colas faillon. By Saint Nicholas; or for Saint
fake; Lorrainois, Rab.

ite du nez. The (pungie bone through which

the fainell palfeth from the braine inte the nofetbrils,


puis


Een


. , sat EE
Meme see 7 > a


Colature:f, 4n expreffionsor firaining ; alfo,a coltitutes
the thing fi Besa © 4 Robe
:througha pia fi
im..A flormie,or tempefluous gale of wind,
Cole: Beer dike,
Colere: f. See Cholere,
Colet. as Collet,
Coleté: me: f.lmbraced about the neck; alfo,wra/i-
_ led, ftinen,or firugled with.
Coleter. Toimbrace about the necke ; alfo, to wrafile,
firiue or firugle with.
euvre. as Couleuvre; 4n Adder,
2oleuvrée. as Coulevré.
Coliart. A kind of fmooth , and fraw-coloured Ray-
Coliaux. The name of akind of Oliues. -
Colier. See Collier.”  .
Colimbades. small pickled Olines,
Colitnbales. The fame. ah
Colin : m, Collin; a proper name (and a derivative of
Nicholas ;) alfo,aSea-cob,or Gull ; (or as Collin:)
Colts tampon. The Drumme-found. of the Suifjers
march. SOU
Grand colin. A difgracefill tearme of the ‘ranke of
Maraud, beliftre,caquin,&c. ire 23e
" Groscolin. Branne, or the great of the fiftings of
corne ; alfo,dogs meat made of tt,
Coline. as Colline ; A little bill.
Colique: f. The (bollicke; a painfull windineffe in the
flomacke,or entrails,
Colique: com. Of the Chollicke, belonging to the Chol-


licke. :
Coliqueux:m.eufe: £ Full of, or fubieët unto, the
Chollicke. :
Colifée: m. 4 Coloffusor Colifeum.
Colitor. The mame ofa certaine Vine.
ane :f. A neck-lace.
eral :m.ale:f. Collaterall ; not direét, on th’one


fide. «
= Mufcles collateraux. Two mules in the mouth, one
bringing the tongue, the other drawing the Larinx, a~


to-fide.
Vent. collaterall. A fide wind, or quarter wind, at


fea.
Collateralité: f. Collateralitie,or collaterainefe.
ur: m. 4 Patron; or, any officer who bath the
beftowing of Benefices.
Collation:f.Acomparingsor examining of one thing by
another ; alfo, acollation, rere-fupper, or repaft-afier
Supper ; alfo, a collation, conferring,or gift of a Beneo


ce, | js:
Collation de Moyne. 4 Monks nuncheon; as much
as another man eats at alargemeale, 0.
Collationné apes :f. Co; tr ay
; ing made, or, intertai ith, a
KA tion; aff, pour 5 à or beflowed (asa Bene-
Coilstionner. To examine a copie by the originall ; to
confer,or ¢ e one writing,or thing, with another ;
alfo,to collation it or make a rere-füupper,to one
take arepafi(after fupper ; ) alfo,to giue,confer,
aB €. x
Goes :f,4 mutual commendation ,praifing,e x-
to ‘ ‘sree _
Collaudé im.ée: f.Collauded ; praifed,or commended
with others. .
Collauder:7o collaud, prayfè, extoll, commend ; with
others. ‘ Sy Pr


ae =
- ‘ ay
Y -


.


Ortainal froma cae


THE OHIO-STATE-UNTRSSRREE


: ae Pen a LC ES


C Oo L COL


Colletier : m. A Jerkin-maker.
Colletin 11.4 kin. 3


Cm : f Anger,choller ; alfo,as Colline ; or,asin Col-
es. ‘


‘A chaude colle.» anger,in choller,in boat bloud,or eur :m, A giver, | ,
while the bloud was vp. Colleure :£. eh ing or foldering, afireclofng.
Colle : f. Glue ; af, folder ; alfa, the gs cor- CEE tm. cule: f. Glewie, fill of glue , cleaning as


ners of bides and skinnes,cut off, in the dreffing.
Colle de bouche. Mouth glue, water glue ; (the beft


ea of glue.) r
Île de cerf. as Forte; white, and cleere-coloured
glue; made of the skinnes of all kind of foure-footed
beafis.
Colle de farine.(Stationers) pafl.
‘Colle forte. Ordinarie white glue ; as in Colle de
cerf.
Colle à or. Borax,or greene earth; vfed in the foulde-
ring of gold,
olle à pierres. Cement; made of ordinarie marble,
Parian marble,and the firongeft glue.
Colle de poiflon. Mouth glue water glue.
Colle de taureau, The flrongeft kind of glue; vfed by
Carpenters, Joyners crc,
IE: m.ée:£ Glued; foldered; pafled ; faft iayned,
CAE cloféd. :
ectage:m. 4 colletting,or ing together.
Collcétares :m, À por Order of Franciftan, or
Grey Friers.
Colleéte : £. A colleétion, leuie gathering,
Colleéteur : m. A Collefor,lewer,gatherer of.
Sergent colleéteur. Loohe Sergent.
Collect : m.iue : f, Colleéliue, gatbering, or that ga-
thereth,
En nom collectif. All together one with another,
Colleétion : f. A collettion,or gathering together,
lée:f. A necke-imbracement, an imbracing about
the necke; a greeting,or welcome expreffed by fuchan
imbracement; alfo,a duft, thumpe,or blow,in the neck;
and hence ; A
Donner la collée. Toknight,


glue.
Collier : m, A coller (or chaîne) of gold, ec , fer the
ae 3 alfo, a dog-coller ; borfe-coller ; ec ; any cal-


Colliers. Eavings,er clues; the firings wherewith the
bottome of afayle,or the bounet,and the tacke,or feat,
are tied together.
Vous eftiez le chien au grand collier.Yen were the
onely noted man,th'onely kill-cow, th’enely terrible fél-
low; (ruftically.)
Tirer au collier contre. To contend, firiue wrafile
Cc bad with, a oP
olligance : f. A binding,tying,or knitting togetber,
Collige :m.éc : f. Gathered, à host tagelber a,
vnited,or affembled,
Colligence, as Colligance; Or 4 gathering, or bring-
ing Together.
Colliger. To gather,or bring togetber ; alfo,to unite, or
ae wee, bebe Riven foot ,
Collin: m. 4 caked Riucr-fowle, of a beautifull
oS ifh colour aide Colin © t if
e :f. A little bill.
Colliquatif: m. iue:f. Subicét te the chollicke.
Colliquation: f. 4 colliquation; a confumption ofthe
vadicall bumor,or fubStance of the bodie ; alfo, a mel.
finesefolaingsor diffoluing,
Collique pafsion, The Chollicke ; See Colique.
ee m. cufe : f. Siske, or full, of the Chot-
iicke,
ve :f. A knocking,dafhing,clapping,beating to-
gel er.
Collitigant: m. ante: f. wrangling ,iangling, ge
ing to law together ; at fuit one with another, litigionf-


ieee :m, À Colledge, M cli handling = a

ue:m.4 Colleague or copartener in Of~ izée. See Colifée. .
fee” cr sags lee er ea Collobe: m. 4 kind of fleeneleffe oper garment in fa-
Collement: m. 4 gluing,or foldering together. Jhionamong the old Romans, -


Collet. To glue ; folder ; paf ; ioyne, or clofe up, füre-


Collcrage: m. Collerage ; a pecuniarie duetie exalted,
in Dt paces. yt soot by wine-drawing
borfès, or men. :

rette de femme, A f#all necke-ruffe,neckercher,
or neck-band,(worne by women.)

Colles: f. Croffe walls of ftone; ec, in fome vineyards ;

Collet. D TE sepia of the neckes alfo, th
Ollet: m. , {2 $ alfo, the
coller of a Ferkin tre 3 the ca LE cloke; the necke- :

in


Collocation. # orderlie placing, fetling,or difpofing
bi ether.
Colloir : mm. Colloire : £ A cullander,or firainer.
| :m. A conference, communication ; confilta-
Colloqué.'Set,fetled, placed, difpofed ; applied , be-


. To place together ; to fettle in, or affigne
“to,oneand the fame ranke; 10 diffofe, put, fet, beftow,
applie, fitly,equally,orderly. : ok

ant: m. One that doth any thing by conin,or col.


| peece of any garment ; alfo,a giane, er fnarle Infion; a deceiuer,a double dealer.
_ wherewith Conies are caught ( ant commonly by the Collant m.ante :f, Colluding dealing by conin, or,
- NECRE). Nm loubly dealing. ‘


Colluder. To collude. 10 make fhew of one thing, and
do the contratie ; to deale by couine, and collufion; to
betray bis caufe vnto.an adutifarie; to plead doubly,
is aduerfaries canfe,sher ely to deceine a
yo EN Le te ees


Collet de femme, À rechercher.” 9


let à peignoir.A large raile which women put


ma


Troqguin


“aboatdbait-geckes when be themfe Collufion :
eaucla min furlecolee To faye fice | be det


one déceitguile don


Colo-


Original from


picitized by Go: gle. ess BesiHE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


ic,


ue, Cleawiag as


» Oc, fre
Gt; any ctl


wherespith the
tecke,or 2 at,


r.Yeuwere the
el terrible fel-


i, Diner | it


iting together,
bielle; af,


bering, or bring,
«fouet,
fa beautifill
bollicke.


fiamption of the
ie; alfa, mel


Colique.
J, ik Chole


ig eating te
my stant, BP
) De bugs -
per garment infer
fing dips


aime.
dy sco
afd applied bre
leno ai
rt, ee
bingy cou ft .


i \
cali cm


-Cc:0 B Cc OM
Colobe: m. 4 fhort, and fleeneleffe garment, or iacket, | Coloffien :m.enne : f, Coloffis-like ; of or belongi
in fajbion een er ; alo, a furred to,a ces ;alfo,es Cola and hence ; ries
hood,or tippet,worne by graduate Priefis. Faisc offien. A moft beauie,or mightie burthen.


locafie. The bearbe Aaron wake Robin,Calues-foot,
Cuckoe-pint, Priefis-pintle ; alfo,the root of the Ægyp-


tian beane,


Colocinthe. 2s Coloq@finte. :
Colom: m. The fift,or great gut Colon , wherein the
Chollicke breedeth; alfo,a colume, or member of a fin-


tence.
Colom: m..4 Doue,Pigeon,Culuer.
Grand coloinb. 4 Oueeft,or Stockdoue.
Ol e :m. Boord-worke on th'outfide of walls,
ec;or the boording,or boords,betweene which mudde
wals,e>c,are made.

Colombain : m.ine:£ Doue-lke; of the nature of
Doues ; of or belonging to,Doues.

Colombe : f. A benne Pigeon,or, female Pigeon,
Colombe de Tonnelier.A toole of bis, which refem=
bles a plane turnd up fide-downe.

Pied de colombe. 4 kind of Cranes-bill, or Pinke-
needle called, Pigeons-foot,or Doues-fiot.

Colombeau: m. 4 little yong Pigeon.

Coloinbelle : £. 4 Pigeon,or yong doue.

Colombier: m, 4 doue-cote,

Cela chaffera les pigcons du colombier. That will
driue away yow(fillie)clients,er Cuftomers;or that wilt
force irrefolute folke out of their bold.

Colombin, The bearbe Colombine ; alfo, Colombine, or
doue-colour ; or, the fluffe whereof tis made. .

Colombine:f. 4 whitifh, and fpungie flone , found in
leaden mines ; alfo,a delicate Italian peare , thats ripe


in
Colomne: £. A columne,or piller.


Lacolomne du nez, The bridge of the nofé ; or the |


whole bone thereof.
Colomneux: m.cufe :f Full of columnes, full of pil-


lers.

Colonie :f. colonie; a countrey,or citie,which people
are ent te inhabite; alfo, the people fo (ent. 4} fêt-
led ; alfo,a Grange,Farme-boufe, or Farmers houfe.

Colonnation: f. 4 pillering,or making of pillers.

Colonnel: 4 Colonell,or Coronel ; the Commaunder of
of a Regiment. =
Colonnel general de P Infanterie Francoife. The
Coronel Generall of tbe French foot, whofe place was
in old time conferred, at the beginniag of a warre, on
Some valiant , and experienced Captaine (therefore
tearmed \e grand Capitaine des gens de pied ) and
againe taken from him as foene as th'armie was caffed;
But it bath fince beene made an office perpetuall,or or=

i of the Crowne.


dinarie of
Colophone. The bearbe Scammanie ; alfo, as Refine


Colophonien : m.enne:f. Refine honien-
ne.Clarified, or bard Roxen; fuch as wee rub Violl
ftickes withail, So

Coloquinthe :£. The wild,and flegme-purging Citrull

CR re

oration: f. Aa ; a fhadowing.

Coloré : m.ée:f. Paru Shadowed.

Tiltre coloré (en matiere de Benefices) eftrepu-
pocllncapacieémeltcopvent, fla yolleion
incapacite n’ é; ‘ ion
vere d'icluy ef dite colorée : 4Code


fd color Lo «040 e0R


-Columelle.Tbe vaula; or a fpungious flefh refembling a


Coloftration : f. Colofiration; or,the indifbofition of in«
fant—flomacks by the fucking of beef. ihefiien af
Coloftre: m.Tbe firft milke,tearmed beeft.or beeftings;

accompted dangerous for fome two, or three dayes ,
in which time it vfisally is drawne out.
Colot. lean Colot ; The name of a certaine merie Ar-
tificer im Troyes, who ordinarily wore about bim three
kines in one fheath,all not worth a good fheath;wher-
of the Prouerbe ;
Les coufteaux lean Colot,!'un vaur lautre.Like to
our ; Neither barrell better herring.
Uvrine : f..A Culuerin,
Colporté. carried on the neckes, or fhoulders of men,
ter. To carrie vpon the necke, ov fhoulders (as a
coarfé vato buriall,erc.)  ~ "
:m. A paulirie Pedler ; as Bifouart,
Columb, as Colomb, x


cockes fpurre, and banging downe in the bottome of
the roofe of the mouth ; alfo, the welling thereof.
lure : m. An imperfect circle in the Spbeare ; wher=
of there be diners (all imagined to meet in the Poles )
but the two principal ones, are ;
Le colure des equinoxes. Goes through the begin-
nings of Aries, and Libra,
Le colure des folftices. Goes through the beginnings
of Cancer, and Capricornus,
Colure :f. The necke,or creft,ofa borfe.
Colure de vignes. as Coulure.
Colymbades. Olives (aswe bauethem) preférued in
pickle, u
Combat:m. A combat, conflit, battell, bickering,
fight; firifé, debate, contention, extreame sarring.
inbatant :m. A combatant, combater , fighter ; a
champion,that is to fight a combat ; or fouldiour inrol-
led, and veadie for the battell.
Datatit; part.Combating ; fighting, bickering, bat-


telling.
re as Combatant; À combater; ec,
Combatre. To combate, fight, bicker, battell; to con-
fliét,skirmifhycontend, fin ffle with ; alfo,to onercome in
combate,
Combatre fon ombre. Te fight withbis owne fha-
dow ; to be angrie without caufe, or, bee knowes not
at what ;alfü,to revile,or flaunder the abfent ; alfo, to
firgesr deuife things, @r afterwards difgrace, orvaile
t .


a . :
Combatre contre laplume. To ftrine in vaine.
Quicombat avec armes d'argént eft affeuré de
vaincre: Prov, Thofé that with filuer weapons fight
ave fiiretoouercome, CE
peer ra n’eftpas mort : Prov. He that doth
:m.ué: f, Combated, fought, bickered, bat-
telled ; contended, (lriuen, con rea:
e:f. À narrow valley,or paffage betweene te
hills ;wberein commonlytheenes do lurke.
Combes un, A fellow drunkard,or companion ia
ri . ?
Coad How ; bow much, bow great, bow many;


cs : ; e
Combien que. Although , albeit that , bowfoener
that, at


Non combien mais comment bien; not bow mush,
or bom long,but how well,


Cc OM


Combinage: m. A combination, coupling ; vniting,or
joyning of paires ; or of fewerall things, together.
Combe; Fue aboundance , beaped meafure ;
the chie} , wholefümme, Jummarie, or accom-
ges ; alfo,the roofe of a boufe,erc.
en comble. Fully, wholly, throughly ; vt-


een the top to the bottome,
é: m.ée: f. Heaped fill of or filled vp with; al.
fr, Dees’ accomplifbed ; made, orclofed vp ; roo-
it ’


ved, $
Comble: com. Full to the top ; or vp to the roofe.
Combleau :m. 4 great cable, vfed about the carriage
of a peece of ordnance; wee callit, the breecbing.
nblement :m. Abeaping, up. filling, or filling up
to the top ; a fulfilling, accompli{hing ; making, or clo-


fing, vp.

Combler. To fill,or beape vp; alfo,to accomplifh, fulfill;
Saciate ; make,or clofe,up.
Celuy eft bien mon Oncle qui le ventre me com-
ble: Proy. Hee’s my beft uncle, who fills my bellie


moi.
Sone :f. The cleft, or diuifion of a ved Deeres
ot


Combourgeois : m. A fellow citizen,

Combourgeoifie : £.Fellew-bourge(fefbip; acommu-
nitie of freedome betwegne th'imbabitants of one citie;
or betweene two cities, and their inbabitants,

Coinbré : in flead of Canibré: (in fome editions of Bar-


tas.)

Combrecelle: £. A tumbling tricke, or Sommer-fault,
wherein the beeles are caft ouer the beadsalfo,recipro—
cation of venerie. TH

Combreffelle. The fame. ect

Combuftible : com. Combuflible, foone fired,eafie to

Combultion: £ A cms. brig) daa

inbuftion: f. 4 combuftion, burning, or ¢ j
with fire ; alfoya Mr à ; pit 3
Entrer en combuftion avec, To makea flirre, to

“_ raife an vprore, to keepe an old coyle againft,

Comedie : f. A Comedie; a Play,or Enterlude(that be-
Sins in diffention,or forvow, and ends with agreement
ov meriment.) By is
Coïneflible : com. Comeftible, eatable, fit tobee ea-
ten. : 1 ntiar,
Coinete: f. 4 commet,or blaxing flarre.
Comette : f. as Comete, ro MON PET
Cometteux : m.eule : f.Like-onto acommetsof a com-
‘met x or full of commets, ~~ ONF


i gy : *
i


COM:


Villenage)inackncwledgement, and prefcruation;
the right of vbeipandbritie over pre nue
mmandé : m.é¢ : f.Commaunded,bidden; charged;
appointed, preferibed.inioyned ; alfo, ruled, gouerned,
domineercd cuer; alfo, recommended , or commiticd
oner vnto the charge or care of.
Commandement: m.4 Warge, commaund, prece
rule,commaundement res chaines seh
a Porisaiite Minimes ete): or ordinance,paf-
Jing from [üch as ave in autboritie.
Comm inder. To commaund, bid, charge,appoint,pre-
Leribe, inioyne unto; alfo,to rule, fivay, gouerne, com
3 alto recommend ,or to commit ouer unto the
care of anotber.
der à baguette, To commaund abjolitely,
wholly peremptorily.
‘A De vous command. God be with you; fire you
we


Commandereffe :f. 4 commaundreffe,gouerneffe,ru-
lerefe; alfo,authoritie;rule,commaund,
Commanderie : f. À commanderie, or commaunder-
Ships the place, or office of a Commaunder (of one of the
ders.)


Commandeur :m. 4 commannder, bidder appointer;
prefcriber of lawes unto others ; alfo , a Commaunder,
uler, Gouernor, Maifter, ouer others.
leurs del’ Ordre du S.Efprit. Are ix.viz.
Foure Cardinals, th' Ammer, and foure other Prelates
® ofnote ; whe haue greater authoritie,and larger priui-
ledges, than the knights,or the reft. of the brethren of
that order.
Comme: f. See Gomme, -
e. As, euen as,enentikeas, much like unto, as
much as,
Comine à cetteheure, About this time aday.
mme ainfi fuft que, It being fo,or, admit it were


0:
Comme celà. Thereabouts.
: “pm en ferois ie fi ae whee Sie — 4
le,jn what tearmes Ibe? fhould 1 doe
tha courfe ‘oonld Stakegbat foift fhould 1 make,
Commedial : m. A fine,ermerie,difcourfe.

+ : com, Commemorable, memorable,
pe tobe mencioned, fit tobe vemembred, ~
Commemoration: f. A commemoiation mentioning,

_rebe en À pr à in mind of. 6 :
€ Sun ne é:m. ée: f. Commemorated, mentioned,
remembred; rebearfédyecorded.


mic. as Comique. | ia !
Comin : m. The bearbe Cummine … cdi te Commetnorer . + res ee: men
Comique: com. A Comedian;Pi Stage Ê ‘tion,rebearfe; record; alfo,to aduertifé or put in mind
Comigae :com. Comical; Cones des os or'be- | of. é
longing to, Comedie ; intreated of in Comedies, * | Commencé:m.ée:f Commenced, begun, vnderta-
Comite : m, The Captaine, Gouernour, or Maifler of a ken,entred into. ;
Gallie ;0r,an pene to the fure chaining | Commenceinent :m. A beginning, a commencement,
of the flaues ; whom fometimes be inconrages;but more an onerture,an entrance into.
_ commonly feourges, vntotheirbufinefes alfo,theBote- | Commencement n’eft pas fufée: Pro. Things are
fwaineofafhip, +. | not done as foone as begun ; or, things are not ther fire
Command : m. Comman authorities theab- |  compaffed becaufe they are undertaken.
_ Solute fray rule or difpofition of Man- | *Atoutily-acommencement ; ou; il y a com-
= damus; or ax Intunttion for poffe, 3 alfosan in- partout: Prov. Eucrie thing bath a
hee cea 7. ee, : Woe 3b SIs us 3 qe ;
a imande:f. as Commende ; Alo, the-maine; or | - cement on fait grande fuléc :
maifier cable of a rar de eed k all beginnings ave greatmattérs raifed,
papes be eft intrufl with, or committee Been, ent onsom le voriendueemen : Proy.
ge enr NA my OF but pers not, aworke ; when bee
: Droiét de cominande.ÿ. bath. hath done, 102


ade.ÿ. d. Parifis takemye


er. To commence begin, take in me 4


Original fi


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY as


COM


mad rain
take enter into an ouertue vito, Selfe ouer unto ; to venture vpon.
dre day Ta un cominence : Prot ‘Some | Commeu:m.cué:f, Moxed, or flirred much; trou
, did perl thinke they bane done when they are to be, os a aies ue 3 chafis éd Heed bearée)
to when
maid ad they ane PS maaan ay NE Ay Comimination :f.. 4 commination ; an extreme; or


they thinke they baue donc, a bufineffe.
Commendaces : f. Funeral Ovations ; prayers made
for the dead ; verfès made in praife of the dead.
Commendataire: m.A commendatariejone that bath,
or (ues fora Commendum.
Commendataire: : com, Commendatarie ; giuenin,en-
ioyed,or enjoying by,Commendum,
Abbé commendataire. 4 Secular Abbot; one that
bath an Abbey ia Coramendum, and yet was newer
Monke,nor Priefl.
Cominende:£ A Conimendum; or Benefice einen
in Commendunt,
Commendereffe: fas Commanderefle.
Commienial. (gRabélaisl.4. chap.4q-) 4 barbarous


fever or ieafting repetition of the word comme going ome
ti two lines before and ufed by Frier Joba,

i comme Commenfal:m, A companion at table ; a foiourner,
dr (of fe _ ordailie gueft.


Les commenfaux de la maifon du Roy. Such off


bidder pit éers as be in or digarie,or baue bouche (which we call
cr budge) à Court.
soc ae Commenfalité : £:commenfalitie; a continuall feeding
eel together at one table.
yd rin CR sion: £. Commenfiration ; a ioynt mez-
i
se been of Cornet :m, as Commentaire,


Coinment.. Haw, ia what fort, after what Aion by
what meanes, for what reafon,in what manner,
Le commenta nom de [a femme. His wines bow-


nld-1-call-it :
Com: call-it : ŒRab.


p Ge onto, a8


ime i, om ntaire im. A comment, commentarie, glo[fe,

FA ur :m. À Lor ot commenter ; a
A ren ofatext. > -

er Commenté: mée: € Expounded, commented on.


Coinmenter. To comment, to write commentaries ; to
expound,

Comiunerage : f. Goffiping ; the acquaintance,affinitie,
or league i ba growes betweene women by chriflening
a child together,ov one for another


mbréd, minerce :m. Commer ce,intercour(é of trafficke; fa-
jonsmentioning miliaritie or acquaintance gotten ; correfpondencie;or
| of: intelligence continued, betweene people, i in dealing,or
ed, mentionté, trading,tog

Leurs o bent en commerce. Their offices |
emember mene ave fale ible; fet mien oo aang
> or putin ommere :
sft Commere Se A bed


ae


equa, onder goffip for all buttocke-matches,or, ia
tings. | PA he han Geo
commencer Moni — Are ani .
out y va ommere. All thin:
ingsett are camia ae and friendfhip;l
Pr at good druskes go will do anything one fi
‘ih j 4
Or py aco Sard To goffip it, to play the golf.
ni tb dpi irable: ps Déeafirabie togetber, or with


ce ttre, Tocommit, re re, gine ouer, eve,
rs raiféd. yne a charge, or bufinefe unto; alfa, to ap-
ment: pire elegate vato a charge , or bufimeffe ; alfo,
rhe; he te fafa ath
in bolt ve #3 gb ae


Digitized=pys


COM


vebement threatning.
Comminatoire: com. Comminatories threatfiull, tbrea-
tening much.
Ca mée:f. Threatned extreamely, menaced


Comminer. % threaten extreamely , menace vebe-


peed sake £Brayed finall, beaten,or broker,
into finall peeces; alfo, diminifhed, minifhed, leffi-


Comniauer: To bray du to beat, or ke,
me ‘mall peeces ; to legen » mingh »-
Coinmis: m, A committee; one thats “appointed to
examine, or decide,a matter; all, a Deputié saan of-
vias alfa Commiffioner; alfo, a Commiffarie salf, a
inte.

Comunis: m. ife :f. Afi sppénted delgated ala
Sa,re ferred unto; alfo,done, atied, committed, ” an
offence,erc ; alfo, "forfeited.

Commife: £. A forfeiture or forfeiting.
Droi& de commife. The right,or power a Landlord
bath to confiféate, feife,or enter on,the land held by his
vaffall,or tenant, who difaduomes bim > gives bim the
lyesor commits felonie.

mmiferation : f. Commiferatien ; compaffion ; a
Sencible apprebenfion, or pitie taken of other mens mix
ries.

Chmiffsre ACommiffioner ; one that receives bis
authoritie by. Commifiion ; bence , a luflice, or Com-

* mifioner, of the peace; who is to inquire afi fer faults,
diforders , and irefpalfes committed ; alfo, a Fudge
Delegate; alfo, a fudge, or Ai bitraror appointed
to examine, determine, or accord, a private contro-
uerfie ;alfo, an Ouerfeer , Sequefirator , or feller of
goods, authorized thereto by the Magifirate sand one,

_ that hath , by the fame authoriti¢ , the poffesi Sion, and
keeping of lands, that are fixed by publike order, gi-
uen bim,

Cominiffaires de l'artillerie. Are 4 certaine nu
- Ber of Commiffioners,or Cormaf[aries one whereof the
Mafter of the Ordnance afsignes to cuerie Prouince of
pr for th onerfeeing of th’ Ordnance that 1
therein.
Commiffaires du Chaftelet, Are in Parisgfttle | >
ther than our London Scauengers; for their pri }

» office isto br that the fireels af hep iow: ond *

well paued, & —_ :


i


des fermes, Certaine
fe sides be mel (hited, an ond


that the firme
teen bereof ducly pated.
{faires des guerr s penteagel Mu.
fermes of armies : eh | pers fach


ene Pages des te D
re 3 and are comme 0
Fer pr met their abfence, by ge
Lieutenants pre
Co aires des Moca: Theme orne.


vie Mufier-mofiers, Vines, | |
y Cm =e tee
> md fé. ARS LE Bae


easy


wlth ae ON VUE IT" La Ewe AG acre © sig re
ieee Ne 4 re 5A ‘
COM CoM
Les grands cominiffaires des procez. A /tleft com- Chemin commun. The bigh wap,road way.
panie of the Prefidents,and Counfellors(or affiflants) of y


a Court, who ordinarily pronounce ludgements | and
make decrees.

: Léspeus commiffatres des procez. Are others who

agape limitation of the Court,cxamine

es,or contradittions, and dates of eurdences,

bookes,depofitions crc ; and thereof making a report,


wean no further. L
epaiftre en commniffaire. To feed plentifülly, or a-
pace,at other mens tables or charges.
Traité en commiflaire. That bath both fifb and
frefh fet afore bimsor as we fay intertained like a Lord.
Commiffion: f. A commiffion,or delegation ; a charge,
Mandate,commaundement ov warrant, for th'exerci-
Jing of iurifdittion, ec, ginen by letters patents,or vn-
der a publicke feale.
Elle a toufiours quelque commiffion par la ville.
Said merily of a woman thats euer gadding abvoad,
Coimmiflure : f. 4 commiffiere,or feame in a boane, (as
in the skull ;) alfo,any ncere clofitg, iayning,or couch-
ing of things together, P - ‘
Commiftion: f. A commixtion ; a mixing,or mingling
of feuerall things together,
ommittimus : lettres de com.Speciall commiffions,
* _ direGled,in the bebalfof priuiledged perfons unto their
peculiar Judges, = =~
m at : m..4 loane,or lending, ©
? e:com,Commorions; conuenient sproper,apt,
meet, fit.
mmodement. Commodiouf}; conueniently ; aptly,
fitly meetly ; to the purpofe, as one would baue it,
Cotnmoderation du corps. A good difpofition of the
whole bodie; a correfpondencie, or equall proporti-
on,of good temper in euerie part, or there-
™ :


Commodité : f. Commoditie, vtilitie , profit,benefit,
thrift; alfo, aptneffe, fineffe ; conneniencieseaft hand.

‘ Someneffe. ae

Commoditer. Te thrive, gaine, grow rich, preuailes
benefit or accommodate, bimfelfe.
Commotion. 4 commotion,tumult,lirre,oprove,bur-
by burly ; a perturbation ; trouble,difquietneffe, —
urans. Dying together. ;
Commourir. To die together, or one for companie of
another,
ouvoir. To vex,trouble, difturbe ; (hake, moue,
raife,or flirre up; (alfo, to rife, or flirre) together a-
gainft,
Gomimé: im cert Changed, altered; bartered, ex-
changed, CUS
. Commuer. To change, alter; barter, trucke exchange
one thing for another. AS
Commun: m. A people,the commen people; a commi-
© maltie; a corporation; alfo, a thing thats common, or
enioyed in common; whence; 7 :
“Commun n’eft pas vn : Pro, Common things are no
one mans things; ov, that which is common belongs to
710 man. À \
- Ouvrage de commun ouvrage denul: Prov. Au
mens worke is no mans owes as that which 5 done
for many is acknowledged by none. Abed
Qui fertcommun nul ne le paye, & s'il defaut
… chafcun l’abbaye: Prov.The frm
0 man rewards, the differuices euery man vailes at,

; ria re a 10 4 3 af,


ci
‘Compagne 2€ A fhe mate, fellow , friend, companion,


Chiens communs. Hounds that will deale with a
ny kind of game.

Veine commune. Looke Veine. 4
Debien communon ne fait pas fouvent mon-
ceau: Prov, Men fèldome raife great beapes of pub-
licke treafure, :

ound; m. 4 common, or great peece of vntilled


Communauté : f. The comminaltie,or commen peoples

. Alfo,communitie, participation fellovefhr »focietic.fra-
ternitie ; good corre(pondencie, neere familiaritie one
with anotber; alfo, a focietie, brother ed, corporati-
on,or companie incorporate ; alfo, a commoning,or bel.
ding in commen with others.

Cominune.la com. he common people,the vulgar, the
rude and vaftall multitude ; alfo,a commons, common
field or tovene field, = ;

Oommunes. Companies of footmen lcuied, and ta~
ken out CR villages,
unement. Commonly, vfually ordinarily, gene-
rally, publikely,in common,with common resin

Communicable: com. communicable ; fit for, applia-
ble unto ; alfo,connerfable, affable.

mmunicatif: mue : f. Familiar, courteous, affa-
ble, eafie to be fpoken with; alfo, communicatine, or
whereof many are to baue part,

minunication :f. A communication, or conuerfati-
on; atalking,a confultation ; alfo, a participation, im=
Parting ,or making common a thing with others. ©

Or ier. To communicate, to receiue the Commu-

Aion. wee

Communion: £. A Communion, fellowfrip, mutuall
participation, :
ommuniqué:m.ée: f.communicated, participated,
imparted ;alfo,conferred,talked,or communed,with.

Inmuniquer, To communicate participateimipart, \
mix with, take,or gine part of; alfo, to conferre, talke,
or commune with ; to veweale a councell, or fècret unto.
ominutatif :m. iue:f.Commutatiue; bartering trace
kingyexchanging one withsor fargenotber,

Cte: com, Compacted; well fet knit,trufl,pight,
or toyned ; 3


Coimpaéture: f. The Tom ture, folide frame , fub.

_ flantiall japechesatall the pers ofa thing together.
Compagnon: > oe
le: com. Companable, friendlie, fociable,


yne bonne compa: ne. fhe 1 a fociable wench,
> agood merrie laffe ; (a pbrafè not taken altogether fo
ill as our good fellow wouldbe) —
agnie : f, Companie, fellowfbip , focietie; alfo,
a crue, rout, alfemblie, conforter knot of; alfo, acom-
panie,oy band of fouldiors.
ompagnie Francoife. wenches(in the opinion of a


wanton Prief.) À
Beftes de c nie, Yong wild fivine which fol.


low their dammes, in great troups,vntill they be
EF, pe old,and then leaue them, and with them,
tbistitle, 2 MRIE:
Compa non: 1. A companion,affociate fellow mate
” collea re Par SRE alfo, an acceffarie x


an offence.


nes. À componion, ov fellowin .
e éminencie than, Compag-


nde guerre.be that fèrues in the fameatti-
on


>


\


COM


ic OM


amiens vader the fame colouts,with
another.
CR non de meftier. A Journeyman ; am arti-
ficert path not fet up for Frs
Peticcompagnon. Aa vpllart,meane companion;
Scaundrell, base fellow; a {curuie , faucie, or proud
Groome,
Demandez lc à mon compagnon qui eft aufsi
menteur que moy, We fay, aske my fellow whether 1
be a theefe or no. '
mpagnon bien parlantvaut en chemin chari-
' otbranflant; Prov. (Neere tothe Latine,Comes fa-
cundus in via pro vchiculo eft.) 1
Qui a compagnon a maiftre: Prov, Hee that is
tied vato companie is tired with controlements ;(And
therefore the way to be abfolute is, to be alone.)
Compagnonné : m. ée:f, Accompanied, affociated,


with,

Compagnonner. To accompanie , affaciate, confort,
be liar, ioyne in fellowfbip, walke together, goe
cheeke by iowle,with,

mpaignie: Compaignon: &c; as Compagnie,
Compagnon; &c.
Compaing. as Compagnon : Pic. {
anage :m. Meat, acates, vittwalls; all kind of
food except bread, and drinke. .
omparagé : m.ée : f. Compared,or paragoned with.
arager.To Paragon,or compare, with.

Comparaison if. A comparifon; a matching or para-
goning; a likening or conferring of things together.

aré : m.éc: f, Compared, paragoned.propartioned
with; equalled, matched, conferred together ; alfo,

bought,or paied for deerely. bad ats
omparenice :f. An apparance,an appearing,

en grees du corps. The price of

im, u ane
“ me Lfésor the buying of a thing with the lofe ther-
x À


Comparer.To compare,liken,cenfer together; to equal,
par agen, proportion one with, or by, another; Alfo, to
buy,or pay deerely for ; and hence;
le lete feray bien comparer.1 pil make thee fart,
or pay und for it ; 1 will caufe thee to rue, bewaile,
repent it.

tition: f. A comparition; an apparance appea-
niag,or reprefenting of himfelfe toopen view, |

op aroir. Taanpears 3 toprefent, or fuew himfelfe;

10 affi{t,or be prefent at.
aroir vne faute. To be punifhed,or pay deerly,


ea
iftre. Co ir. pa J
Compbatfonnicrm.4 plow Oficerge fellow laborer:
i:mie:f, Diuidéa, parted, put inte equall


parts. =
artimient: m. 4 compartement ; a {quar
or peece)in building(efpecially of flone ) aff, a bed, or
border ina garden ; alfo,a partition,or equall,and pro-
portionable Gig ar à
artir.To diuide,part,or put,into equall peeces.
Gompartiff: ant : m.A copartner,or fellow-pariner,
iffant. Diuiding,or parting with. 3
Mparuit..47 adt,order,or teftimoniall,fignifying the
ance of a partie.
paruti Noor or as Comparition.
mpas:m. Acompalfe; a circle,a round; alfo, a pair


ycled ; af ymeafured,


eyes


consorted , fallen incompanie, ioyned in fellaw{bip, |.


by compaffes.

Compafiement: m, 4 compaffingyncircling, turning

round ; alfo,a meafuring by compalfes,

aller. To compaffe incivcle begivd; alfo, toturne
round ; alfo,to make a circle,or compaffe ; alfa,to mea
fisre,orfquare out by compalfe,or compaffes.

Compaflion : £, Compaffion,pitie mercie.

Wallionhaire : com. Compaffionavie, compaffo-
de compaffion of. fe : be is
sionner. To take compaffion,to baue pitie of.

Cenpadoie : ÉCompalibibtie ; a a
cord agreement together; a mutual induring of, or
bearing with one another.

Compatible : com, Compatible concu rableæbich can
abide,or agree together ; or indure,or beare with,ene
another,

Coimpatir.To faffer,indure.abide, or beave with,one a-
nother; to agree concurre,accord,together, |

INpatriote :m. Ones count ey-mañr.

a c: com. Able torecomyence, or make a-
meds .

Compenfation:f.Satisfaition,recdpence,equal amends

Compente : f.zs Compenfation.

Compenfé: mée : f, Kecompenfed, or fatisfied (witha
like meafure,proportion, flore &c.)

Compenfer.To fatisfie,recompence, make amends une
to,with the like. .

Comperage :m.4 gofipfhip;a goffiping of,or betmeen,
men; th'affinitie,or frienc flip gotten by their chrifte-

aing of children.

mpere: m. À goffip. ‘ .

Coinpere d'oribus. 4 fupes ficiall friender copanion,

Compere preftez moy voftre fac, Words vedin a

certaine Tew-game. F

Touty va par compere, & commere. 4/ things

there do go by friend{hip.

Compere de la Pouille coufte & defpouille: Pro.

Sceke Pouille. :

Entre deux co es fe perdit le fofloir : Pro.Our

ncereft friends ofimakeus the worft accounts; fo may

a cofen fafely be tearmed a coufener.

Qui de maftin fait fon compere plus de bafton ne

doit porter : Prov. He thats in league with a churle

hath no need of a cudgell.

Compermutant : m. 4 changer, {coorfer barterer,in-
terchanger,


Compermutant: m.ante: f. Changing, eoorfing bar


bering jmter changing.


Compermutation:f.4 change,exchange jaterchange.


mpermuté: m.¢e:f. Changed , exchanged, inter
aint hip Ve Es
mperre.as Comparer; To buy,or pay decrely for.
Competcnment omy nnn ice ts
pre Deer time 3 aljo,aptly, fit
agreeably, Ce
ce: fCompetencie; conneniencie, fuffcien *
cie; aptne(fe, fineffe, agrecableneffe ; alfo, a concur.
rencie or competitorfhip; andbence; )
Venir enc ence avec vn autre. Toffrine or
contend far ,to make equall c'aime to,a thing, with ano-
ther; to challenge couet,or fue for, thing as well as a-
__ notberzalfo,to paragonstr compare bimfelfor,to be laid
in equall ballance with,another3to make,or bold bim-


el fe euery way as good as another,
Commperentaempelentficens able fl pnmenien.
. To be fufficient for, futable with, agreea-
bleunte; alfo, to belong, or appertaineto; ott
demaund,or fue for the fame thing that: L
tz. Com-


: £ …
Ofigin à] frofn


THÉ-OHIOQATE UNIVERSE F7


COM


Compctiteur : m. À competitor , concurrent, fellow
füitor, or feeker for.

Compilation : f. A compilation, or compiling; alfo a
rapfodic;a booke, treatife,or colleétion,of fundrie mat-
ters, heaped together.

mpilé :m.éc:f. Compiled, beaped together,

Compifiant : m. ante =f: Staying to piffe at euery poft;

bepiffing euery place; all-to-bepiffing.
iflé : m.ée :f. Bepiffed, all tobepiffed,

Compifler. All to bepiffe; to piffe euery where, er be-
Pie eueric place be comes in , euerie corner be comes
neere.

Compite : m.4 crofle way,or place where diners waies
doe mecte; as, the corner of afreet, érc.

Complaignant: m. A complainant , or complayner ;

properly, one that complaines, of an Offence commite

ted, vato a Magifirate, or court, of Iuftice ; referrin
tothem.the profecution, and punifhment thereof, ad
refüfing to medle firther wa it.

Complaignant: m. ante: f. Complayning; plarings
or find ng bimfelfe ageriened ; or expreffing bis griefe.

a laindre. To pe a ; ps

nde bimfelfe aggrieued , or exprelfe his griefe.

Se Cor Lis re en matiere aimee de nou-
velleté, To bring a writ of Nouel difleifin again/l.
Complainte : £. Aplaint, complaint moane lamenta-

tion ; al(o, anaccufation, or bill of complaint.


Nouel diffeifin (mut be brought within a yeare of the

difftifin.

Ramener la complainte fur les lieux, To procure a

-Indge to heave examine,and determine a controncrfie
! upon the land in controuerfie.

Coinplaire. To pleafe, like, delights fèrue, obferue, be
obedient, or obfequious unto ; conforme, or apply bim-
(elfe to the bumors of. -

on laifance : f. Delight,pleafure ; filneffe of, or fel-

ip in, toy. :

Complaifant: m. ante: f. Obfequious,obferuant, foo-
thing, (and thereby) pleafing.

ea: cmt :m. A vine plant ; alfo,aplace thats d
with yong vines ; the nurferie of a vineyard; alfo, ver-
inice; alfo, as Complanterie, - 305.27
Tenir vignes à complans. Which is, on condition to
plant nevo,or preferue the oldsvine-plants ; orto yeeld
unto the Lord a certaine portion of the fruits, and re-
uenue,of the vine-yard.


de. arts
oo eg m.ée:f. Planted , or flored with yong


Là Se + » s =
Complanter. To plant a vine-yard;to flore it with
vine-plants; to fet new, or preferue 3
alfo, to lay out,or deliver ouet, a Lords part, or fhare,
ia the fruits of avine-yard let né 4 parts, or
balues ; or to let a vine-yard in that manner.
Complanterie : f. À letting out of a vine-yard to


< or portion due vaio the Landlord by fuch a leafé, or
__ eftate made. OR |
Complexion: f The emper,con=
pony the bode sal, the difpofition, affection,
,07 inclination of the mind ; alfo,as Simploce,
né : m. ée: f. mgéee de e 26


Pepe. dre + à “à
Corps bien coin nné, well fafhioned,er tem.


pered well fet together;of a good confitution of an ex-


cellent ci


à Fra pen Fr U difjofed, affeéied, inclined,


or er de Novelleré, À wit, or Aion of


balues, or fox part of the fruit thereof, alfo, the part,


COM


of leud bebauior, bad manners,and worfe conditions.
lication: f, Acomplication,or folding together,
Compe m. A Complice confederate, companion (in


Complicité :£. A confpiracie, a bad confederacie.
be +f The complyne; or, a part of the PopifhE-
ong. = -
l'heure de lie : Secke, Heure.


together.
t:m. A complot, cenfpiracie, couin, confede-
racre, packe, ov compatting sh She
ote: m.¢e:f, Complotted, confpired
ne, de among, mp , confpired, packed
loter. To complot, conffire, combine or packe ton
gether,
Comploteux : m. eufe: f, Full of, or addicted unto,
complots,or complotting.
Componé. La bordure componée...4 border Go-
bonnie, in a à
mporté : m. : ££ Comported ; indured, borne.fuf.
fered ; bebaned, maintained, füflaned, #
rtement : m. Comportment,bebauior,carriage
the bearing of bimfelfe. à ide
orter. To indure, beare ; füffer ; alfo, to extend,
or ly (in Surueying.)
Se Coinporter.To carrie,beare bebaue; maintaine,
or fuflaine, bimfelfe. |
É: m.éc:f. Compofed, conipounced , made,
framed; difpofed, ordered,digefied; written, or done
in verfe ; alfo, accorded, agreed, attoned compounded,
reconciled, 2
ofer. Te compound, make, frame ; difpofe,ovder,
digeflyto write verfès, compofe, or poetizeit; alfo, te
accord,attone,reconcile aduerfavies ; er,to compound,
finifh take up, their differences, and hence;
Compofer auec. To agree, take an order, make an
end, fall to attonement, come to a compofition with.
r ofer fon rs paper pe * ions, &c;
To frame, enure,or fettle, bis mind to refifi griefes, m-
dure croffes, beare mi


rm, Acompofer, poet, writer, maker; a


fiteur: m. as Compofcur; alfo , a Printers
_Compoñtor, he that fetteth the letters for the Preffe;al-


fan Arbitrator, flickler, vmpier, frendlie compoun-


er of differences.


ten f. A compofition ; making, framing; a.
- _ confettion, compofiture ; compounding s alfo, a worke,


or booke, or the writing of a worke, or booke ; alo, an
accord, compofition, attonement , agreement; alfo,a
Quietus eft,or generall acquitance hi the king toa
Treafurer, ec.

Compoffefleur: m. 4 compoffe [Jor ; a ioint poffeffer ;
one that enioyes, or bath part in, a thing with another,

Compote: f. 4 condiment or compofition ; a wet fuc-
ket, (wherein fweet wine was vfed in flead of fügar)
alfoya pickled, or winter Sallet of bearbes, fruits, or


flowers,condited in vinegar falt, fugar or fweet wine, |


and fo keeping all the yeave long ; any bearbes,fruit,er
flomers in pickle; alfo pickle it fel fe.


Porter le bras en co e. Tocarry th’ arme ina


Skarfe.

Tempore :m,ée: f, Compounded ; bedrugged; min-
i “a made of condiments, or compound fiuffe ; alfa,

pickled.

Compofter. To compound, fopbiflicate bedrugs tofea-
“fon Di, or make hoes: alfo,to rile


Qué : m. ée : f. Foulded,enwrapped,intangled


COM.


Comprehenfion :f, 4 «
do under flanding of.
mprendre. To comprehend,containe, comprifé,com-
passe ; to perceiue,underftand,apprebend,attaine vn-
to the knowledge of; to conceine,to be capable of,
Comprer. as Comparer ; To buy: €Pic,
effe :£. À boulfter,pillow,or fould of linnen, to
bind up,or lay on,a wound, ,
Comprimé : m. ée : f. Preffed, (queexed,thruf, cloféd,
or trained bard together.
Compritner. To preffe, tofquecxe, to thrufi, clofe, or
firaine,togethber,
Comprimeut: m,A preffer,thrufter (queexer together.
rins : m.infe: f. Compriféd,comprebended, con
tained within the compaffe,or limits, of. \
Compromettre.To compromit.or put unto compromife.
Compromis : m.A compromifé; 4 mutuall promifé of
aduerfaries to referre their differences unto arbitre-
ment ; 0r,a priate power to end a contronerfie, giuen
by the mutual confent of the parties in coeathe
inpromis: m.ife : f, Compromitted, put unto com
promife.
Compromiffaire :m. He vatowhoma controuerfie is
compromitted.
Comptable : com, Accountable , accountant , lyable
unto account. {
tant. Countingaccounting;reckoning numbring.
ent cotnptant, Readie money ; Looke Argent.
er comptant. To gine readie money; to pay pre-
fently,ont of band or downe in band. ?
Compte: m. An accoumt,a reckoning ; a computation,
or calculation ; a number; alfo,a refbeët bad , regard
made,of; alfo,the reafon,or caufè of a matter ; alfo, a
fib, gull,tale ; an idle, or vnlikelie tale, biftorie,relati-


on; je Conte.)
“Ya chambre des comptes. The Court of Accounts ;
the Exchequer, or werchamber, +
e. One that is true in all his


“Homme de bon co
dealings; aright bone[t man.

. Lignedecompte. Seeke Ligne. 8
Perle de compte.4 Paragon; a faire, great, Oriental
Pearle. 1
Rouë de compte. A notch-wheele ( in a watch, or

| clocke.)

~ Peris comp

. toyes to mocke Apes withall. LA

_ ‘Aton compte. As thou telleff it ; or,as thon thinkeft,
or makeft account ; according to thy reafon.

' Hors de compte.Se voyanthors &c; Seeing,that be

© bad miff of bis reckoning ; or, that matters anfwered

_ not bis omen À | PIRE

- Abreger fon compte. To make the matter fhort.
Avoit foncoinpte. To be merie, iollie, liuelie, light-
bearted,all-a-hoight ; Looke Avoir, _

C’eft le compte. chen ap buns 8
Il eft bien au te de la douzaine, He is a forie
fellow, fillie mate, companion, -


tes. Tri fling words, ridiculous tearmes,


a day,weeke, moneth, yeare,rc,and no more.
Tenir compte. To score,or keepe reckoning.
~ Tenir compte de. To prixe;refpeét,efleeme, regard,
~ make reckoning of.
- Frouver fon coinpte. Ie trouve m6 ¢ e.lbane
veafon for it; or it appeaves by my reckoning i


out :
<A vieuxcompt és difputes: Pro.Old ac-
| crus ARR (alerts, euler th


ehenfion, containing ;mp- |


Comptereau : m, A booke of accounts ; 4 bill of recko-
Compteur: m. Areckoner counter accounter; a cafler


Comptoir: m. 4 Counter, or Table to caft accounts


unto
. To compell,force,conflraine unto.
Compal tomeing or compulfion ; alfo, an
Servir dieu par ave That 1, iufi fomany times | it
>


SE
; 1 am certaine of ils my conceit of it falls”


Cc OM


diforder, or the forgetfulnelfe of thofè they concerne;
makes them verie [ubiebt.)
Qui viticompte il vit ahonte: Prov. Hee lies
but [hamefilly that reckons all be fhends ; (yet is there
verie little difference betweene a gallant that.knowes
not bow,and a gull that cares not what,be fpends.)

npté : m.ée: £. Told, reckoned,numbred,counted,
calculated,accounted. ;

tement: m. À counting, telling,veckoning,num-

bring, calculating accounting,

. To count,account,reckon,tell number; to cal-
culate,or account ; alfo,to make,ov gine up, an
account ; alfo,to fib,fable,cog,talke vainely, chat idly,
tell a foolifh, fabulows,or unlikelie,tale,

impter les ais,& fouliveaux. To picke flrawes,to
loofe time,or {pend it to Up.
es chevilles. one makes another
wait a little too long at bis doore before be open it, the
Frenchmen fay,c eft luy faire compter les chevilles;
wiz.To mocke,or amufé bim to no purpofe; and when
they wil threaten to make one attend long for the thing
be defives, they fay, Xe ve feray compter des chevil-
les; (1 will make you coole your beeles before you baue
it;) and hence, are moft Courtiers tearmed , grands
compteurs de Chevilles. :
mpter les cloux. The fame; or,to loofe time ; or
confume it in idle feafting.
Compter fans fon hofte. (we fay the fame)to reckon
without his hot ; Looke Hofte.
Qui compte fansfon hofte, il faut qu'il compte
deux fois: Prov. Hee that reckons without’ bis hoft
muft reckon twice; be that concludes, or determines of,
bufine [Je without the priuitie,or prefence of bim whom
it moft concerns js like ynough to heave of it,or be trox-
bled withit, at leaft once more.
Vne fois faut compter à l’hofte : Prov.Our account
mufibe made,our reckoning paid ; (our lines exami-
 ned,our vices cenfisred) one time or otber. ~
Apres cot il faut boire : Prov.Looke Boire,
C'eft yn marchant qui prend I’ argent fans cot
ter, nipefer. One of Saint Nicholas Clerks ; or an ar-
rant theefe.


ETES AM: EU té


ese


ning.


of accounts ; alfo,the Numerator ; or figure that flands
aboue the line,in an Arithmeticall fraction.
Compteur de chevilles. Az ordinarie,or thred-bare
Courtier ; as in Compter les chevilles.


on.
Comptoir de chemin, Abex,cabinetor little coffer
to carrie letters,or otber writings i


ée:f. Compelle, frced, confirained


npulfé: m.


or meanes of compulfion ; alfo,a commiffion
imoyning a Regifter Notarie,or Clerke , to deliuer the
contracts pleadings aëls,or ders , or iudgements which

a fuiter bath need of. \ SNES
unétion : f. Compunttion,remor{e; the pricke, or

Sling of conftience. Wigs:

urgateur : m.A compurgator; one that by oath
+ infifies the (innocencie ) report, or oath, of ano-


sutifte : m. À compxtift,or computatifl; arécko-
ner,calculator or counter of. PRE à
eae T i ~~ Comte =


Original fror
THE OHIQSTATE


LITRES


_ | Conare: m.4 kernell (refembling a Pine-apple) that


nu. lle © Pee à


COM


re Frankes bad woon — from the Romanes,their
mes appointed fome of their principal followers, (|
the aa of Comtes)to be Pi pou, marist 4
ges of Prouinces ; and others(by the fame title) of good
townes ; giving them withall the territories thereof,to
be beld of them as Fiefs ; and fo they became both Of-
ficers and vaffals:yet were they neither but at the will
of their Soueraigne or at moft, not longer than during
, their owne lines ; But within awhile the means
to make their Fiefs bereditarie; and afterwards pro-
cured their gouernments to bee annexed vato their
Fiefs ; and at length(taking aduantage of the misfor-
tunes weeakenef]e,or facilitie of their Princes) incroa-
ched on the Soueraigntie of them both: (Inall which
time the Earles of Prouinces were no whit inferior
unto Dukes ; bauing as large dominions as they, and
Earles of townes under them as well as they; befides
that,the Gouernours of diuers Prouinces (as Norman-
die, Britaine,and others) were as often called Earles,
as Dukes.) Being at this height, and thereupon growing
emulators and fometimes th’ enemies, of kings, they on
the otber fide tooke a courfe, at firft by the Parliament,
(fetled at Paris) to abridge part of the royalties; and
afterwards by Efèbeats, Confifcations, or mariages, to
reunite unto the Crowne the whole Eflates, of as ma-
ny of them, (whether Earles,or Dukes) as yet acknow-
- dedged any dependancie on them by Homage, or other-
wi 3 (The reft,either at firft (as Lorraine , and Sa-
voy) hauing vfurped an abfolute Soueraigntie; or fiuce
by mifcbances (as Burgundie,and Flanders, by the im-
prifonment of Francis the firft)being alienated from'the
Crovone ; ) And creating other Earles, haue graunted
them only a iurifdiétion,or foueraigntie (if fo they will
baue it) thats wholly controllable bythe Parliaments,
and fisbieét unto themfèlues.
Comte d'Eftable. was in old time the title. of the
Maifter of the Horfè; and hence (doe fome perfuade
themelues) was the name of Co: le derined.
du Palais. Was the title of the Lord High
= Steward of the Kings boufe; now tearmed,Le Grand
Maiftre de France, & de la maifon du Roy.
Comté : m..4 Countie , Shire; Earledonie: (in France
it is to baue foure Baronnies, and euerie Baronnie the
eflates of, at the leaf, teane Gentlemen, belonging to
it: ENicot. But by an Ediét, made in the yere 1579,
and grounded on a decree of the Prinie Councell the
~ tenth of March 1578 (though confirmed onely in the
© Parliament of Britaine ) it was 3 That an
Earledome fhould confift of two Baronnics, and at the
leaft three Chaftellenies (which countervaile one
Baronnie) or of one Bavonnie, and fix Ch e-
ais all united together and held , by one bomage of


Was poten oe.


,


flickes to th’ outfide of the braine.
Tn eg ha filer Hae


‘vo
f


meafler. To/quafh , da bruifé or bu


| À concaenaton chain


Sencar cma rh te


2 A


Concile: m, 4 Councell ; an afemblie,Seffion,or using


s Coneiliateur:m. 4 reconciler peace-maker, procurer
‘ia pee- | )


| aie, foes. ;
Conciliatrice: f. A conciliatrix, reconciliatrix ; a wo-


CON


LL tent
Comte: m. A Count,an Earle, As foone as the aunci- Concavité : £4 concauitie ; bellow bowing,or boughtie


bollowneffe, |
La concavité des cieux, The round firmament, or


cope of :
Concedé : mée: f. Granted confented,or yeelded un.
Conceder. Te grant ,confent vnte; beleeue.
Concentrer. To ioyne in one center. :
Concentrique: com. Hawing one, and tbe fame cen


Concept : m. as Conception.

) cle:m.4 conceptacle;any bollow thing, which
is apt to receiue,bold,or containe,

Conception :£. 4 conceit; alfo, fence , apprebenfion,
judgement under ftanding ; alfo,the conception,or con=
ceining, of women with child ; whence, ?
La 9 papes noftre ome The conception of
our Ladie ; a folemne the Church
Rome on the eight of nant à st 7

cerner, To coacernc,touch, import; appertaine, or

Concets det ufique, À confort of Muficke
oncert de Mufique, A confort of Muficke.

Concerté. Conforted,accorded,agreed together.

Concerter. To confürt,or agree together.

Conceffion. 4 conceffion,grantor granting ; a leaue,

iffion, füfferance. ; é

Conceu: meuë:f, Conceined ; apprebended , gathe-

ved,underflood ; alfo,conceiued,or a breeding i the


Concevoir. To conceine,apprebend,underftand ; aff,
a female to conceiue,or breed yong(bones)in ber womb.
rier : m,.A chamber-fellow,a comerade.
Conche: f. 4 kind of bafon, or open veffell refembling
a bafèn ; as Coquille; al/o,as the Latine Concha,the
Shell of  mufele,cockle,erc;, alfo, order, equipage, or
firniture ; whence ;
Eftre bien en conche,ou en bonne conche. To be
well clothed, bandfomely attired,in good fafhios oror-
der,in fit equipage or array. LE 4
nes. certame receptacles for fea-water (as in


pp wre pak


befquatter, beray.
U-fifh,orfcaled fifh,with whofe
bloud purple is died ; but efpecially one(bearing fcales)

which yeelds a veddifb-purple,or {carlet colour.
Concierge : m. À bouje-keeper ; be that keepes a great
| mans boufe,or lookes to the fluffe that is therein; ao,
a Keeper,Goaler,Wwarder of a prifon ; alfo,a principal,
veblor;chiefe maifteror gonerner of a publique exercife,


or 2
Concierperie:f.The name of the common goale belong-
ing to Paris ; bence,alfo,a prifon, or goale.


_ of councellors; alfo, a (génerall) Councell ( for Chure
matters.)
Spncillabule, A ont Le fnall,or private affem-
lie,


nour,and goodwill for,or betwixt others. -
Concliaion 2 £4 concilia nae pro-
4 * san atione-making; anagreement,re- |
ribet, an, league of ens wade among À


man that reconciles thofe thatwereenemies. -
Concilié: m.ée:f. Attoned,vnited accorded, agreed,
or madc friends with; reconciled unto. ~


Concilier. To attone,reconcile, accord, or make friends


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


CGMOON | CON


MARES: SU Oo SRE SEG, 0 <a eens.
ther: toi it in loue one with another. of agreement, that paffes betweene the P e, and the
Conellipes.tee Jette towards a generall coun- French king touching the difpofition of Date fees.
basen Concorde: f. concord,accord,barmonic ; Peace agree-
Concion: f. An affemblie, or congregation of people, | ment, quictneffe ; a compofition. ’
called together ; alfo,the Oration, or Speech delimered | rder. To accord,compound,pacifie, quiet agree ;
and addreffed,unto them. f alfo to live in peace, and concord together.
Concis: m. ife: f. Concife, briefe, fhort, (uccinét, com- NCrcé: m. eée: f. Bred,compofed, made created to-
pendious. gether 5 alfo, congealed, compaëted, gathered clofe to-
Concitateur:m. An incitor , incenfor, urger, prouo- ether
ker, flirrer , or quickener up unto. Concréer. To breed,compofe make,or create together.
Concitation: f. 4 concitation; inciting, urging, pro- Seconcréer. To be bred, compofed, made, dc; alfo,
woking ; a raifing, roufing , ftirring, or quickning , vp | : to thicken, congeale; curd, or clofé together, i
unto. ncret: m.A coniunétion,or conglutination; an intire-
Concitatrice: f 4 concitatrix; incitreffe, prouoke- neffe,orintire thing.
reffe. Concret: m. ete : f: Coscretes bardened , thickened,
Concité: m.ée:£. Concited sincited surged, prouoked; compatted, congealed, conioyned together.
raifed flivved,or quickened, vp unto. À Concretion: 4 compa€tion, conglutination, congeale-
Conciter. To concite; incite, excite; urge, pricke for- ment, thickning, ioyning curding, clottering, faftening
ward,prouoke ; raife, quicken, or irre, up unto. together, £
Concitoyen : m. 4 fellow Citizen. Concubin: m. Aman vnlavefilly kept,and'vfèd, by a
Conclave: m. A conclaue, or Clofet ; an inner parlour, woman, ‘
or chamber ; afecret, or private roome ; and efpecially Concubinage : m.Concubinage; the keeping of a whore
that (for it is feldome vfed but to expreffe that) where- for bis owne filthie vf. :
in the Cardinalls affemble about the election of anew | Concubinaire, enfant concubinaire. 4 baftard
Pope ; alfo, the affemblie it felfe. 5 borne of a concubine; awbores fonne, the brood ofa
i Conclu: m. ué: f. Conclude sdecreed,determined,re- whore.
on. Concubine : f A concubine, aleyman; a woman ufed
À ces fins conclu. See Fin. : ordinarily, as a wife.
nclure: To conclude; decree, determine, refolue vp- | Conculcation: f. A Conculcation » or treading under
on. foot ; a fuppreffion, or extreame keeping under.
Conclure in Barocco. See Barocco. Conculqué:m.ée:f. Oppreféd ; trodden under foot.

_ Conclure à la mort. To gine fèntence of death; to Conculquer. To eppreffé , or tread under foot; to

_ adiudge , or condemne unto death; or ,in an Argu- bruife, or weare with often treading, or flamping on.
ment, to conclude that the partie accufed is worthie of Concupiféence: f. Concupifcence, luft, feruent defire,

| death, » AU ES ! grecdie appetite unto.

Condufion:f. A conclufion; end,iffie,clofe ; refoluti- | € ifcible. faculté concupifcible. The vnrea/e-
Pad con lo ane part of. nable, or fenfuall part of the foule, which couets meats,
Prendré conclufions rigoureufes à l'encontre d' | _ drinkes,and all forts of delights beyond meaficre.

un criminel. To urge the Euidence hard againft apri- | Concurrence: f..A concurrence, or concurrencie ;an


fèner;t6 lay fore unto bim;to put bim to bis neck-verfe ; agreement, of feuerall matters,or in circumflances (all |


(C' eft le Procureur du Roy, & la Partie civile qui comming 10 one point, or ayming at one thing ;) a run-
rennent leurs conclufions: Celuy-la conclud à ning, meeting, or ioyning, in courfe, together.
la peine, & reparation publique; ceftuy-cy en re- Tufques à la concurrence de fa debte; to the value,
: pes de fon honneur (s'il y efchet)& en defpés, or quantitie of bis debt; vatill it be fully fatisfied, or
ammages,& interefts : @Code Henry.) run Up. : ‘


Concoétion: f. Concoëtion ; good difyeftion 34 boyling, | Concurrent: m. A concurrent , corrinall , competi-
ch) me : re |


or feetbing (of meat in the tor. \ -
Concombre: m. 4 Cvcumber. —__ Concurrent: m.ente:f. Concurrent, concurring, a-
Concombre afinin. as Concombre fauvage. grceing with, ioyning or meeting in courfe running to-
nbrecitrin. 4 Citrullor citrull Cowcum- ether. - RS
> ber, a Pome-Citrull. LEUR Concuffeur. as Concuffionaire,
Concombre long . The crooked, long, or Adders, | Concüffion: £. Cone RER extortion,clofe ra-
owcumber. gi a


c dj Pine ; an extorting 0 falfe fhew of authoritic,
Concombre marin. The round Pompion, or Me- | or impofition KA sce et Re vin}
zt. : taire


pro-
À - Aro. curement of bribes ; alfo, a ioulting,or ing one a=
Concombre See Cowcumber, Spir- gainfhanother. — + x“ wae
tiag Cowcumber, Touc 2 ~~ | Concuffionaire: m. 4 Concuffionarie, or publicke exe
Concombre Turquois. A muske Melon; alfo,the | tortioner sone that (counterfaiting an anthoritie) ex-
Turkie Cowcumber,fome what refemblingaPompion,| — torts gifs from men by threatning to punifh, or profe-
and bauing a more folide, and ferme pulpe then the or~ cute their offences ; or any officer, or Magiftrate , that
; ie one, : will neitber do right jor gine good words valeffe be be
7 Con riere: f. À bed of Cowcumbers ; a plot of | _ foundly bribed. ;
ground wherein Cowcumbers grow. 1 Co ion; & Condamnatoire. 4 Condem-
, Concomitance: f. Concomitancie; fellomfbip,or affo- | -_ nâtion, Con atoire. :
ciation with, companie together. . ndamné; & Condamner. See Condemné, &
! Concorda ccord, agreement, cone j ar


Con
Originat-frorrs#


THE OHIG-SHTEUNMERSEY
Ga A MAI T = Far


47


| CON CON

L2=

Cond de. A kind d-play, Lan£- | #ed,and fétchti lace.
pr 7 « ete Condé de Rare To a eines


Condemnation: f. 4 condemnation; a damming or | Conduite: f. A conduét,c
co ing. ’ on ; a trayning,or gouernment ; alo, a mana-
Condemnation d'amende. Ana amercing, or put- ing,or he À

ting to a fine. Conduidte de l'efprit. The inclination, motions, or

Pafler condemnation. To give ouer afuit, toyeeld | _ fway ofthe mind.

vnto an agreement,to defift from brabling,in Law. Conduire. To condutt, lead, guide, bring on ; gouerne,

Il pafla condemnation de tout ce qu’ ils defiroy- | fivay, rule, wholly difpofe of ; alfo, tobandle, or ma-


ent. He graunted.or yeelded unto, what{oeuer they re- nage.

quired. Conduire fourdement vne Orne. Looke Orne.
Condemnatoire: com. Condemnatorie,condemning; | Conduifeur:m. A Leader,Guider,Conduétor.

amercing, fining. Condui-fomne. fe Ae e 7 filent,quiet.

ondemné: m. ée : € Condemned, damned , ouer- | Conduit: m. ite : £. Conduéled, led guided, brought on;


throwne in Law; alfo, amerced, fined, put unto his trained, gouerned ; be ad ifpofed of.
ui


fine. Conduit : m.# Co

Vn lieu condemné. Ax uncouth, or vnaccefjable | Conduite: £. as Conduiéte.

place. *| Condyle: m. The tuberiofitie;out-fwelling,roundaelfe,

Tela bonne caufe qui eft condemné : Prov. Hee | er knots, of the thigh, knee, ankle, elbow, or knuckle-

thats Fthe right oft times receiues the foile. bones; alfo,a blow with the fift ; a box.or cuffe.
ndemner. To condemne or damne ; to ouerthrow in lome :m. A fwelling,or excrefcence of. j

indgement, ouercome by Law. unto little warts,or the flones of a raifin,or figge)in the

Condemner à l'amende, To amerce,fine,or putwn- |: fiundament,or in a womans priuities.

to his fine. Cone: m..A (one; a Geometrical bodie ; or any figure,


Condenfé: m. ée: £. Thickencd, made thicke,compac- that is broad,and round below, and fharpens towards
ted,or clofed together. the top. ; :
Condenfe : com. Conden{e ; thicke,clofe together. Coneftable. See Conneftable.
Condenfer. To thicken, or make thicke; to gather, or | Coneftablie:£. A Conftablefhip ; alfo,a Captainefhip,
forte together. or gouernment held in Peerdome; alfo, a companie,
Condenfité: £, Condenfitie,thickneffeoardneffeclofe- | __band,or battalion of Souldiers.
A ? mic SN 0 Confanon. .A Standard, or Banner, rc; # Gonfa-
ndefcendre. To condefc afe.yeeld,graunt non. ;
unto. hee Confanonier: m. A Standard-bearer. .
Condefcendu: m.ué: f. Condefeended ; voughfafed, | Confanons. The wild Poppie.
grauated,or yeelded unto, Confeétion : f. 4 conftthon,or compofitionya mingling;
Condignac. as Codignat; Marmalade of Quinces. | _ aconfetting or comfet making. "
qRab. Confederation : f. A confederation, or confederacie ;
or igne: com. ps, a tga lenge Fe making of or entring into, a league with others ; a
ndignement. Coadignely, worthily, bonefily ; as it d,a complot,or confpiracie. =
pare en ue My Cobieden-n: C ate, in fri ip, entred into a
Condile. as Condyle. me PONT 3 alfo,joyning in a plot or confpiracie.
Condifciple. À /choole-fellow,or fellow diftiple. Conference: f. A conférence; alfoya comparifon.
Condition : f. 4 condition, couenant; law,or bargaine | Conferer.To conferre commune,demife,or talk,together;
conditional; alfo , the propertie, nature, ion, conferer enfemble;) al/o, to contribute,or be at a-
ike, and equall charge with another; (conferer avec


manner, one vfeth, or is of ; alfo, ones eftate, fortune;
place; birth ; qualitie, (efpecially meane,or bafe.) vn autre.) :
Tene fçay pas les conditions du ieu, I know not the | Confermé :m. ée :  Wonfirmed.firengthened, :
lawes of the Game. ed, fetled;hardened; incouraged,alfured; ratified,efta-
nditionaire: com@onditionarie,conditionall,vpon | _ blifhed; auouched,auerred for truth.
condition,under couenant,conenanting. ermer.To confirme, firengthen, fortifie, fettle,bar-
Conditionnel. as Conditionaire, den; affure ; eflablifh, ratifie, make good ; incourage,
Conditionnellement. Conditionally,vpen,or under, | _ comfort; anouch,or auerre for truth. :


a condition. e: fas Co:


à dol: m. 4 ridge,or raifing of eartb. : Aller à la confefle. To goe to fbrift. :
| Condoloir. See Cordoue Confeffé: m.ée: £ Confeffeds acknowledged, yeelded


Condonné: m.ée:f. Gixen freely, forgiuen, parde- | _ unto; diftouered,reuealeé,bevrayed ; alfo.fhriuen.
ned. k «| Cor . To confeife,acknowledge,yeeld vatoyreueale,


ede, x,’ :
hy 0 cu mA rot i + CO
e | mealingsor beworayingsof a fecret.
ies  Gonkfon culai fus ing, auricular con-
“ bé ? n ñ 4 ce è < Et
€ naire : com. (0


__ treating of auricular confeffion. ’
Copfeffionnat : m. Anal of confeffion tending to.ab-


v


sarie; belonging to,or


Original from


Divitized. by CO: gle D A THESOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Confer: |


co N


Contez.
Confer’ Ua > truft, affurance, bardi-


nelle.
à Contiant. Trufting, bauing confidence in, building vp-


Confidant: m. A friend to whom one trufis,in whom
be hath confidence, on whofe affifiance be relyes ; a fe-
cond in a fingle combat, fuch a one as à man takes into
the field with bin.

Confident. as Confidane.

Confidentiaire: com.Trecherous,faith-breaking,truft-

| deceiuing.


ionnaire. #5 Confidentiaire.
| Contier To trufl, belecue, haue confidence iz ; affure
elfe of; build,rely, or depénd,vpon.
ez de Cour. as Pairs de la Cour.
Configuration : f. A likeneffe; or refemblance, of fi-
gures.
Conte m. ine: f. Neere,neighbor confining,or adioy-
ning,unto; bounding,or Len
nant: m.ante:f. [oefitieg bounding bordering, | C
een hing neere vato ; alfo, confining,
ani


So confine; toabbut, or bound upon; to ab-
boord, adioyne, lye neere vnto; alfa, to affigne limits,
point marches, lay out bounds unto ; alfo, to con-
fe relegate, bani{h into a certaine, or limitted,
place.
Confire. To preferue,confeit, foake,or ficepe in; alfo, to
feafin, lar gine fauor vato.
er sp ns ne Sfeeirantins confirming; efta-
a[fiering ; auouching.
Confirmationt © Acon ae aa tis fet-
ling,affurance; ratification,eftabliflynent ; alfè, a bart-
a or hg rt sa 3 alfo, an auouching, or auer-
iom,Bifhop ping,


mat
or (as the vulgar) Bisping
Droiét de confirmation. hs fine, or fee due, by all
Officers of the kingdome of France, unto the King at
bis fir{t comming to the Crowne, for confirming themsby
bis Letters Patents,in their places.
riné. as Confermé.
Corée See Confermer.
7 m. Cha rate beene foaked, or flee-
ped';any pickled,or preferued t
Confit: m. 7 confifcation,or thi: confifqued.
acne fA confifcation; a publick feifure; alfo,


eur: es A Confeëlor, Preferuer, or Confèt-ma-


ker.
Confifqué : m. ée : £. d;; feifed to publicke,
snd floes tb, aes


Confitquel To confiiate, to feife,as forfeited vnto the
Princes, or common, 3 alfè,te.


Confiffable : com. Fit payee Panne faked Preferued,
confeéted.


Confiffeur: m. A (onfettor, Confèt-maker ; Prefer-
Confit: m m. Rees f, Steeped,confetted ; fully foaked,whel-


ee gran whofe heart is full of bitter-


1/1
RSR à
; one thats


ungr
that habit
ae 3 one that minds,
citar preesing; feeping,foakings


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSE 39


CON


à faucing, Seafoning ; alfo,a confection, condiment, pre-
Jerue; ence ;
Confitures. Confèts,ienkets, al kind of fivcet-meats:
and,moft properly.fruts,bloffomes,leaues, flalkes é c,0f
plants,preferued whole ; Prefèrues.

ration: f. À conflagration ; a general bur-


07 confuming with fire.
Conflans :m. 4 seen whereat tro riners meet.
Contes :m. ée : f. Blowne, or, puffed vp. See Gon-


Conkle: zm. A conflit, skirmi{h, bickering, or bat-

te

Confluant. as Conflant.

ndre. To confound ; diforderly to mingle, or tum-
ble together.

Conformateur: m. 4 confirmer ; a maker of’ things
like one anotber,and fit altogether.

tie f. A conforming ; a framing, fofhio
gor difpoftion of things to a bkenes betweene them-
flue, a fitneffe altogether.
Conforme: com. (onformable, conforme, agreeable
unto; agreeisg,or of a like fafhion,one to the other.

Conformé: m. ce : £ Conformed; made apt fir, fitted
with, fafbioned like.

onforméinent. Conformably , accordingly , there-
after,

Conformer. To conforme; fit with; fafbion as; make
apt for, like to,proportionable untosal/o(fimply)to make,
frame, fafhion proportion.

Conformité: £ Conformitie, conformeableneffe ; a re-
femblance,likene[fe, fitne[fe,or befitting.

nfort: ni. Comfort, foaresenfilaten an incourage-
mentor cheering vp; an eafing.or mitigating of grief;
the application ef firength unto weakeneffe, thereby to
inforce it.

Confortatif: m. iue: f.comfortatine ; of power,or pro-
Pour comfort.

Conforté: m. €e: f. Comforted, eafed, folaced ; fireng-
thened ; fupported.

Conforte-main. ‘rhe Ltrengthening,and confirmation
of an inferior per fons feifisre by the [uperiors afi lances
as when a Lord, hauing {eifed an inberitance beld of
bim,prayes inaide of the King (or a Mefne Lord of the
Lord Paramouat) and procures it, for the better afx-
rance of bis poffeffion.

Donnerconforte-main. To belpe, fuccour,aide,af~
Sits to lend a helping band vnto,

nforter. To comfort, folace, recreate ; te encou-
es cheere up ; alfo, to confirme,belpe, ‘frengthen,
reinforce.
Comforter vne playe. To corroborate a wound by
fomentations,or otber (external) applications.

Confoulant. 4 certaine village bard by Paris; tear-
“7 af, becaufe two riucrs (Marne, and Seine) meet:


Confiairie: £ A Fraternitie, Brotherbood, Fellomfhip
Societie; a Companie of one trade, or profe/fion,


Le pain benift dela co: e. Bobbes,
thwackes, blowes.
nfreres : m.Fellowes of one,and the fame Companie,
or Socictie.
tation: f. À confronting, or brim ing eto
face ; alfo,a reading, or Scand of the en of
accusers in of the
:m.ée: f. Cnt rot fi face to ia ;
examined, “agite conferred one by another ; layed
neére together x
Confonter. To confront,or bring face pee 3 10 exa-
mine,


+ Original icom


—


Be “repeating 3 (whence) alfo,as Epizeuxe.


 Congencré


> NÉE A


CON


mine,or compare,one by another ; to cenferre,or lay, fe-
nerall things together.
Confropter pape To ¢ vi be es; to
accufers, or accufing witnelfes, before the accu-
fedsa 2 ape hele or to read and examine the
euidence they baue giuen in, or depofitions which they
baue made jn his prefènce.
nfus: m.ufe: f. Confifed, difordered; budling, in-
difiinét ; alfo,confounded,troubled ; abafbed, amazed,
difmayed,put or dafbt out of countenance. -
fément. Confifedly undiftinélly without order;
one with another,

Confufion : f. 4 confifion, er diforder ; a rude mingle-
mangle,chaos,burly-burly ; a confounding ; alfoya thick
Ruffe thats worne clofé before.

Confüté: m.ée: f. Confiited,conuinced,refelled,difpro-
ued, ouercome in arguing.

Confuter.To confiite,conuince,refell,difproue,ouercome
im arguing.

Confuter vn tefmoing. To difgrace,confound,puzle,
blanke bim; to put bim out of countenance, or, drive
bim to a Non-plus.

Congé: m, Lesue,licence,permiffion; graunt of libertie,
discharge i[miffion; alfo,a pafport.

/ ngé de Cour. Looke Renvoy.

Congé deffaule. 4 d'/inifion vpon default;(Se don.
ne à l'appellant, qui a cfté anticipé,contre l'antici-
pant defaillant ; Quia fungitut vice rei, & a€toris.


Dar

g ngé » ae yo pay rm f
onge fimple. À fimple difini ifthar ge out o,

a cout ; (Stobtient par yn ns mis ps de-

mandeur non comparant, ou à faute de repliquer :

& par l'intimé contre I’ appellant defaillant qui a-

voitrelevé,& adfigné. Ragueau.)

Ii me donna congé de ma chambre. He gaue vp my

chamber.


Congesble: com. Difmiffeable, licenfable, difcharge-
a


Domaine copgrable. Which the poffelfor is to leaue
when his Landlord pleafes ; a demayne held at will.
Congedié: m. ée: f. Difmiffed, difcbarged , licenced,
that bath leaue to be gone.
Congedier. To difmiffè, difébarge, licence, gine leave
unto,permit to goe, fuffer ali
‘ongedier vne armée. To break up an armie.
ation: f. 4 dt A congealing, freezing;
“ also,the difeafe tearmed Catalepfis,viz. a fuddain ae
tention,or occupation of the bodie,and mind ; the Pati-
ent continuing in the fame forme, and holding the fame
poftare, which be bad when be was taken with it.
Conga m. ée: f. Congealed, froxen, clofed, toge-


Congeler. To congeale; to be froxen, or clofe togetber
with frecxing, dre.


Congemination: f. A congemination, doubling, often
:m.€c: f. enerated; begotten, or in-
gendred aber. ms es


aire: m. A dole; a large(fe,or liberall gift (of mo-
ney,0r vitinals) unto the people. ne


ae ccm or lay ena


fire; or very neere our gallon, “age
Conglutinatio: LÉ A canltination singing a


_ kuuit ting, a he
onglutinated ; glued,clofed,or
aS a eat


Al


Digitized*"by Go. gle


Conjeétural : m.ale : f.Coniegturall; which may be ga-


CON


Conglutiner. To conglutinate ; ioyne, glue, clofe, kait |
with,or together. : |

Congnoiftre. See Cognoiftre,

ngratulation:f. 4 congratulation,or verball reicy~
cing with one for bis good fortune.
tulé : m.ée: f Congratulated reioyced with.
ys. pere To congratulate; or,in words, to reioyce
with another for bis good fortune.
gre: m. A Congar,or Cungar (fifh.)
É: m. cée:f. Congealed, thickéned,curded, ga-
thered clofe togetber,clottered ; compaët, made bard.
cement: m, A congealing, curding, thickening,
Srewing,or clotting together.

Se cer. To congeale,thicken,curd,clofe ; gather,
compact together.

ns pe ra : £4 congregation; affcmblie , or cem-
pany of people gathered together in a publicke place.

Congregé : m. Ée.f. Congregated, gathered, alfembled
together.

Congréger. To congregate, gather, affemble together.
Ilfe c en pierre precieufe.Jt growes,or con-
geales into,a precious flone.

10n: f. Companie,congreffion with others ; or, -
as Congrez; an screen mr

Congrez: m. fo affémblie,or meeting ; alfo, an
incounter,coaping.or [cuffing together.


thered by ghe([e,or {cand at by conieëture.
Conjecturalement. Conieéturally, by gbeffe, or coniec-
ture,babnab,bittie-miffie.
Conjeéturant: m.ante: f, Conieéturing, gheffing at.
Con. le lion par les ongles. See Lion.
Conjecture: £ .4 conieéiure, or geffe; a indgement
wr conceit taken,on uncertain grounds,or atran-
ome.
Conjecturé: m. ée: f. Conieétured, gheffed, imagined ;
deemed, diuined.
Conjeéturer. To conieélure, gheffe,dinine; to indge, or
imagine by. ;
Coniguer. To fevatch,or claw. pal
Conillart. 4 certaine very tender,and delicat peare.
Coniller.To play the coward,or lurke in corners;to feeke
a bole to bide bis bead in; to fneake, or flinke from place
to place,as a connie that boults fiom bufh to bufh.
nilliere: f 4.Conmy-bole, or Conny-borow.
oignant: m.ante: f. leyning,vniting, combining,
coupling with, or together. :
Conjoinét : m. te : f. Joyned, conioyned, combined, Ÿ
coupledvnited knit, fure with. : !
joinétement. loyatly, wholly,togetber,as well the
one as the other.
Conjoindre. To conioyne, combine, couple, counite to
joyne, affociate ; faften,knit ; marriegmake fure with,or.


together.
Conjonétif: m.iue:f. Coniundixe ; ioyning, coupling,
combining, uniting with,or together.
Membrane conjonétiue. The white of the eye ; or,
he. couers it. . ere
On: f.A coniunélion; combination coupling,
ing together ; alfo, the partef Leech tearmed,a


e Conjouir. To ag be glad with.
ement. A congratulation , or reieycing
with, i
Se Conjoyr. as Conjouir. ie
FPaiiioylecment. ac Conjouifcment aoe it
nile. Flea-bane,or Flea-bane Mullet; (anbearbe.)


Original-from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


C ON


Conjugal: m.ale:f. Coniugall; belonging unto man
br, or le de ioyned, or yoaked toge-

ther, as man and wife in wedlocke.
Os conjugal. as Os Iougal.

Conjuger. To play the part of a busband ; toknow, or
‘ufe,bis orne wife. À.

Conjunétion. as Conjonétion. À

Conjuncture: f. A coninnéture; 4 serie together.
Il venoit en vne fort mauvaife conjuncture. Hee
came when all things were cleane off the bindges, or

quite out of ioint.

Conjurateur: m. À confpirator. .

Conjuration: f. 4 confpiracie; complotment, privat
confederacie againft ; al/o, a coninration, or coniu-
ring. :

Conjure: f, 4 Conjuration ; 4/5, 4 fummoning, or

pr of people nt geste is

onjuré: m.ée:f. Coniured; adiured; earneflly be-

Sought,or intreated ; alfo, coniured, or exorcifed, alfa;

warned ,fimmoned,or called together; alfo, conjpired


4 > : againft tad +
: Copa To coniure; adiures befeech earnefil;intreat
me vehemently ; alfo,to coniure,or exorcife (a {pirits) alfo,


toconfbire; complot; ioyne in a prinat confederacie,


againit.
Combes la Cour; ou fes hommes. To call, or
warne,a Court ; to fiummon,or fend for,bis people toge-


Connathrel: m. elle: £ Connaturall ; naturall unte

all alike; alfo,agreeable to the nature of.
nne e:m. A (énfable ; ( In former times the
amaiflers of the Kings Horfè, and the captaines of cer-
taine bands ingarifonned in frontier townes, and other
forts of importance, were tearmed, Conneftables:
At this day the Conftable of France is the principall of.
ficer of that Crowne, efpecialy in warlike Expediti-
ons, whereof, im bis Princes abfence, be is (or flould
be) the Generall; He alfo keepes the Kings Sword,and

does him homage for it.)

Conneftablie: f. 4 Conflablefhip ; the Office, or Place,
of a Conflable ; alfo, a Captainefhip, or Gowernment,
held in Peer dome; alfo,a Squadron,Band,er Batallion,
of fouldiors.

Cognesés m. CC: f. Kit, ioyned, tyed, truffed toge-


ther. É
Connexion. 4 connexion ; ioyning,knitting,tying,truf-
fing together.
Connexité: f. # Connexion.
il: m. A (onnie,a Rabbet.
Connille: f. A Doe Connie.
Conniller. SeéConiller.
Connilleur : m. 4 coward; one that


‘


y


playes leaf in
ene. ‘ =} Ê
Connin : m. as Connil. 4 Connie.
in, & vilain avec la main: Prov. A Conni
membred with the hand,a kiaue well pummelled with
the fifts are much the fooner eaten,or amended. —
iniere: f. À Connigrey,or warren of Connies.
Connivé: m. ée: f. Winked at; tolerated, fufered,
borne with, feene and not feene (of purpofé,or by con-


ju) a
Connivence: £. A conniuente, or winking at ; a fuffe-
po ia eg ae 4 feeing, and not feeing


Connivensta inte at; fuffer, tollerate, beare with ;


nor


Connoiffance: £ Knowledge. See Cognoiffance.


Sight, or bides bis bead in a bole for feare of being |


to Few oa ofl e feo te


CON


nnoiltre. To fmow, See Cognoittre.

NON: m. 4 long Dray, or Cart,bauing at the fore-
end a Pulley for the drawing up of loading. €Pic.

noeidal:m. ale: £. Cone-like; broad, and round at
the bottome,and fharpe at the top.

Conopée: f. À Canopie ; a Tent,or Panilion.

Quaflc : m. ée : £ Stamped,pounded broken Flirt,
gq in pieces.

Conquafler. To powne, breake, or bruxes to flampe
in si morter ; 10 Split, or quafh in peeces; or as Con-
cafler,

Conque: €. Shell-fifh; alfo,the fhell it felfe ; fometimes
the pearle found in a fhell- heal A mesure |

om corne, ps pound weight. e a

Nqueradie: com. Conquerable, vanquifhable, fi
dime SE Nc
nquerant : m. A conqueror,ov onercommer ; a fub-
duer, a vanquifher. .
Conquereur. as Conquerant.
Conquerir. To conquer, fubdue, vanqui


‘ onercome;

ouermaifter bring under obedience ; alfo, to get, pur-

chafeswin acquire(during mariage,or iointly with ane-
er.)


Conquerre. as Conquerir.

Conqueft: m. An Eflate, or Purchafe compafféd by a
mans one induftrie, labour, or meanés ; alfo, a thing
Sot, or matter come by, wherein another is to bauea
[hare ; (therein differing from Acqueft.)

nquefte: f. A Conquell ; the fubduing of a forraine
countrey; or,the inlarging of bis owne dominions by the |.
winning of other mens. .

Conquefté: m.ée: £ Conquered, fubdued; woon,got-

ten,purchafed.
nquefter. as Conquerir. To fubdue,conquer ; win;
get, purchafe.

Conquis: m.ife: f, Conquered ; fubdued, vanquifbed,
woon; ouermaiflered,onercome,wbolly brought under;
alfo,gotten,acquired,purchafed (as in Conquerir.)

nroy : m, Stuffe throughly tawed,or curried.

Conroyé: m. ée: £. Curried, tawed, or dreffed, as lea-
ther ; rough-bewed, chipped, (quared, or fa{hioned as
caer alfo, well wrought ; well fadned, or (etled, by
working.

Conroyement: m. A currying,or dreffing of leather ;
4 chipping,or fquaring of tymber.
onroyer. To currie,tawe,or dre(fe,as leather; alfo,to
M vt hew, or fquare,as tymber ; and (metapbori-
cally) to worke throughly ; or, to fadden, or fettle toge-
ther by a through working.

oyeur: m. 4 Currier ; a Leather dreffèr. ©

Confacré: m. ée: £ Confecrated, ballowed,dedicated,
denoted unto, :

acter. To confecrate, hallow, dedicate, or denote


unto. ;
Confalme de mer. The great borfé-muskle. *
Confanguinité : £. Confanguinitie, neereneffe in blond,
kindred by birth, or bloud. .
D PER
nfçachance: £ 4 ge,or notice of.
Confgachant de. Fully acquainted with.or on LA Un.
to ; hauing notice,or knowledge enough of.
Contcience : f. Confeience ; the tefimonie of our owme
knowledge, the witne[fe of our ovne thoughts ; a re-
morfesor a remorfefüll remembrance of,


ce à pont levis. A very large cenftience ;
the humor of fitch as dare commit,or i adie of, amp 2


Le +, bd


TS PRE PU ERP me


VC RP ON 1 TE


OUT A


ao. 2


Conte fa confcience. To commit awicked,or lewd
à }


Faire conftience de. To flicke at, or make a feruple


i veut Ja confcience monde, II doit fuir le

mondeimmonde: Prov. Looke Monde, \
Conftienticufement. Religioufy regi witha
, Good confcience; curioufly, fcrmpuloufly.

deux, m. cule: f. Confcientious; godlie,de-
+ hout religious of a good cenfcience, full of conférence ;

alfo,{crupulous, timer ous,curieus.
Confcinoinaatie. Diuination by a fige, and a paire of


pene Rab,

onfecutif: m. ive: f. Confecutine,or confequent;next
or immediatly ficcceeding enfuing neceffarily,cer tainly

lowing.

Confecution:f. LA confequence, or confequent ; an
order, fuccefion, following ; a neceffarie ifjite, ov ét
fiing.

Confecutivement. les ju à :

Confeigneur: m. 4 fellow Lord; a Partner, Affociate,
ue dominion, or feignorie.

Conleil: m. Counfell, aduife ; a iudgement, or opinion
demaunded, or giuen; aifà, a Court, Companie, Affem-
blie, or Affociation of Counfellors ; The bodie of the
Connfell ; whence, fi

. Confe il des Affaires. The Counfellbf State; the Pri-
uie Counfell ; held ordinarily in the Kings clofet, and
mali commonly a mornings, or at bis gettingaup;, when
the Packets of forraine Princes, Embal] s, and
Gonernors of Prouinces be opened, and refolutions ta-
ken as well upon them, as upon other imp and
State-affaires of the time; the ouerture, iad dippateh
whereof is committed ouer unto the principal Secre-
taries,who ever attend his Maïefliein this Counfell,ci-
ther alone, or with fuch Lordsias be pleafts extraovdi-
narily to call untoit, I |
Confeil d'Eftat.An affemblie of Counfellors,wherein,
when it concerns matters of warre, the(onflable,when
caufès of Luflice, the Chancelorbe Prefidenis ; and the


Princes of the bloud, Peeres of FrancesOfficérs of the


Crowne, Gouernours of Prouinces,chiefe Prefidents of
the Parliaments, and (by Special fauour.or commiffion
from the King) other great Perfonages, be affiftants ;
‘pet none, with any obligation of ordinarie attendance,
but a few of them (commonly of the long Robe) who
baue penfions allowed them for it. This Counfell is this
tearmed whertit is ee about publicke, and im-
“portant bufinelfes ; for upon other occafions it 1s tear-
med otherwife. — : FEES
Confeil eftroit..as Confeil dés Affaires.
il des finances. as Confeil d'Eftat; when it is
affembled'about the ordering,or dispofing of the Kings
~Confeil privé. ae Confeil d'Eftat; but called thus
when it is affembled hens pee controuer fies, or


betweene partie and partie, and rl
ce eth ha MOT rs


| e
I Table. ‘ Syed piss PRIE
Cent ese Contents Con


aiflers of Req
determine ord


_difpute about it.
- De chofe perduë le confeil ne fe remuë: Pro. Ad-


Contfeiller: m. ÿ Confeillier.
Confeiller. To counfell,aduife, dire? ; perfuade,adme-


Se

aske th’opinion,craue the divettion,of.
: Se confeiller fur. To examine,weigh,ponder 3 to ad
Poets liber ate,confislt of.


Counfellor,or Rie: |
Conteillier: m. 4 Counfellor ; one that gines bis aduife,


| Care.


Confemblable: com.¥ery like vntomuchrefémbling,


Confentant: m. ante: f. Confemting, or partaking,


Confentement: m. 4 confent; amagreement, or ac- |


. concurre with; approne,or alowsof. .


ad of foure Pref |


ri
C ON -


Nos gens ne parlent pas en confeil, viz. They gape |

£ loud that all the houfe rings of them, ù
A confeil de folcloche de bois:-Prov. For weed-
cocks counfels woodden bells.

Chofe faiéte confeil prins: Prov. For things alrea-

che done the care’s, alreadie taken; matters once paft |
it’s bootleffe to talkeof them ; à bufinesje ended ends


uife is idle when a thing is loft; or when things are Lo
why flould we aske aduife? : « #
Il peche fagement qui fait folie par conf&il: Prov.
Looke Pecher.

La nuiét donne confeil: Prov. Night gives aduife;
We fay, take counfell of your pillow.

Pour neant demande Lonbeil qui ne léveut croire:
ae In vaine be ciunfell askes that will not truft
wt, )


nifb,warne.


conteiller à. To demaund counfell,take th sduife,


ie: fA counfelierfbip 3 the place,or office ofa


or deliners bis opinion, vpon a doubt propoñnded, bu-
‘fineffe diftuffed, or caufe to be determined ; hence, 4
priuse Counféllor unto a Prince ; a Senatour in a ci-
tie; and an Affiftant in a Court of Inpice ; aifo, (in
Normand-French) un Advocate, or Counfellor at


Conteilliex de fon orcille. Said of 4 priuie Coun-
feller, whofe aduife bis Prince ever likes well, and
loues to heare often; one that frames bus wordes to fit
the well-knowne bumour of bis Prince ; one thatin*
respect thereof, is very gracious with him, or bath bis


matching with. |
Ses confemblables. His félowes, conforts, compli- À


ces,companions. |
| with; accefarie, or agreeing, unto ; approoning, or al
Lovin -


Conlenian du cas, «A confenter, acceffarie, par-
taker. : 4


cord,vnto; an approbation,or allowance,of.
entir. To confent ; accord,or agree,vnto; iumpesor


Affez confent qui nedit mot: Prov. He confents e-


nough that fayes nothing; (Many, who know not much
wre Latine can fay,Quitacet confentire Mr
el fee ts ferepent: Prov. Some yeelding (in
repent (at greements prooue a-
ae eo F 5 | gene


iy
Tae


CO N
Confequentieux: m. eufe : F. Moff important, full of |
confequence.
Jequutifs m. iue: f. Confecutive ; or as Confe-
cu


Conferte: £ A conference. ]
Conferté: m. ée:f. Ordained, made, ftirred, or fet,


up.
Confertion : £ A ioyning, coupling; interlacing, inter-


mingling, Hi.
Conféctieir: m. A Conferuator;Preferuer,Maintai-
ner; Defender, Protegor ; Sauer,or Sauior.
Confervateur Apoftolique. The Popes Conféruator
ia Vainerfities; an Officer that both upbolds the priui-
ledges graunted, by the Church of Rome, thereto ; and
takes notice of all the Ecclefiafticall controuerfies , and
caufes therein.
Confervateur des foires de Lyons. À Magifirate,
who bath iurifdiction ouer all manner of debtors, for
commodities taken up at any of the [aid Fayres.
Confervateur Royal. The Kings Conféruator in V-
minerfities ; an Officer that both maintaines the priui-
ledges graunted by the (rowne unto them; and is their
Indge of all caufis, and controuerfies that be meerely
ciuile,or lay, (In Paris the Prouoft of the Citie alwaies
bolds this place.) é mates
Confervation: f. A conferuation;heeping maintaining,
prefernation ; defence, protection.
mie ire: £ Th Office of a Conferuator;bis Court,
or the roomie wherein be vfèth to keepe it.
Confervatrice: f A (onferuatrix; Prefernereffe; Pro-
tedirix,Defendere(fe. k
Conferve: f. Prefèruation gard, (aft cuflodie,keeping ;
alfoza Confèrue, as of Rofes, V'iolets,drc.
ouferve de grain. cave,pit,or bole under ground,
to keepe corne in.
~ Navires de conferve. Ships of a Fleet,or of one con-
t. ;


fort. , i

Confervé : m. ée: f. Conferued; kept, garded, maintai-
ned, preferued,fauedsprotetted, fended, upheld.

Conferver. To conferue; keepe, gard, maintaine, pre-
ferue, faue; defend, protettphold.

~ { Conferve-fanté. Hole/ime,or bealth-preferuing,
iderable: com. tre 3 10 be confidered,

or thought of.

Contest m. One that does things with confidera-

tion,and aduifement.
ideration: f. (onfiderationsaduifement ; alfo,dif-

cretion,cir


cumipection 2, carefülneffe; alfo,
Confideté: m. éc: he, a thought of aduifed
examine ponder ¢ ed, perpended, i reuolued pe ighed


Confideréement. Confiderately, aduifediy
great


fey aire


CON


Configner. To configne; prefent,exbibite,or deliner, in
hand,or into the Ha i Ks deliner,affigne,or appoint
(abfolutely) ouer; to deliuer, gage, or lay downe, as a
se at ‘flake.

es. Two conduits or pipes in the throat,

Confimilitude : fConfimilitude;likene]t,concurrence,
equalitie,agreement together.

Confin : m. A Mite,or weeuell,

Confire:f. The hearbe Comfrey, Confound, Affe eare,

itbacke, Backwort.
ire moyenne. Middle Confound, middle com-
Srey, brovone Bugle ; alfi,the Daifie.
ca grande confire. Great Comfrey, &c ; as Con-
Ce

Petiteconfire. The little wild Daifie, called other-

wife,Bruifewort ; alfo, the bearbe Prunell, Carpenters

bearbe,Selfebeale,Hookebeale, Sicklewort.
nfiftence : f. A confiftence,or being; a refidence, or


fetline.
à 5 confift,be ; reft,refide abidesto fettle fland
14,07 at a ftay. :
Confifloire: mn. A Confifierie ; a Counfell boufe of, or
Counfell held by, Prelats ; a feffion, fitting, or affemblie-
of Eccle fiafticall perfons.
nfiftorié: m, éc : f Cenfüred,or determined of, in
Confillorie.
Confiftorier. To cenfure, or determine of; in Confifte-


rie,

Confolateur: m. A confolator, folacer,comfortersalfe,
a Corbell (in building;) or, as Confole de bafti-
ment.

Confolation: f. Confolation, comfort, folace.

Confolde : £. comfrey, or Confound, Wall-wort, Affe-


eare.

Confole de baftiment: f.4 Corbell,or pendant of flone;
@ bracket,or cartridge,of timber,

Confolé: m. ée: f Confolated, comforted, folaced.

Confoler. To comfort, folace ; cherifh, or cheere


Up.
Confolidation : f. 4 confolidation, a firengtbening,
PAPE: a clofing, or ioyning vp, as of a


wound,

Confolidé : m.ée: £ Confalidated made found,bealed,
or clofed vp.

Confolider. To confolidate, or make found; to beale,or
clofe vp, as a wound,or vicer. AO


Confommé: m. ée : f.Confimmated,accomplifhed,per-
fied filed, finifhed ; fammed vp.
Co éen Grammaire. A perfeét, or abfolute


Grammarian,
ommé en bonnes lettres: 4 foxad (and gene-
tall) Scholler. - - ip
Confoinmer.roc fimmate,accomplifh,per feet, fini
full; 10 make,or fiamme vp. fs


pyres ga £. Confiance, accord, barmonie,
asa r be ; > <<
Confiderer. To confider, aduife vpon, thinke of; exa- de Dent Goo Drop =
or, » perpend, renolue , or weigh im the | Conforant. Legian cde pee gy ecing
: in ing with.
Confierge. See Concierge. Confone. 4 s
Configtation:£.4 er 3 prefentation,exhibi- Canon To accord confort, agree , or found , a-
ting, sions dns : de ap pme eee CE Shi
owne of a pawne, :m. ts, mates, fellowes, complices, par-
oom if ~ fet ax nt a full famping, or takerscompanins neighbours, whofe land be
ure of. together. .
Co of. d,exbibi } : » My wife, ,
Pc conne
or appointed ouer ; alfo,delimered,or layed downe,as a | Confoulde: f. e Comfrey, C d, Affe-
Sflake,pavone,or ¢ : R aytos A ~ eave, Kpitbacke, Backwort,
| Con-
| Go gle THE OHIG EU) wae


ay


:
.
+
|


A... |:


‘ ¢ ON


C-0:N.


Confoulde moyenne, Middle Confound, middle
Comfrey, browne Bugle ; alfo,the great white Daifie.
Confoulde royale. Larks heele, Larks fpurre,Larks
toe,Larks claw, Monks bood, Kings Confound.
La grande Confoulde. Comfrey Confound, great
eye, as Confoulde.
La petite Confoulde. The ordinarie little Daifie,and
Bruifewort ; cr,as Petite Confire.
Confourde.  Confonlde. j

| Confpection: £. A conipeétion, feeing,bebolding.

Confpiration: f. A confpiracie.
on{piré: m. ée: £ Conspired ; contriued,or complot-
ted; entred into a conSpiracie,with others.

Con! pirer. To conspire ; to enter into a confpiracie ; to
soyne or agree,in a plot or opinion, with others.

Conftamment. Conflantly, fledfaflly , firmely, fla-
bly, vnremoueably, perfèueringly, ener alike, in one
manner,

Conttance : f. Conflancie, flabilitie, fledfaftneffe,firme-
ne(]e,unremoneablene[fe,per {ener ance firength of con-
tiuance.

Conttant. (onflant fledfaft, firme fable; durablefure,
[etled,unr cmoueable,perfenering,euer the fame.

Confter. Il confte. (as the Latin ImperfnallConftat)
it is cleere, plaine, certaine, euident, manifeft, appa-

© rant; generally agreed on, out of all doubt, without a-
ny marrer of controuerfic. TT

Conftellation : f.4 conjlellation,or affemblie of flarres
together in one figne. RTE

Confternation: f. Confternation, aflonifbment, dif:
may ; a great,or flupifying feare. UE an ds

Confterné: m. éc: f. 4/ionifhed, difnayed, amazed, a~
mated,dciected in courage beart-fallen; afraid.

ri Ta aflonifh,difinay, amaze, dull, deieét, a-
matesaffray.

reine gk m. ce: f. Conflipateds coftine, or bound in

ele. ' ,

Conttitu: m. 4x order,inflitution,decree, fentence,con-
Jlitution,ordimance,att, ftatute; a matter throughly en-
atted, or determined. ‘ st

Conttituant : m. He that appoiateth to bis place,or fet-
tech in bis roome,fome other.

nftituant: m. ante : f. Conflituting, making, crea.
ting; ordaining; appointing,affigning unto; el ing;
Setling,or confirming in. — Le

Conftitué: m. ée: Fa Conftituted,made,ordained, crea-
ted; appointed vato,cflablifbed, fetled, confirmed in;
alfo, concluded. ae
Conttitué prifonnier. Taken prifoncrsalfa,arrefled,
apprebended, Ÿ en


Conftitué fur vn’affaire. Imployed as a Committee,


or Commiffioner in a matter. METRE
Renteconftituéc. Arent upon morgage; or, a re
thats raifed vpon,or procured by A
Conftituer. To conftitute, ma cytes “ create; ap-
| Paton fine oma a ee 7 cn
| frrme,in.. net SI PP TS
. Conftituer vne Rente fur, Te raifé a rent upon ; or,
é to charge with a Rent. > AUX )


: LonEtitueu : md coi maker gd # no |


= Digitized by Go gle


2 THE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSFEY,
: te ol =


plexion of the bodia.. »,,, r mitts À
aaa ppp rep à 2 ig
aming ; alfo,a conflruing,or expofition >
Con wick: m. iéte: f par re ER
firued, or expounded. ‘Wis
Conftruire. To build,make,frame, found ; alfo,to.con-

ffruesor expound, words,
Contiupemien : fi Aconflupration, ranifhingdeflen-
ring efiling of a woman.


Co rer. To confluprate, rcuifh, defloure, defile a
woman.
Confubftantial: m. ale : f. confubftantiall ; of the


fame fubftance, or fluffe wher eof another is made,
Confübftantialité:f. Confibjtantialitie ; the being of
the fubjtance whereof another 15 made.
Confuivre. See Confuyvre, |
ful:m. A Confull. (The old Romanes chefe yearely
two Confuls,to gouerne their citie, and command their :
Armies: In Paris, Les Contuls are fixe boncft;and
Subflantiall citizens, who determine all cafes of debt
(not exceeding 5001. Tour.) betweene Marchant,and
chant; Their authoritie continues but a yeareyand
punifhment they can in flit is but imprifon-
ment : In moft Cities of Aquitaine the chiefe Gonernors
are tearmed Confuls ; the ref? of the good townes in
France baue fich Confuls as Paris, by the names of,Les
on Confüls des Marchands.)
Confülat:m.A Confulfhip;the cffice,or place of a Conful.
Confultatif: m. iue: £ Confülratine ; confulting.
Qui a voix confültative.##o{in a Court,or Counfell)
propounds bis opinion, deliuers bis aduice, or grues bis
pire an Affiftant ; but neither concludes,nor deter-
+ 5,5 ludge.
obus. f. A confültation ; a folemue delibera-
= ting ov difcuffing of;a deliberation,aduifiment,or paw-
fing, on. ,
Confülte. as Confultation. x
Confulté. Confulted,deliberated,pondered of...
Confulter. To giue,or take,aduifes to confit, or delibe-
rate; ponder,or thinke of; reft,or paufe on,the matter.
Confulteur: m. aie a counfellor x an aduifer ;


€ -


:m, A Coulis, ’ :
:m.€e: f Confumed,vwafled spent out,worne


way, brought unto nothing.
Chine te waficonfume, spend ouit,weare away, de- ||


pei than: vnto nothing. : ;
mption: f. A confumption ; defirudlion; confi.
ming,wafling wearing euts pining away. £


) e. To onertake,reach, attaine vato; alfo, to |
‘. get,obtaine,atchiene. + +5 EB
Confyre : f. See Confire.
Contablerie: f. A Conftablefbip ; the office of a Confta-


°_ ble; orsplace wherein bis office is kept. ;
Contact: m. 4 mutuall touching,or carnall feelingone |
of another. ' ras


Contadin::m. 4 countreyman,bind, fivaine, clove, |!
booresbusbandman, = ï At


so: destin pe repertin " If |
mberin a Lohse che


counting,num : .
Argent contant. Sheere money, veadie coyne


ù it =


Argent contant porte medecine. La
~~ Vous


Original-from
= 3


Be i Nad
‘oct.
de CREME TI


<


ew


dk,


CON


CON


—————————_—_—_—_————_—————————————————_ —_——
Vous vous abufez contant. You abufe your felfe o- Cest: m. ée: £. Countenanced, fanoured, gra-


peñly, plainly, cas
Vous avez perdu tout contant. You bane flatly, vt-
terly,abfalutely lf.
onte : m. Az Earle, See Comte.
Conté : f. 42 Earledome. See Comté.
Conte: m. A ape ss Er tale,fib,fable. See
Compte.
Contes de la Cigogne. Foolifhyidlevaine, fantafli-
call ftories ; tales of a tub, or dened borfe.
Contes de la quenouille. Old wines tales.
Fin de conte. To be briefé,to conclude,to 6 come to an
end ; or,inthe end of bis tale.
Ilsen fontleurs contes . It is their common table
talke; tis growne to be a publicke, or or dinarie ieafl a-
mong them.
Vn conte attire l'autre: Prov.One tale drawes on a-
nother.
De fot homme on n’ en peut faire vn bon conte:
Prov. A fats whole life affoords not one good tale.
mte: m. Az account. See Compte.
Ie {gay le conte de mon argent. I know bow much
money I haue.
temné: m.éc : f. Contemned,deppifed, (corned neg-
lected, fet at naught.
mtemMement: m. A contemning, defpifing, feor~


ning,negletting, fetting at naught.
Contemn


er. Tocontemme, fcorne,de(ifè,negle£t, make

Pas ln t.
Contemneur. A contemner, defpifèr, [corner ; a dif-
dainefüll per(on ; one that fauffes at eue thing, and
likes nothing, or one that neglects, or difèfieemes, ane-


Contemperé: m. ¢e: f. Seafoned, mingled, tempered
a


Contensperer, . To temper, feafon, qualifie, mingle one


Contnplter ine ‘contemplate grea thinker ferious


Contemplatif: m.iue: £ Ms su mufing,thin-
king much ynind-bebolding meditating.

latifs: m.Certain Friers(of S.Marie Maud-
lins Order) who feed on all forts of. tof feb, and weare
blacke upper babits,and white under ones.

Contemplation: f Contemplation deepe confiderati-

Ps rstel Va = pr ofsprofound mufing on,a matter.


m.éc: f. Contemplated,deeply confidered,
dr
hog 7 ja mer are oer aga confide-
en ES
Con templeur. as Con


ss rf en: ia Sif time.
nternpt: m. Contempt,fcorne.
ae à com. ee ne to
be ftorned,neg ly regard
ge £. resem apr.
e,bebanior carriage; prefence
oat) get bodie ; alfa, x + yep litle
ar pe women bold before their faces, to re
freien fromthe Lies beat bn fire; all
the fall looking glaffe which fome
their girdles sic Sain , 0


Lies contenance. Grace fill audacitie,comelie
boldneffe ; 4 conflant and pleafing fet, or garbe of the
countenance.

Contenancer.T countenance,fasor,grace,maintaine,
fan countenance unto; alfa, to frame, or fet the face

del 3 10 giue it a grace fill and conflant garbe.
endre. To firine,contend,brable,debate,wrangie,
CE at oddes,or variance, with.

Contenir. To containe,boldor comprebend; alfo;to bri-
dlesreftraine,moderate ; kecpe in.

Secontenir. To refraine forbeare withbold from.

Content. content, Satisfied, pleafed with what be bath ;
alfo,indifferent, which takes all things well.

Coeur content & manteau fur l'efpaulc : Prov. In
an boneft eflate ho meane ae there is great con-
tentment to be found. . See Coeur.

Contenté: m. ée : f. Contented,{atisfied, fatiated. fully
pleafed,throughly appeafed.

Contentement: m, Satisfation, contentment, fil plea
Jinre,or delight in; alfo,indifferencie.

Faire contentement. To doe one reafèn,er gike bim
fatisfaition.

Contenter. To content, fatisfie, fatiate, fulfill the mind,
or appetite; alfo,to pleafe ; quiet,pacifie.
SeContenter. To line at refi,be in a ateafes
toquiet,pleafe content bimfelfe with.

Affeza qui fe contente: Prov. we/zy, 4 ‘contented
mind is a great treafure;or,is worth all,

Contentieufement. Contentioufly, litigionly, debate-
filly, with much wrangling.

Contentieux: m. eufé : f Contentious, debatefiull,
wrangling litigious, full of controuer fic.

ntention : f Contention, firife, debate, variance,
controucrfie, quarrelling ; brawling, tarring , brab-
ling.


Contento#Droié de Regiftre, ou de con. # x1. s.
Tour. upon enery Charter; The fee of the Audienciers
of Chaunceries.

Contenu: m. ué: f Contained, comprehended, held


in.

Contenué: f. Capacitie; or, a containing.

Conter. To tell fa »fpeake, report, deliuer, declare, ex-
preflerlateeckon™p
Tu m'en veux pr Thow art difpofed to talke.
Tu nous encontes bien. Tu awife tale you tell vs;
or,fucha tale pifi a goofe.
Vn homme qui conte vingt & onze. .4 coxcembe,
noddypeake,ninnyhammer.

Contereau. # Comptereau. 4 bill of reckoning,


Ore.
Conterolle : m. as Concéesoclle;


nm er ne
ing,or calling to witneffes alfo, a conte

pei resfeniog, brabling about a matter ; alfo,a
conteflation again(t ; a gainfaying,denying, or waging,
of Law.


teftation de caufe. An opening,before a Iudge,
the jhe Points contained in the Bit and Anfwer.


Conteftation en caufe. A Rule given by the Ind, ge
Bar ye faces 222 tat t


defeaden homes default,or money “pri à bis


fei b
Pr


FgiInalLtTTOM


THEOHIO'STATE UNE ahi 2 ae


he


CON: CON


Conteftation vraye. 4 refolute,or peremptorie con-
Me FR made by both parties.

Contelté: m. ée:f. Contefled; protefted ; called, or
taken to witnele; al debated,reafined,argued,brab-
led about ; a{fd,den::d,gainfayed, contefted againfi.

Contefter. To conteft ; call,or take to witneffe, make an
earneft proteflation, or complaint unto; alfo, to brable,
argue, debate 2 matter with; alfa, to denie, gainefay,
conteft againf.
Contefier la caufe. To open before a Indge the chiefe
points of the bill and anfwer.
onteur: m, An idle talker, vaine fpeaker, ordinarie
teller of old wiues tales; alfa, as Compteur; alfa, a

Counfellor,or Atturney iatertained for the pleading,or
opening of. 4 Cane in Court,

‘A fol conteur fage efcouteur: Prov. 4 foolifh tal-
her bad need to find a wife hearer; or,let bimtalke ne-
uer fo foolifhly;they ave wift enough that beare bim.

texte: m. 4 context; a whole web, compofition,
worke ; or,an iaterlacing joyning,or weaning together;
alfo, the forme , or flile of a Proces , Booke , or Dif-
courfe,

Par vn contexte. Allogetber ; with one tenour, in
om manner ; without any interruptionsor


whole round of territorie, or ground, lying next unto,
Fo about,a sa TEA 5

ntoureinents ve turningssto and

other umquiet fhrrings of thofè that bane stein
en pue le: com. Pinble: which may be turned


way.
Codecs Trine swbeclingwindng about. |
Contournant la tefle comme vn Singe qui avalle


pilier wheeling bis bead like a Mare ouer this-
tles,


pore :m. Ge: f. Turned round, wheeled er com-
about.


Contournement : 2m, A aimble turning, or win-


Contourner. To round, turne rnd oelcompafe


Contract: m. 4 contraét bar gaine agreement ; a coa-
ping ; treatie; couenant,
Contraétation: £. A bargaining contraéling,couenan-
ting with.
Contracte: m. as Contraët.
tracté: m.ée:f. Contraéled. IE td
coaped,or conenanted with.
.To contraël,bergain,agree 310 coape,chaf- |
_ _ fer, couenant with,
PRE a ne : £ The (rampes aconuulfion,or


ht finewes.
oy Bay f.4 contraction firaitening gathering,or


drawing v narrower and narrower; a making fmal-
ler in one pice then in another.
Contradiétion: £. 4 contradittion.gainfaying,thwar-
ting; acroffé werd,or {peech.
ontrahant: m. ante : f, Contracting, or making a
| _contraë.
pereignsble: com. Conflrainablecompellable.
ntraigneur. À forcer,compeller,confirainer.
Contrainét : m. éte : £. (i rpg |
thrufisor put,on againft his will
Le branfle contraingt, The fhaking of the sheets.
Contrainéte : f. Confiraint, violence, compxlfion.


Contigu: m.ué: f, Necre adioyning, fafl by,clofe toge-
ther, 1 touching one another.

Contigué : m. ée : f. Juned; layed mere, or clofe
unio. \

Contin. Mon contin. My countreyman.

Continemment. Continent! foberly, chafily s fpa-
ringly; with much temper, and moderation; abflemi-
ou

Continence; f. Continencie, fabrietie, forbearance of,
abftinence from,pleafure.
ntinent. Continent ; fober, moderate; abflinent, ab-
Slemious,delights-forbearing. |

Continu: m.ué: f. Continual, perpettäll; day by day,

without intermiffitn,or interruption intiré,wbole.

Continu à faire quelque chofe. Diligent, laborious,


tuer at it, perfewering in it. ‘A Anan contrai - Moft oer in all extre-
Fiévre continue. A continuall mn hd fit neuer

ceafeth till the bedi eefta difeafidyend, Sam contrainéte- Freely willing of! bis owne ac-

tinuation : f. 4 continuation, or boldi
without an on fp, or intermiffion ; a prfuerene. Cotttaindtement roc van yy compul[fan,by
Continuë: f 4s Continuation. . confiraint
‘Ala continué I cau cave la pierre : Prov. oft > To pa ype i force, thruft for-
length, or in continuance of time, the water pierceth ward,or againft bus will.
Contraire: com. (ontrarie aduerfe ; againflymueb dif-


Continué: m. ée: f. Continued,beld om prends
prolonged,dravne out in length, perpe

Continuël: m. élle: f. CE D roses PAP
ted, without intermiffion,daylie, that euer dureth,

Contivuëllement. Continually, incelfantly, without
one Sint ; perpetually ener fit euer.

Gontinuér. To continue, laft,bold out; proceed, per-

ai bold on; to perpaneett, prolong, draw out in


agrecing; alfo,direttly oueragainf.

« Aucontraire. Contrariwife,on the other fidesor part,

much otherwife ; 3 alfo,oueragain{t.

trarié: m. ée: f. Contraried, croffed, impugned,

thwarted, cfified with/lood,or flrouen againft.

ontrarier à. To contrarie,crof[ethwart,impugne; re

Sift, withfland firine,or be againf. :
Contrarieté:f. Contrarietiesextreame difference maine


oppofition mightie difagreemrnt.
Contnité. Continuationsa wbolenefes an imtiveneffe, Contrafte: m. withfianding, Lifes pme, m dif
” or intire coniunttion. remce,yepugnance, aN 4
: ee Contrafté: im. ée: fw
Contain: m. A Clofet,or Counting-houfe. {
| Comorion: fo A rs a PI DiNE


: Ofiginal from
THE'OHIO-STATE-UNIVERSITY
PE - ,


a


» Digne,
sa
ch may be trad
rang bout.

Sot
swbeeled,er com-
uring , oY wi
see compe
Teen ace


rabling conenst-


gaintésgred;
ta ceape dif. |
4 comuulfion,or


gathering. pr
making, fmal-


fing toa
, or making 4
npelable.
vie fr
Ü the Jheets.
À y ee
promets.
compulfian by
ce, traf fr
ned |
fides Dat
edi |


(gaunt
jmp


sfeoo |
contesté af


GON


CON


nace Againfl,contrarie to; much o, ,oppofite,
PL vate; 3 msn à on the other
, (fo, difner; contre la
pu = and Dontisies ‘im campoption # in Contre-
bas, Contremont,&c.
Il eftoit rout contre. He was very neere,or hard by ;
alfs,be was right oueragainf,them,
Halener contre. To blow upon:
Contr~adveu: m. An Anfiver, or Oppofition to a Bill
of Complaint for poffefion of moueables.
ntreadveu. See Contr-'adveu.
) Contre-advoué: m. ée : f Owned,or signed byfe-
uerall parts, one faying tis bs,another that tis his.
tr'amour : m. A ho/ie;and honeft loue;oppofite vA-
to the lafciuious,c> diffolute La crgagrrele ws commonly
tearmed loue.
peer m. ce: f. Animated, or incouraged, a-
ain
Contrañtidote: m.A remedieor poifon againfl a pre-
fèruatine ; a counterantidote,
Contrapple gement. dn Anfwer, or Oppofition, to a
Bill of Complaint for the pelfeffion of an immone-
able,


Consrebalance : f. A counterbalance, or counter:


Conrebaancé m.ée:f. Cousterbalanced; counter-
eife
Cnbalancer. To counterbalance, or counterpeife ;
to weigh againfi; or to eficeme by; to make of equall
weight with.
Contrebande.Marchandife decontrebande. Mer-
chandife that is forbidden (by Proclamation,crc.)
Contrebarre: f. 4 counterbarre; the long (outward)
barre, wherewith fome (two-leaued) doves sou wigs
dowes.and the moft fhop-windowes, are
ebatré: m. ée: £-Counterbarred; tea or
Sti onthe onfides al (in Blo) coterbr-


Feta


Contre bus Downewar
Contre-bafe: £4 ps VS loweft pate
Sis; or the part,or peece,whereon it fi
Contre-bafle: f. The Bafe part in Mufeken.
Conttebondi. Rebounded, leaped backe or againf.
Contrebondir. To rebound ; leape intaae againf.
Contreboutant. as Contrefort.
ue =" m.ée: £ Vaderpropped, borne vp, or
Orne a:
Contreboavet To underprop, fapport, beare vp, or,
cin ain pe ‘
ntrecatre: £4 couster| ength,oppe ition, refiflance,
_ defence ; (alfo, a reafoning, or arguing ) againfl; alfo,


comparifoa,or equalitie.
+ Contrecarré:m. ée : £. Setor. s4fù,
x ee a Nelo. 4


. féti roe b
Contrecedule : f eta Pirie
| Contrechange: m. 4 counterchange ; mutwall chan
ging, or. croffe exchange.


2 SR m. €¢: f. Cousterchangedseschenged :
Contrechanger: To a counterchange exchange acroffe
er. T9 SERA finging ; to anfioer in the


PAS


famen lune.
Con «To ptites interchange br
thens,or


Go gle THE ©


Contrechifre: m. A countercypher ; a note explanation ,
a of Lo cyphers 5 5 er, 48, Le Chifre d’un


Contrechifrer. To anfwere cyphers with cyphers; alfo,

. to expound Ephers 3 Alf, to requite prinat affection i in
a privat

Contrecoeur. as  Contrecueur.

Contrecourbé: m.ée: £ Bent fromward, or one from
the other.

Contrecourber. 10 bend one from another as wrefllers
doe their backes.

Contrecueur: m. Loathing, irkefomeneffe ; alfo, the
backe of a chimaey. :
Cela me vient À contrecueur. That goes againfimy
flomacke ; my thoughts leath, mind bates, heart ab-


Con it: m. A contradiétion, gaimefaying ; refita-
es hematin; Aaa a replec oe
wing of the contrarie.

Contrediét: m, iGte : £ Contradifted, gainefayed ;
thwarted, contraried in words; refelled, refuted, con-


fisted.
Contredigué im. €e: £. Fenced, or fortified with
bankes and ditches againf bankes and ditches. .
Contrediguer. To fence,or fortifie with banks and dit-
ches ; orto pei ‘fet vp,banks againft- banks.
ntredire. To contradiét,eaine{ay,thwart,croffe,con-
trarie in words ; alfo,to Les, confitte.
Contredifant : m. ante: f, Crojing, contraditting,
thwarting, gainfaying; quarrelfome, contentious, con-
tratie,croffe.
Contredife : f. 4s Contredite.
Contredite: f. 4 contradittion,or croffe fpeech.
Contrée: f A (ountrey, Land, Region, Part, Coaft,
con forts fi
ntreftort:m.A counter effort;or effort vftd
force; bare: 2 [riune, refiflance, i hac
and firrin, herfarie. hint


g
| Carr dl der. Ta counteritcounterfikescounterdeft


counterfquixe; to breake a firoke, or dafh, cc, with a
oake,or da

Coupé eeampe: fA counterftarfe, or countermure in
a fortified towne.

Contr'efchangé: m. éc : f Counterehanged,
ontr'efthanger. as Contrechanger... ©.

Contrefeript: m. 4 reply. vato PTE
inp eae + ge a confutationsor sreatife mitten a-


Cue m. ipte: £ Con, d, written againft;
alfo,copie emt cg Ne


Deere To confer rite ginhale spi
Conte: m. ml ee trial of.


“tae 5 Dre perre |
water of a Pondithats
cree To withfland, ref, contend ‘to re.


MOVE


Se


pugne. : =
= | eee m.iéte: f.Counterfeit,adulterate À
de, d,
Res


Ce To enunterfitimitatere mble.faine.


CPE oa Filth me


. other then be is.
Conte-fenfre ue mqermnt
D a pelt


. Secon


FT OS CES D CT


Les -


eS ia UU


CON


= "Ml | a ae a a


Ed,


CON


Contrefente: £. The bruife , or craxe of a bone isans-
ther,or oppofite, part to the place where the blow (that
caufèd it ) was giuen ; this happens, efpecially,in the
5


fall.

Contreferme.A see à + to coléter-auouch-
ment ; an affirmation of that whereof another affirmes
the contrarie.

Contrefermé: m. ée : f. Counter-affirmed, counter-
var 3 the contrarie whereof is affirmed, or auou-

_ched,

Contrefermer. To oppoft an affirmation unto an affir-
mation ; to affirme the contrarie of that which another
bath affirmed ; a Law-tearme.

Contrefeu: m. 4n yron backe,or Plate for the backe,of
a chimney,

Contre-fil. à contre-fil, Contrariwife,cleane kamme,
or againft the baire.

Contrefinefle : £.counter-cunning,deceiuing of the de-
ceiner;the meeting with as craftie a knaue as bimfelfe.

Contreflaté: m, ée: f. whofe flatterie 1s requited, or
anfwered with flatterie.

Contreflater. To returne one faire word,or flatterie for
another; to flatter as fifi as another.

Contreflux: m. An ebbe, or ebbing ; the fall, or going
out,of a Tide; or a checke,or flop,onto a Tide, y

Contrefort. (iw Architetiure)a Buttreffe,prop,or [bore-
poft; an vp-bearing arch,or pillar.

Contrefortuner. To arme againft the iniuries of for-
tune ; to make fhift for one (bow/oeuer the world goe.)

Contrefrontail: m. The brow-peece, or upmoft poff, of
a dore ; a baunfè,or breaft fummer.

(Que en a A counter-gage, Entre t 4
ué aucuns feigneurs ont pr
voir de leur auGorité faire MG qubhd' Gé lon
avoit faittort. @Ragueau.
ntre-garde: m. An under warden, or counter-
= ibe ; of the
ontre-garde pese es. An Officer of t
Mint; wie takes notice, and keepes a ne, of
the mettall that is delinered into be coyned;and after-
ward ouerfèes the working thereof, together with the
warden, whofe place be executes, (as the otber bis) in
abfence. oT BI


Contregardé: m.ée: f
much of looked well unto "#0 "Pre
der. To keepe, fawe,preferue,conferue,looke
well to,make much of, 0 7
Se contregarder, To referue,Spare,on forbeare bim-
Self’; to take bis eafe. > - oprah satin
ntrehaftier : m, À Rackesto turne (pitson.
os mena spb ie 929 =
ntr-"imiter. To refemble. » imitate counter fit or to
imilate one that imitates bim. ©


| ©. that counterpeifeth


cf the contraét.

trelouér. To returne praife with praife, or a

word for a good word; to commend pr at =
mended bim before ; to feratch the backe of one who
bath alreadie d bis elbow, |

Contrelutté:m. ée:f. wrafled, riven, contended


againft, }
Contrelutter. To wraflle,firiue,contend againft.
Contre-maifire : m. The Maifters mate ma fhip.
Contremanche : £.A falfé fleewe,balfé fleene,or,draw-
er ouer a fleeue. :
mand: m. A countermaund ; a reuoçalion, or
contradittion of a former commaund.
Contremandé : m. €e: f. Countermaunded ; contra-
Contremandement: m.4 countermaund or counter-


Gonereniander. To countermaund ; to recall, or con-
“tradiét,a former commaund.

Contremarque: f. 4 countermarke.

Contremejane. The fécond mizen, or after-mixen,ofa


Contrementir. To fèr one ty a ainf another.
Contremettre. tapers , lay, fet; or wage a-


Contremine: f. À countermine ; 2 mine digged,by de-
féndants within a fortreffe, to meet with another made
by the enemie,withont it.

iné: m. ée: f. Countermined.
aoe. To rr
- ont. Vpward; alfo up ; as,

Contremont l'eau. Zp de: water, direËlly againft
the flreame.


Contremonté : m.ée:f. Mounted,or got vp againft.
Contremonter. To mount,or goe vp hr
iNtremunir.To fortifie inner or binder parts, thereby

tofuftaine the outward, or forward, ones; alfo, to re-
Paire fuddainely fuddaine ruines ; as in a fiege.

Contreoffrir.T0 change his offer;to offer otberwifé then
tee or, tomake an offer contrarie ta that be made

Jae) > (NY Sen ner’ t


CR nes
Contrepan: m.A pled, ” ejor pawne,efpecially of an À
‘immoueable; (It (ram) the eight pennie of tbe
worth of land as it is eure Hypotheque. .
itrepané : m. ée : £ Pledged,pawned,engaged.
ntrepaner.To pledge, pawae,engage an immoueable; À.
alfo, as Compenfer. :
trepant. .4 gage; ov counterpane ; or as Contre~
D) pan: ‘

Chair Lé:m.ée: f. Diflikedor diftrufied after li- |
doser craft 3 thought bn of then before.
Contrepenfer. To thinke otherwife then be bath dene;

to diflike a thing which he bath affected, or difirufl thofe
~ whom be bath velyed on. 12 LE TIO
Contrepenfeur: m. 4 counterthinker ; one that thinks
otherwife then,or contrarie to, that be bath done; ene
that changes,or doubis of, the conceit, or affurance bee


efant. Counterpeifing ; countéruailing.


ontrepefé. Count À HARAS
- er. To connterpeife; counteruaile, weigh in
q Lance, 0 8 ETT TE


_ Mal poife qui necontrepoife: Prov. He peifetb ill
ns font good lucke aright

that thinkes not enides not fir ill lucke.
ntrepeter. T0: ‘one cracke with anotber;alfe, |
to counter feit,or play the counter feit. ‘©
$ “a


7
F


‘


Or ut Ty


THE OHIO STATE


OF
UNIVERSITY


CON


CO IN”


Contrepicqué :m.ée: £. Countergir ded,counterpric-
ked,counternipped, EUR
Contrepicquer. To retumme gird for gird ; to gine a zip
‘for a nip; or,one pricke for another. , AA
Condespiats That which we call Counter in bunting;
AGE;
Tenir contrepied à. To fer, or hold bis foot againft
another mans, thereby toftop bim from going any fur-
ther to croffe, or impeach all he may the defignes, or
. _ enterprifes of another, :
Contrepleige:m. A Counterfureties one thats bound
to faue a furetie harmele(fe.
Contrepleigement sm, A counterband ; or ,the fecu~
vitie gruen toa fuertie.
Contrepleiger. To faue a faretie harmeleffe by coun-
terband , hc; Te giue bim a counterfuretie,or other
fecuritie.
treplié :m,ée : € Bent,bowed, or foulded backes
made firaight thereby.
Contreplier. To bend,bow,or fauld backe ; to make, or
fet flvaight by fach a bending,érc.
trepoids. 2s Contrepois.
Contrepoil. à contrepoil. Againft the wool, the
wrong way,cleane coatiarie, quite kamme.
gaque ie tefpluched contrepoil. Secke Efplu-


cr.

Contrepoinét : m. The backe itch, or quilting flitch;
alfo,a quilt,counterpoint, (quilted) conering ; alfo, a
croffing, difference eppolition ; alfd,a ground or plain-
Song (in Muficke.) r j
‘Acontrepoinét; ou à contrepoinéts.By 4 quil-
ting with quilt (litchsor in a quilted fafhion; alfoyback-
ward and forward , interchangeably ; now one way
then another; alfo, croffely, thwartly, oppofitely, con-
ph 4: TT De poin&.

incte : f. as Contre
ey : m.ée : f. Quilted, wrought with the
backe ftitch; alfo, inter ed, fetbackeward and
Sra rdsrefmie againft opposed, or in eppofition
with. ,


Tay la peau toute contrepoinétée de coups: y
skinne-coat hath receiued as many knockes as aquilt
bath fiitches..

Contrepoinéter. To quilt,to worke the backe flitch,or
worke with the backe flitch; alfo,to interchange,or (et
backeward and forward ; alfo,to croffe thwart, pere
unto, fland oppofite againfi, bee in oppofition with,

Conmepotattion: mi, A Quilter, or quilt-maker.

Con int; 8 Contrepointer ; # Contre-
poindes &


Contrero


ont


* de amiffe.


vnto whom les,


© ler general of


; & Contrepoinéter.
Contrepointerie: £. The flop ofa Quilter, or Coun-
Contrepois :m, Connterpois , equall weight; alfa,

pie à . 08 5 1895 47%


1584.
. Contreroll


laine-[ong, in Muficke, % be payed ouer by the
Paiterecomepnis: To counterpoifé, balaft, make of | Ad ere dom
enen or equall weight, +e MRSS
Marcher à contrepois. To walke freine
and leuell ; to proportion,or meafure out bis \
trepoifon: m.4 counterpoifon,antidote,medicine, !
or prefernatine againft poifom. 1) rall (in whofe bouf it
Contreporteur : m, # Bifoiiart(So tearmed, becaufe
she carries bis packeor burthen before bim)
rence: m.ce : f. Counterpotencie(a tearme of | _… nery fort of coyne foc
uying,and conuby,


J . 6 Contr haze have nu :
Conan nec, mai cmt. |
Co nce:f. A counter-acquittance. > >
Cone can


KL


Digitized CO: gle THE C


Contrerepliquer. To replie againe,or againf.
Contrerolle : m.4 controlement,or contrarolement;the
2, copie of a voll (of accounts érc;) a Paralell of the fame
« qualitie and content, with th'originall; alfoja control.
op ling, or onerfecing ; and,th Office of a Controller, or om
- He ter alloya Controller,or oucrfeer.
\Contrerollé; m.ée : f. Controlled, ouerfeene, obfer-
ued; alfithe copie whereof istaken,and kept.
. To controll; obferue,ouerfee , (pie faults
in ; al{o, to take and keepe a copie of a roll of accounts ;
. to play the controller any way.
:m, À Controller ; obferuer, oner{eer;
properly, an Officer that takes notes, or keepes avoll of
another Officers accounts thereby to difèouer bim if be


a LL

_ Contrerolleurs des Aides. Controllers of th Aides,
looke that the Efleus, Affeffors, Collectors, and Recei-
uors of Subfidies doe their ducties ; of all the particu-
lers whereof they muft cuerie yeare fend a roll into the
Chamber of Accounts.
Contrerolleur de l Audience de France.The Con-
troller of the Chancerie attendant on the kings perfan;


Contrerolleurs des Chanceleries (whereof there
is in-enevie Court of Chauncerie one) fend balfe-yeare-
ly a particular account of the reuenue of the Sealere-
ceiued in their feucrall places.
ntrérolleurs du Domaine. Controllers of the
© Kings Demaine ; one e(tablifhed in enerie feat of ordi.
narie Recent for the Demaine; who is to afsift at the
Said Receit ; at the making of leafes of farmes; and at
the fales of weod,wine,corne, bay, ffb, rc, got in the
Kings landss.and is totake notice of all eftheats, due.
tiessañd rights of Seigneurie, dueor occurring thereby;
and kecpes a veckoning of all works reparations ,almes,
cofts of fuit,and other charges,defrayed by th’ordinavie
Receinors Of all which be makes a roll, and fends it |.
unto the Treafurers generall, who therby keépe in awe
the faid Recetuors..
{ r gencralde l’Artillerie. The Confrol-
Ordnance ; next in-place, and degree
unto the Lieutenant: be kecpes a Regifler of all muni-
tion that comes into,er gots out of, the flore; and Inuen-
tories (deliuered vnto bum by the Warden general) of
allthatremaines in particular Fortreffes, ec and
certifies them, with bis controlement of them, euerie
yeareyinto th’ Exchequer.
Contrcrolleur general du Domaine, One
Shed in euerie. generalitie by Henry ;
yeare 1581 ,and fupprelfed again by bimfèlfe in the yere


curs generaux des finances; One ime-
uerie general Reccit, who lookes that the kings money.
particular Receiuors (or farmers)
| to which end they ave to bring
untabim the others acquitances,which if they omit, or
flacke, be informes the Treafurers generall who the

isin. The money being paied,
of the cheft wherein tis layed, and the Receiuor gene
) another; this untill, a-
mouating vntoa round fumme,they both together fee it
ps | unto th’ Exchequer. Of all which,as alfo ofe-
onseyed,and of the charge of le-


. torie into the Chamber of Acccount, —


Secretaire, & Con.gencral


s À mp
s guerres. The Co:
|: troller general of the warres ; Looke Secretaire.”


:
|

:

x

“


C O.N


Contrerolleurs des Mines.Controllers of the mines;
euery one wherof is bound to fend, from yere to yere one
Roll,or controlement (containing the proportion of fil-
uct, which bath beene deliuered bythe Mafter of the.
mines unto the mafters of the mint,or otherwife drawn
from , and fined within , the faid Mines that yeare)
unto the Receiners,or Treasurers within whofe charge
the Mines are ; and another unto the chiefe Maifter of
the Mint.

Contrerolleurs provinciaux, ou ordinaires,des
guerres. Prouinciall,ordinarie, or inferior Controllers
of the warres ; muft,in the fèuerall Prouinces affigned
unto them, be prefent at all Mufters and fifteene _ ag
after euerie one, fend unto the Controller generall a


Summarie thereof, containing, the inft of the
men that were muftered,and an account of the moneys
paid,or laid out thereat.


Conteroolle : & Contreroolleur; as Contrerolle,
&c.
Contrerufe: f. Acounter-fleight; a wile for avvilesene
tricke in lieu of another.
Contre-fanglot:m. 4 Tab; the leather whereto a
girth is faficned ; a girth-leather.
Contrescarpe. A counterfcarfé, or countermure,
Contrefcedule: m. The counterpane ofa Schedule,
Contrefchange : m, 4 counterchange, interchange,
croffe exchange.
Contrechangé : m.ée: f. Counterchanged
Contrefeel : m. 4 (little) pale unto alabell , ec,
whereby diners writings alreadie fealed are ioyned, or
clofed together; a counter-feale, yi Tash
Contrefeeller. To feale the Labell, &e, whereby fealed
writings are ioyned,or faflened together, © |
Contrefigné:m. ée :f. Subjigned ; figned after, or
under ,the fignature of another. AH)
Conerchgner. To fubfigne ; to figne aletterjerc, or put
is name or fet bis marke unto it,afleryorvunder, ano~
ther ;({o doe the French Secretaries of State fet their
names unto letters Patents under the Kings.)
Contrefing: in. A fubfignature ; a band; name, or
marke , fet to a letter, c,vnder another ; a fubjcripti-
on made lower than th’ other. uy
Contrefommer. To reuoke, or countermaund, a Sum
mons,or Citation. :


Contrefonné :m.ée: EThecantrarie whereof i foun-


ea. MT
Contrefonner. To found the contrarie , or to the con.
trarie. ;
Contre-foufflé:m.ée: £.couster-blowne,croffe-blown;
blowne on both fides, or blowne vp two contrarie
wayes, |
Contretaille :£ The one part of a tallie, or {eorealvea~
die marked or notched; alfo,the Counter-tenor part, in
Maficke and be that fings or beanes,it,
taluér. To oppo, Finks on balay Pally ©
~ dal to refifior firengthen, as with a double
anke,0v canfey. oes
Contretemperament: m. 4 croffésor contrarie tem-
rs; whence ; LE on EE Sade tint}
Faire yn contr. ala nature. To alter nature,
se ea Ul, or falfe time ; or, motions out of


Contreteneur : m. The Counter-tenor part in Mua |
ete Wiest 5 4 vat ids mh


Contreteir 79


Digitize cg Go. gle vee


CON


Coperenedes = ep on th otber fide; alfo,clai-
med,challenged,quarelicd for, pretendcdrnto,
Contretefte. faire c fic


Date pra c x à; To withfland, re-
,make bead againft, |
Contretiré: cite if, Drawne againft; alfo,drawne


after the patterne of.
. To tug, bale pull; birle, throw, fling, a-


gainft ; alee draw after the patterne of.
On: fA counter-treafon; treafon againft


treason. :
Contretrancher.To conter-trench,cr fertifie againfi an
enemie intrenched.
retrayerfant : m. ante :f. Counter-croffing,coun-
ter-tr auerfing.
treval. Downeward; alfo,dewne.
trevenant : m. alte :f. Swarxing, tranfgrefing,
departing from ; going, or doing againfi an agreement, |

» promife,or bargaine ; alfd, croffing, thwarting, contra-

diéting ; refifling.
trevengé : m, ée: f Fully reuenged.

Contrevenger. Toreuenge one blow,or inixrie,with a-
nother,

Contrevenir. 'T¢ fwarue, tranfgreffe decline,go,or de-
part from ; to do contrarie to promife,or otberwife than
was agreed ,alfo,to croffe,thwart,contradict, refift or
be againft.


Contrevent:m. 4 contrarie mind,
eventer. Tobold againft the wind :qRab,
Contrevention : f. A fivaruing from a promife,or con-
_ brat; a going againft ones word ; alfà , a thwarting,
contradiétion ;refiftance.
Contrevenu : m. ué: f, Swarued, tranfgreffed , gone
% from bis word , or agreement ; alfo, croffed, thwaïted,
refified,oppofed againft.
ntre-vitre.À counter-window ,outward-window,or
fence for a glaffe window.
Contreuve. 4 fibleafing ; tale of muention ; or matter
inuented, * ÿ ;
Contribuable : com. Contributable ; fitable,or agcn-
flomed,to contribute; liable, or fubieët unto contribu
tion,
Contribué. contributed.
Contribuer.7ocontribute,to gine,or disburf2 together,
pce mean ki to lay their moneyes toge-


Contributeur..4 contributer.
arendcontributeur. See Garent.
Contribution: f 4 contribution ; a ioynt gift of many;
vali, as Defconfiture ; A diftvibution, o7 {having of a
debtors, or bankrupts gocds among all-bis creditors, :
Ré: me: f, Griened, afflitted, made forvew-'


Cntr To grieue, fadden, affliét make forrow-


Contrit : m. ite: f, Contriteaggrieued,remorfifill,mof
penitent, or forrowfull, fir mifdeeds.
ition : f. Contrition, rcmorfe,sepentance; benrlie
Sorvow,jnward lamenting for a paincfirll apprebenfion,
or memorie of, offences. Lahore
ontrole,& controolle.« Contrerolle. » *
Controngle: f.The Deaw-claw,or water-claw ofdogs,
5 =, ai Lu
rover{é : m. ée :f Litigicnsim comtvoner fie ; fill
of firife,and controuerfies alfo,gainfaid called in oe
vy ifputed againfls made;or bandled as, a contre:


WK % Da RME à, Abe: 97 :
Controuerfe :£ controwenfie, variance, debate, fri,
altercation, = = ee


Original trom


THEOHIO-SIATE UNIVERSITY


-C.O-N


Controure: m.ée:f. Fained, forged, inuented , de-

uiféd. -

Controuvement :m. Afainiag, a i ; a mat-
ter muented,mecre imagination, forge fe oc
Controuvér. To faine, forge, deuife, inuent, imagine,

out of his owne braize.

Contr-ouverture. A counter-opening ; See
trouvrir. ; ale

Controuveur : m. A fainer, forger, inuenter, deuifer,
ber. a sa

Coatr'ouvrir, To open counter, to make areuoltion ; to
pierce,or aber a thing (as a part of the bodie) either
farre of, or appofitely againft, the place tb'aucrture 1
intended for.

Contumace : £: Stubbornenelfe ,obflinacie, wilfilacffe,
porusifèneffe; difobedience,contempt.

Conturnacer. Todeale flubbornely, be peruerfe; follow
bis owne will ; difobey,or rebell againt bis fuperiours;
to make a contempt ; alfo,to iudge,or proceed againft,
as difabedient,abjtinate, rebellious; to punifh,or cen-
(ure,a contempt,

Côntuinax : m. ace : £ StuSborne , fullen, refradta-
rie,rebellious,contemptuous, difobedient ; obflinate,
flife-neched, headfirong, wilfull, beadie, felfe-willic:
(The French Lawyers make , deux efpeces descon-
tumax; The fir/t, fitch as after three feuerall,and pub.
like, fummons refüfe to appeare , the fecond,thofe that
appearing fland mute, and will not anfwer; A filence
which imports a confe(fion.)

Creme :f. Contumelie ; reproach, an outrage in
words ; a {pightfisll reproofe,iniurious cbecke, fcaada-
lows or flanderous rebuke.

Contumelieufement. contumelioufly,reproach fully in
defpightfulltearmes. Sa

Coatuinelicux :m.eufe : f. Contumelious ; reproach-
fill ? defpightfull , outragious or moft imiurious, in
words, à

Contundre. To beat,knocke, thuanpe, bruife, pound, or
flampe in peeces. rat aR HART

Contufion :f. 4 knocking,thumping, bruifing, beating,
pounding ftamping.

Contuteur : m. 4 foynt Tutor,er Gardéin,.

Conu: m.uë:f. Krowne,érc; as Cogneu.
onvaincre. To conuiét,conuince, take tardie , prooue
“faultie ; find in the manner. ‘

Conyairicu: m. ué: f. Conuitted,conuinced;takentar-
die.proued faultie , found in the manner.

Convalefcence: €. 4 recouerie of bealth, ftrength,and
and vigor ; a waxing flrong againe. '

idé: m.ée: f. Reconered, reflored vntobealth,


growne well againe. ACER
ts bealth,or firength.


Con-


alider.Torécouer,to refer
Convaflal: m. A fellow vaffall. +1
Convenable: com, Conuenient ; apt, fit, meet for; a-
grceable, fitable,according vato ; proper comelie, de-
cent, befeeming, feemlic. Ee 1°
Conven nt. Conueniently ; aptly, fitly, agreea~
Sie tht secs ed à


;
Convenance : f. 42 accord, concordance, agreement,
condition; couenanting ; al/o,conueniencieproportion,
~bandfomene(fe,agreeablene/fe. :
Conyenancé: m.ée: f. Couenanted ; agreed; promi-
Radcontsaited vpon couenants.


. To couenant, bargaine, contract, agree
ouenants, SNS


Convènéés mA couenant,or agreement upon coue-
nant ; «conditional bar gaine,or contract ; a faithfull,


igitized by Go. gle


sings [uiting with ; befitting,befeeming.


|
|
Converle
Co
Converfi
f
of.
Con
Con
pile


C.O.N
_ and publicke,or folemne promise.
Convenant : m.ante: f.45 Convenable; Aifa,agree-


Convenir. Toafemble,méet,or come together; alfo,to
befit, belies ar well unto.; to be aie pKa cos
*  conuenient for ; alfo, to agree,confent accord with; al
foto couple, conclude, iayne ; come to the point.
Contvenir en juftice.To bring in fsitconuent before
a Fudge,enter an aétion againft,
I meconvient. 1 mufi;1fhould, 1. bane need, tis ne-
céllarie for me; proper,or belonging to me.
nvent: À Covent, Cloifter, or Abbey of Monkes, or
© Nunues.., >
Abbe & convent ce n’eft qu'un ; mais la bourfe fe
garde en divers lieux : Prov. An Abbot and Coucnt
_ though but one bodie baue-fèuerall mindes | ends , or
meanes. rats =
_ Pour vn Moine ne faut conyent : Prov, Ove oely
Monke deferues not an Abbey ; or, one Swallow makes
not aSummer,  - : beady
Conventicule: m. 4 conuenticle; a little, or private,
cu moft commonly, vnlaw full;orill-affeéted) ajem-
€.


Convention:-f, 4 covenant, contrat, bargaine agree:
ment ; alfo,a fuing,impleading, or connenting before a
Fudee; and, bence 3.» ;
Cecy n'eft pas de facile convention. Tha is bard
0 be compaffed by fait of Law:
nventioné. as Conyentionel,
Conventionel:m.elle :£, Contraéted,conenanted, a-
greed upon; or pafjed by contraét ; done by agreement,
under articles,or conenants.
Intereft conventionel. Intere/l, or uf for the lone
of money rc ; as in Intercht.
Propre conyentionel, Secke Propre. .
Conventuél. prieuré conventuél. 4 Priorie where-
in there are Friers. lune
Conventuéls: m. An order of Obfervantin Friers ;
not altogether fo flrit ws the ordinarie ones.
nvenu : m, Ue: f, Affembled,met,or come, together:
alfo,couenanted,promifed; accorded, 01 agreed unto,
alfo, impleaded, ued, conuented or called , before a


udge.
Convcreau: m. 4 ffhthat fomewhat refémbles but is
leffer than,th Alofe:
nvers : vn CON. À conuertite; one that bathturned
to.the Faith ; or swoon unto a religious profeffion; or
hath abandonned a loofe to follow a godlie | a vici-
ous to lead a vertuous,life, = ' :
Converfation : f. Conuerfation, commerce, great ac
quaintance, fimiliavitie,affociation,with,
nyerle: f. A Nunne (that formerly bath beené of
loofe bebauiour,or bath, in ber time,beene a good one.)
nverfer avec. To conutr{e;or be much conuerfant af
Sociate,or keepe much companie, with ; to havnt, fre-
quent,refort often vito, ;


7


nverfion :£. A comuer fon; alteration,changesa tr
ning; renolution,compafle.ar courfe of things.
Converfion Sainé Paul, 4 Holy-day bn by the


Church of Rome the xxu.0flanuarie,
Cônveïti:m.ie: f.Conuerted alicred,changed,turned,
transformed,tranflated.
vertir.Tocomuert ; alter,change,transforme,turne;
tranflate,
vertiffement : m. À converting turning altering,


eae


changing. — ere
Convartoir. Part of the bead,or chapter of an Ionian


.


Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY.


rT, =? ~


«COR


doore; any bafe feoundrell, or furuie fellow ; alfo, as
au.


C'efl vngrand cas Ia fureur de deux coquins à
Yne porte. À prouer be meant,as well of thordinarie
iarring,and thwartings that paffe between two ambi-
Hous Competitors, as of the fcoulding, or other (curuie
. Îlurre made by two bungrie, and enuions beggers at a
mans doore,
I n’eft vie que de coquins: Prov. There’s no life te
the beggers ; Looke Vie.
Il vaut mieux eftre coquu que coquin: Prov. Bet-
ter bea cuckold than a beggerlie knaue, ;
Coquin : m. ine: f, Beggerlieneedie 3 loufie ; roguifh,
vagabond-like,
Mouton coquin. 4 BeË-weatber,
Pigeon coquin. Atame Pigeon.
€ entrejetta la jambe coquine. She interpefèd
ber wanton,lafcinious, or barlots,leg.
Coquine :f A begger-woman; alfo,a cockney, fimper-
decockit nice thing.
Coquineau: m. A fcoundrell, bafe varlet, beggerlie
vafcall bea(tlie fellow.
quiner. To beg,to crane like a begger; to play the
rogue,or bafe rafcall.


quinerie: f, Beggerie, begging ; aUo,roguerie,kna-


nerie, bafeneffe ; or bafe bumors ; alfo, meats that are
more tooth{ome than bolefome; forced meats.

Coquiol :f, A degenerate Barbe, or weed, commonly,
growing among Barlie and called, Hauer-graffe,

Coguu. as Cocu.

Cor: in. A Hunters borne ; a Bugleor Hutchet ; alfa
corne in the foot ; alfo,the bard, and bornie {welling in
hor{és, tearmed,the Sit-faft. À
Cors. The broches of a Deers head ; all the pegs ther-
of from the'fecond ,or third upwards.

Cor de mer. The Sea-borne; a SoeU-$if that fome-
what refembles a horne.

“Acor & à cry. By Proclamation; alfo, might and
maine,with beaue and hoe ; eagerly , vebemently, fe»
vioufly. >

Coral. m. Corrall; ( growes in the fea, like a thicke
Shrub and is then of a greenifh colowr; taken thence,it
waxeth veriebardyand (afier ithath been be.
comes red,and (mooth ; (There is alfo a white,a black,
and a yellow, kind of Corrall.) ONE -

Oralin: m. ine:£ forralin;of Corrall, like unto Cor.
Hl,


Coraline: f. See, Corrallineser Corrall-moffe,


rapei. A Princes cloth of Eflate. ;
Corbat pefcheret. 4 Cormorant: qDauph,
Cor u : m. The Cabot fifh ; or,asC ais


Corbature. 4s Courbature.. - Sine:
au : m. A Ranen ; aÏ5,a Corbell (in Mafonri
and,a Gates be ould SA à timber mtb
a ap RS ument ; alfè; the broyled
i, os leg,o7 fhoulder, of mutton, bauing fome flefh
+ abont it. \ ty ROE IME seo a TT a el
Corbeau d'eau, A cormorant.
tbeau de mer, The fame or sthe fea-Ranen.


du nui&, The Night-Rauem,

ftr es Corben OP EEE AN a

unburied in 1} a “oH

Tromper vn Sats abouche beante, To confen

Fe estes ofa bit which be gapes after ; or , as

+ De mauvais corbeau mauvais oeuf: Pro.Of an il
Le PME TA a weeds, =


nid» ae À


COR :


La cenfure tourmente les pigeons laifiant aller les
corbeaux libres: Prov. Cenfire torments Pigeons,
and frees Rauens ; and hence are Lawes compared un-
to Cobwebs ; little flies are caught in them, great ones
breake through them,

Corbeil. The name of a towne that is not far from Paris;
and bence the pronerbiall phrafe ;
Prendre Paris pour Corbeil» take an apple for an
ne to miflake the matter quite and cleane.

% ile : £. Awicker basket, or mauad ; alfo,a dof-

er,

Qui fait corbeille il fait panier: Pro. He that makes


a basket makes a pannier; be that can do one thing can
do another,


Corbeillée : f. A basket-full of
Corbeilleux: m. eufe : £ Belonging to a basket or

maund ; alfo, full of baskets, dc. À
Corbeillon: m. little basket, pantier;er mann.
Corbieu. Gogs heart, .
Corbigeau: m. 4 Cormorant or Sea-Rauen.
Corbi ag] res “
Corbillon. # Corbeillon.

in : m. A (carrion,or carre)Crow,
Becde corbin. 4 Pentioners halberd, or pollaxe; al-
£ a Chirnrgions toole, called a Crowes-bill; See


Gaia
Oscorbin. Acertaine bollow bone in the crupper of
a Deere. y ,
Piedde corbin. ‘The hearbe Crowfoot, Kings-cob,
Gold-cups ,Gold- flower Butter- flower.
Corbiné: mée:f, Stollen, filtched, purloined, lurched;
iy age a =r 3 extreamely vfèd. .
Corbiner.70 fleale,filtch,purloine,turch;alfo,to poll,ex-
tort,or exact more than is due. |
Corbinerie : f.Stealing,filtching lurching; alfo,polling,
exattion,extortion,
Corbinet : m. The crooking of Rauens,wr Crowes.
orbineur. A filtcher,lurcher,pollerjexatler, ;
rbineurs du Palais.Lawyers,and Clerkes; which
ordinarily fleece Jurchspoll and fpoile, poore fusters,
Corcalihat :m. The crie of Quailes.. R
Corcefque:£ 4 kind of broad-beaded Faueline , or
Corchiere : f, The battlement ofawall ; alfo,(in a gal-
j ourfie.,


bé)as C on
Cordace. 4 ‘conntrey daunce: ERab.
dage: ay esrepes ; or fluffe to make ropes of.
de navire. Tacklin
Corde:f. Acord ropesbalter ; a twifted firing band, or
line ; alfo,as Tendon. ‘63
» Corde de bois, Acertaine meafüre, or quantitie, of
~ wood(whether fagots,or billets) laid together ; eight,
or ten foot in length, about foure in height , and ba-
wing at either end two flakes to bold it in. ;
Corde du bras.The greateft and moft notable,branch


ofthe ler veine.
da ma Cordelier, A grey Friers girdle or, the
ed cord wherewith be girds bimjelfe..
Ses Aniemreette he fr Serscrl sud
Haut m a corde. A hanging, >
Homme de fac& de corde. One for whom the gal-
~ Ep Hands PS LR EDIT, :
Avoir deux cordes à fon arc. To bee fürnifhed with
two belpes,to-baue a double hope of fucceffe;in bis bufi
neffe (we alfo-ufe the fame phrafe.) ae
Bailler à vn lacorde pour fe pendre. Cunninglyto
- giueone an aduantage whichi e «fe will terme tohis


preiudice. | Ps Tai |


COR


_ Coucher fous corde. In game, &c, to flake downe
readie coine ; from Tennis-players, that lay the money
they play for under the line. -

Elle n’eft fi fine que la corde n'y apparoïfle, As
cunning as fhee thinkes her felfe, ber tricks may be

_ difterned : (a metaphor from cloth, whofe thread may
be feene.) .
Ieftau bout defa corde. He is at the end of bis
ameanes ; be bath fhewed his vtmoft skill in the matter;
be can do no more to it, fay nought elfe of it, goe no fin-
ther init.

Il y aura beau ied fi Ja corde ne rompt. #ee
Shall baue good fport if the line breake not; s. if alt
ings continue as they are, or bold, that ave now,


a
À Fondant que la corde eft au puis. while the mat-
ter is bot; while there is opportunitie; while pour band


is in,

* Plus coufte la corde que le fardeau, Said when the
charges of law,or trafficke, ec, exceed the principal,
or diminifh ones flocke.

‘A groffe larron groffe corde : Prov. 4 firong hal-

BY serra trong theese.

YAlongue corde tire qui d' autruy mort defire:

Prov. Hee that longs for another mans death, bath
a long (or a cold) fuit of it; We fay, be that waits
for dead mens fhoone fall goe long barefoot.

Qui plus qu'il n’a vaillant defpend il fait la corde
à quoy fe pend: Pro.#ho more than be is worth doth
end, be makes a rope bis life to end.

rdé. corded; wifled asa cord; bound with cords;

alfo,out of feafon; (a Metaphor from Lampreyes which
ee out of feafon bane a bard firing in their
| _ baskes.) Temes

Cane: st, A Carpenters chalked , or Oakered,


/ Cordeau courant, 4 Gardeners line; the line wher-
* with he meafures ont bis plots,and beds, 2:
Cordeau volant. The fame. ‘


4


Vv sm. €e :f. Twiffed, or made into cords,
| Cordeler. To twift,or make roapes ; of make into cords,


| OC.
| Pres ati f. Afinall cord ; a twine , or packthread;


_atwifted lace,line,or firing.
Cordeleux: m, eufe: £ Cordie, cord-like; full of
cords, :


| Cordelier :m. A Grey Frier (ofthe Order of S,Fran-
|” cis\acordelier, alforwif.

Monnoye de Cordelier. Thankes; or a Benedici-

a Grey Friers are to carrie no money about


Me d "2
Po 2 LES irdle (made of a peece
f'ésna D aii nates ate xy


» and
ter than a firing)

by fome Gentlewomen ; alfo, knotted cords
in Jmbraderie, Gt; alfo, a Nunne of Saint Fran-
| cis bis Order; alfo, a row, file, courfe, ranke of fe-
| -wered,or feuerall things ; and bences ey US
: : Vne longue cordeliere de montaignes.
delle :f. #5 Cordelertes À ligle cord, or twifled


‘Cordier :m, 4 Roper,a Cord-maker. .


| LORS 4 frine-fallo ; alfoaranke,rom, lif file.


COR


Cette Lamproyefe corde. This Lemprey is out d
Séafon ; ( bites a hard firing in ber beck) d
Cordeur de terres, 4 Surwejor 5 or Meafuver of


lands.
Cordial :m.ale:f. Cordiall,beartie ; fiacere,unfained ; |
affettionate ; aljo, beart-flrengtheming, brart-comfor-
“ting. à
Les trois fleurs cordiales. Rofés , Bourage,and Bu-


gloffe.
Cordiale :f. The hearbe Motherwert, (good againfi the
cae: or Len of the heart.)
rdialement. Cordially , heartily ; truly, frithfull
“with the whole beart. 7 es | fy
Cordialeufé : m. ée:f.Heartie,cordiall ; full of heart,
or beartineffe, alfo,beartened, cheered ; well comfor-


er encouraged,
Co oe :£, Cordialinefe, beartineffe , beartfiul-
neffe.
Cordiaque:com. Cordiall , beartacomforting, mind.
cheering. ters


Delinarche de cordier. A flepping, or going,back=
waras.
Fr dure : Efpagne. A kind of twifted fluffe made of
ine wool,
Cordilles. Theyong frie of Tunnie,
rdon: m. A firing, twine, twifl; one of the rrrifis
of arope, ov corde ; allo, a wreath; and, thence, an
out-flanding wreath , or edge of tone { commonly
aiftinguifoing the feuerall flories) on th’outfide of a
utlding,
Sonn de chapeau, 4 (wreathed)batband.
Cordons d'une trompette, The cordines, or firings
ofaTiumpet.
Tel Jarron tel cordon : Prov. Such theefe, fuch bal.
' ter; apunifhment ess th offence.
lonné : mie : f Txvifted,twined, plaited; wrea-
thed ; alfo,made as,or into,a cord. :
-Cordonner. To twine, nwift, plait ; wreath; alfo, to
make as or into,a cord. ;
Cordouan: m. Cordouan leather ; (which is properly,a
Goats skin cnet
Cordouannerie : f. Shoo-making the trade of a Shoo-
maker; alfo,the part ofa towne wherein Shoomakers |’
worke ; Shoomaker-row ,Shoomaker-fireet.
Cordouannier: m. 4 Shoomaker; a Cordwainer.
Cordouanniere: £.Tbe wife of a Shoomaker;or woman
that 15 a Shoomaker. - oe e
Cordueil: m. Hearts-gricft, teene,anguifh, beartie for- |


0”,
Cordule: m. Akind of verie finall water-Newt , of |
Lizard , miftaken, and oft mif-nfed , in flead of the |.


juc. 5
Core : f. The broad peece thats berwéene the croffe-bars |
of the bilt of a fword. ré. PR
Corée de pourceau, A fivines gullet , or abogs bafe |


el. |
Corgeal:m. ale: f. Choaking ; ofa choaking propertic,

or qualitie.
Coriace. (The feminine of Corias; )as tough as a bide;

ctr as leather, Suivrefer
Corial: m. À Singing-man, Quire-man,or Quirrefter,
Coriandre: m, The bearbe,or féed Coriander,
Corias:m.ace:f. 4s tough as leather, as bard as a


- de fouliers : m. The latchets of fooves,
re ee : ee
, as Corlicu, te es


x


COR


COR


Corman: m, The greedie water-fowletearmed a Cor-
morant; alfo, the Cabot ff}.

Corniné. 4 drinke,or wine made of the Sorbe apple ; it
Surpaffes in goodne(fe Perrie, or Cider ; and comes nee-
refi,of any of thofé kinds, unto white wine,

Corme:f. The Seruice,or Sorb-apple.

Cormier :m. The Seruice tree,Sorb-apple tree.

Cormorant : m. 2s Corman. ?

Cornabon. A muficall Cornet ; or fuch a wreathed in-
firument : €Rab,

Cornadiz d'Efpaigne. Bafe peeces of money,thirtie fix
of them being worth but one Douzain,

rhage : m. Hornage ; an yearely duetie of corne ex-
abted | by the Lord Chaftelain of Berri (in the iurif~
diélion of Bourges) upon euerie Oxe that labours in
the Winter-corne-ground which is within bis terri-


torie. ?

Cornaline: f. The Cornix, or Cornaline ; a flefb-colou…
red ftone that is eafie to bee grauen on, and therefore
much ufed in fignets.

Cornalique: com. Cuckoldlie,cuckold-lie,

Cornard : m. 4 cuckold or borned beaft ; one of the for-
ked Order. J :

Cornardife : f. Cuckoldrie,

Corne: f. A borne; alfo,borne ; alfo, the hoof of a beafts
foot; alfo,the Sit-faft; (a hard,or bornie {welling in the
Dee pert of a borfe ) alfo, a corner ; limit , or

und, :

Corne boeuf. The hearbe Fenegrecke.

Corne de cerf. Buckborne Plantaine,Crowfoot Plan-
taine , Harts-borne , Sandwort , bearbe Ivie, or
Exe,

Cornes du front. The fwelling, or out-bearing, of
the bone of the temples on either fide of the forebead,
Corne prendre, To wax proud.

Avoir du foin aux cornes, Ila du foin aux cor.
He is a fierce ; proud ; flurdie, furlie mate; a fhrewd,
curt, vnfociable campanion; a dangerous fellew to
deale with,

Bailler foin en corne. To deceiue,coufen,gull, giue a
gleckes fell a bargaine. ,

iffcr les cornes, To bumble himfelfe, to let fall his

creft; to yeeld, floope, trike faile.

Haulfer,ou,leuerla corne. To grow proud, wax
neue loftie,(or liuelie) begin to take flate vp-
on him.

Prendre yn boeuf par les cornes. To undertake, or
per forme,a dangerous aët.

Dieu donne bieris, & boeuf, mais ce n’eft pas par
la corne: Prov. Looke Boeuf.

Corné. Horned,bauing bornes. ;

Corne-boeuf. The hearbe Fenegreeke.

Cornée de l'oeil. The hornie Tunicle wherein the apple
ofthe eye is placed; fo called, becaufe both in colour,
and conjiftence, it refembles a thinne,and tran{parent,


ne,
. Corneille :f. À Crow ; alf0,a Cornill berrie.


rneille emmantelée. The Roiffon Crow,or Win.
ra Crow , whofe backe, and bellie are of an afbie co.


Corneille fauvage. The fame. ; :
Pied de corneille. Crowfot Plantaine , Buckehorne
se > Coronop Plantaine, Hearbie lvie, Hartes-
orne. ‘ :
 Purain fait comme la corneille , plus fe laue, &
plus noire eft elle : Prov. Awhoore is like a Crow;
the cat oy wafhes ber the blacker fhee ws; viz,
the more {he excufes,the move fhe betraies per felfe; or,


» Go gle


in flriuing 10 iuflifie,fbe condemnes, ber felfe,

Corie Pr ve à oer

Cornement des oreilles. The glowing or tingling of the
cares,

Cornemufe: £ À Bagpipe ; alfs, as Cornuë ; the ve/~

fell, or Lymbecke a oyles are extraéted ;
Gummes,wood,or mettals. ~~ ;
Toutes ces chofes procedent de Ja mefme corne-
mue. Au thefe things come fiom one bead, runne
- one fpring , baue one and the felfe-fame origi-

Cornemufcur : m. Bagpiper. |

Corneole : f. wilow-bearbe, Loofé-firifé , water-wil-


low.
Corne-pied. Hooféd,borne-feoted.
ter. To (ound a Cornet, to wind a Horne; alfo, to
Stinke, or fell muftily , as meat that bath taken wind.
Cela cornoit prife. That finifhed the chace , that
made a full end of the matter,
La oreilles mecornent. My eares glow , or tin-
gle.
Cornes. as Cornilles.
Cornet: m. A Cornet, a Trumpe; a little Horne ; alfe,a
fea-Cut, or Cuttle-fifh; or,as Cafleron, about Bayon-
ne; alfo,as,Siffler. ,
ornet à bouquin. A Muficall Cornet,
met à encre. An Inkeborne.
Cornet de papier, The Cornet, or Coffin of paper,
wherein a Grocer makes vp bis retailed parcel of Spice


oe.
Corneté :m.ée: £ Scarified, or cupped.
Corneter. To capo er fe with borned cups.
ye a m, eufe: f Vfed in cupping , or fcari-
ing.
Cornette: f. ABugle, Hutchet, or little Horne ; alfo,a
Dottors Tippet ; alfo, a Cornet of borfe; and, the En-
| figne of a horfe-companie ; alfo, a fafhion of Shadow,or
Boonegraceufed in old time, and at this day, by fome-
runs alfo, the tuft, ov tipping, of a Hawkes
Les cornettes d'un arc, The bornes, or bornie tips of


along Bow, k

La cornette baffle. Ax old-fafhioned Shadow, or
Boonegrace ; (as in tl’originall.) ;
La cornette d'un chaperon.The Cornet of a French-


Corneur : m. À Horner; a winder of a Horne,
Corniat :m, The Juice,or Syrop of Coraill berries.
Cornice : f. The cornifh , er brow of a piller , or


wall.

Corniche: £ A kind of little Sea-cut , or Cuttle-f{h;
of, as Cornichet; alo, the corni{h,or brow of awall,
piller,or other peece of building.

chet :m. The fleeue,or Calamarie (fifh.)
rmichon: m, A little Horne; alfo, a Deevesbead
while it is young, or but new put out ; alfo,a playat
Quoites, wherein a peece of borne is led , or layed
for the marke ; or a play at Bowles with a SMifireffe
(fe commonly they play at Prickes ) tearmed-Cor-


nichon,
Cornier : m.# Cornillier ; 4//o,a Horner,
Cornier : m.erc : f. Belonging to, tanding in , the cor
ner ; angular,
Pieds corniers. Looke Pied.
Corniere : f. corner; alfo, afbe borer.
Cornillat. 4 littleyong Crow, anefi Crow. &
Comillé: m.ée:f. Jurred, or butted with hornet.
Corniller. Taiwrre,or butt with the bornes. =.


“COR


Cornilles: f. Coraillberries. )
er: m. The long cherrie, wild cherrie,or Cornill
tree ; Cornillier mafle. . A ;
Cornillier femelle. Hounds-tree, Dog-berrie tree,
Prick-tymber tree; Gaten,or Gater, tree.
illier fauvage. The fame. . \
ole:f. Part of a Stags throat; or, as Gargatte,
the V'uula ; See Gargatte,
rnoaller: m. The Cornill tree; as Cornillier.
noalles: f Cormill berries, ,
Cornoiller. 4 Cornillier, :
rnoilles: f. Cornill berries. '
Cornoiiaille: £ Cornewall ; one of the fhires of Eng-
land ; alfo,a part of Low Brittaine; whence ;
Chevalier de Cornoiiaille. 4 cuckold, a borned
beafl,one of the forked,or cornuted, Order.
Eftaim de Cornouaille. Seeke Eftaim.
Voyager en Cornoiiaille. To weare the borne,to be
one of the bead men of bis parifh.
tnu: m. À kind of Serpent; as Serpent cornu.
Cornu: m. ué: f. Hornie, borned ; cornuted; bauing
bornes ; bearing, or wearing bornes ; alfo, crooked, or
boughtie, like a borne,
Argument cornu. 4 fastafticall, frivolous, imperti-
nent ill-made argument.
Afpic cornu. Looke Afpic.
e cornu. The Moone. P
Bafton cornu. À Battle-ax (of the old fafhion.)
Bonnet cornu. 4 coraered,or [quare cap.
Pain cornu..A loafe that is not round,but made with


gh or fafhioned illfaueuredly, and with vneuen
es.


Serpent cornu. À fand-coloured Serpent,which bath
two, or (as Iulius Solinus reports) foure

bornes on his bead, and his hinder parts full of skales,
which make bim feeme to biffe as be goes; (bis biting is
alnoft incureable.)


will tell you many a loud ly,
Fuftil plus Diable qu'il n’eft cornu. were be more
terrible indeed then he is in fhew.
Ie le rendray plus Diable qu'il n’eft cornu, Iwill
put bimin greater feare than be puts others.

A l'enfourner on fait les pains cornus: Prov. 4


carelelfe, erronious,or ignorant entrance into a bufines

po a am AA se fera et

it ofthe fame finceis; *

Qui mal enfourne tire les pains cornus : Prov. He

that unfeatly ends ill 4 . }
Cornuaille. as Cornouaille.
Cornuchet.Alittlecorac, = =
Connie ogee Cr

rmueé : £. A kind of ing Limbecke(like a Bagpi
D cafe amet leaded within ; oh Pr 4


tratting of oyles out of hard and drie things , as woods,
mettalls , cc; alfo, as Malarmat, a bad of Gur=


 —_ met, ;
Comniiette :f, The mall Pulfe called Axe-feed, Axe.


wort, Axfitch,and Hatchetfitch ; alfo, boraed wild


Corollaire ; a fir plufa ad.
nr np TEE


diese Mr |


Coronal : m.ale: £ Coronall,Crowne-like ; ofor belong="


Corp: m. A blackifh (ea-fifb,whoft head fhineib almof
Pee.


Corpaut. 4 pot : qBarrag. |
Cosipeiitite ihe cure, the fine linnen wherein


Corporalier : m. 4 Pix, or box fir the forefaid linnen,


Corporel: m.elle : f. Corporal bodilie,perfonall.
Corporellement. Corporally,bodily,perfonally ; in per-


Corporence : f. as Corporance.


Cores :m.A bodie,a corps; the whole bulk,or fibflance,


erle cornuë. A ragged pearle.
Pois cornus. 4 lind of or fquare,peafon; being
either Sheepes Ciches;or bis Cichelings,cal-
led alfo, flat peafon.


Bailler des plus. cornués. Il vous en baillera,&c.He


any thing to (pend.
ce ie little bodie; alfo, a paire of bodies or;a
ce: Corpulencie, evoffene(fe fe, big-
| CE conta arts à


£L OR


ing to,a Crowne.

Artere coronale. Seeke Artere.

poe coronale. a ge Suture, or
_ Seame which compaffes the forebead, or forepart of the
_{cull,in forme ofa Weenie de ‘ ;

Os coronal. Seeke Os.

Veine coronale. 4 branch of the hollow veine, fo

tearmed, becaufe it enuirons the beart in firme of a

Crowne ; there is alfo another of that name, a branch

of the Spleene veine ; 4s Stomachique, |

ronne :f, ACrowne,or Garland, dre; See Cou-
ronne.


like gold ; fome tearme it a Cabo


the Sacrament is put.


or Sacrament.
rporance : f. Corporature ; the quantitie, fafhion,or
conftitution of the bodie. ,


Veine corporelle. as Mediane.
[on ; without Atturney,or Deputie,


orporu: m. ué: f. Corpulent , big-bodied , groffe,


flefhie, well fed, of a great lature .


of; alfo,a volume; alfo,a companic,or corporation; al-
 foyas Vaifleau corpulent ; al/o,(in clotb,or fixffeyfub-

flance,tacke, fluffineffe.

Le corps d'un arbre. The ftocke,or bodie of a tree,

Vn corps de cuirafle. 4 (orfelet.

Corps de garde. Court of gard,in a Campe,or Fort.
Vn corps d’ hoftel. The bodie, or heart ofa boufe ;

that part wherein the chiefé roomes, and lodgings, are

contriued,. :

Le corps d'un navire. The Hull of a Ship.

Femme de corps.A Wileine[fe,or woman of a feruile

condition,

‘A corps perdu. Defperat}y, firioufly, beadlong with-

out any care of bis ovene fafetie.

Droguer le corps. To make an Apothecaries fhop of

bisbellie, :

Excufer aucun par fon corps. To fight in another

mans quarell; 10 defend anotber mans innocencie with
the baxard of bis owne bodie,

Logez fous noftre corps. viz. Vnder-our roofe, or

couert ; at our charge,or allowance. - :

Marcher en corps. as la Cour marche en corps ;
_Allthe Officers of the Court go along together. ~

Mettre corps & coeur. To labour tooth and naile, to

. tndenour by all meanes pofible; ae

Prendre au corps. To arref ; or take prifoner.

Bon chaufteau garde qui {cait fon corps garder:

Prov.Laoke Chafteau. 6

Hommeendormi corps enfevéli : Prov. Theres no

difference betweene a dead,and a fleepie,bodic; or,as
Ss be dead outright,as aliue,and do nought, ;

u


arid Jes biens viennent les corps faillent: Prov.
Moft mens lines are neere fpent befère they haue got


womans bodies


b
xy


Compu: |


| ALG IAAT AT ON
THE ONOSSATEENERS


Corpulent : mente: f, Corpulent, grofje, big-bodied,
“quarriefat.
Vaifleau c t. The bodie, or the lower part of
pier = ke ; that which containes the fluffe which is
to re
rratage : m.Brokage; al/o,borfe-fcoorfing ; alfo,cou-
Senage ; or,as Courrerage.
ie: £. A broking ; alfo, borfe-(courfing; alfo,
coufening.
Corratier: m. 4 Broker; alfo, a borfe-[toorfér.
Comraye : f. as Courroye; A thong, or belt of lea-


Correct: m. correcte :f. Corredt, congruous, perfect;
good,pure neat,

Correctement. Correctly,purely, neatly, with congrui-
tie without fault.

Correéteur : m. 4 reformer ,corretter controller amen-
der, fault-finder.
Correéteur des comptes, An Officer that examines
and centrolls, or paffes, th’accounts of the Receimors,
vnder-Treafurers,& others the like accountants of the
Exchequer ; (there are foure of them belonging to the
Chamber of Accounts.)

Correction: f. A correétion, reformation, centrole-
ment.

Corregiole: £. as Corrigiole.

rrelaire: m, An additwn,aduantage, furplufage, o-
uerplus of meafure; or as Corolaire.
rrelatif :m.iue: f. Correlatine.

Corrente. À ffrait of the fea, as that of Gibraltar, of
Magellan, ec; where commonly it runnes violently,

Correfpondance:f. Acorrefpondencie; a mutual a-
greemént,or anfwer ; arefèmblance,or equalitie of bu-
mors affections qualities quantitie,

Correfpondant :m. 4 furetie,
orrespondant : m.ante : f. Correpondent; anfivera-
ble,or according vato ; equall,ov agreeable with jn all


oiats.

Correfbotidre. To correfpond , bold correfpondencie
with; be cor/e{pondent unio; to accord,confent;agrec
all together; torun one,and the fame courfé together ;
or,torefemble,anfwer equall; to be like, anfwerable,
or equall,in all points. ;

Corret : m.4n agnaile,or little corne upon atoe.

Cottiaffe. as Coriace.

Corridor. 4 curtaine, in fortification.  -

Corrigé: m.ée : f. Correéted,amendedyeformed ; im
proued ; vedreffed, firaightened,


Corriger.Tocorrett amend, reforme, redreffe, better; |


ffrasgbten. -
Corrigiole : £. Male Knot-graffe, Swines-gralfe,Birds-
Cortfon :m.A latchet, firap ; little thong,or belt of lea-


ther.
Corroboré: m.ée:f. Corroborated, firengthened, for-
| tified confirmed. -
Corroborer. To corroborate, firengthen , fortifie, con-


Camas i be: Ê Gnawen,woorne,or fretted arvay,a-

~ bout the fides.

Corroder. AS espe wearesor fiet away, about
ges.


the fides
at le : com. Corrumpable, corruptible, per=
uertable,deprauable,

Dern PET M ee, a woman that mars
others. : |
‘Corro t:'m.. A corrupter; deprauer , defiler,

ur ue. on ef


er


thie leacher. i

Corompeufe : f.She that mars,or mifleads others,

Corrompre.To corruptrot, putrifie taint ; marre. pill,
fate 3 deprane, mfett, viciate; inuert, peruert, mif~

ad; alfo, to bribe; fuborne, or win,by gifts.

Corrompu : m. A difolute youth , umibriftie packe ri-
otous youker , loofe mate, notable wag, terrible wena
cher.

Corrompu : m.uê:f. Corrupted , tainted, putrified :
fee Poyled ; infélted , viciated ; milled g r-
chan 3 4lfo, bribed; woon, féduced, or fuborned, by

es.
Corrompu comme la fefle d'un Poftillon. Looke

Pet nm

ompure : f, A corrupting,or corruptio; 7
loller'peyle by oi, seu bé
trofe: m.ée :f. Corroded ; fretted, bitten, enawen,
worne or wafled about,or en th’edges,or fides. .

Corrofif : m.iue :£.Corrofine ; biting, gnawing,or fret
ting away(on th'edges,or fides.)

Corrofion: £.4 corrofion ; a fretting, gnawing,or biting
away (on th’ edges,or fides.)

Corrofivité : f. as Corrofion; or corrofineneffe.

Corroye: f. See Courroye,

Corrude: £ Stone Afparagus, mountaine Sperage.

Corrugation : £ A corrugation,a wrinkling, or fiarow-
ing of the skin; a frowning.

Corruptelle: £ 4 corruption deprauation ; falfificati-
on;

Corruptement. corruptly; to the fpoyle, marring, or
putrifaction of. :

Corruptible : com. Corruptible ; fubiett unto corrnp-
tion ; eafie tobe corrupted, —

rruption:f, Corruption; putrifaction ; alfo,a mar-
ving, deprauing, peruerting , vitiating ; alfo, a fafifj-
‘ing.

Corruptrice: f. A corruptrix; a woman that marres,or
mifleads,others. .

Cors, The Plurall of Cor;SeeCor. :

‘A cors & à cri. By Proclamation, or, with bue and
crie ; alfo, by might and maine, witb beaue and boe,
earnefily,eagerly;vnbemently, ferioufly,


Corfage : m. The forme,babit,or conftitution of the bo-


die, ae
Gens dec . Villeins; or fuch as bold their land
by aflanifh, uile tenure,

Corfaire :m. A courfer ; as Courfier ; al/o,a pyrat.
De corfaire à corfaire n'y pend que barriques
“yompties: Pro, Nougbt is to be got of rouers but trafh,
or blowes. bs

Corfelet : m. 4 vevie little bodie,

Corfer. To imbrace,take,or bold,by the bodie ; to catch,
fake ft lay,bold of the bodie.

Corfefque: f. 4 kind of broad-beaded Jauelin,Glenes


or Dart.
Corfet : m, A little bodies alfo,a paire of bodies ( for a


woman.)
Corlu:m. uë:f. Grofesfiie ,corpulent , bigwbodied.
Corfyre. A kind of bearbe, (un
Coran .SeeCourtine. = |
:com.Liable,or fubie&t vato bafè, and per-
 fonall feruices; bound to performe,or of whom a Land-
lord may exact, certaine dayes workes in theyeave,
Corvée : f..A boone,or bound; a toilefome,and drudging
“dayes worke ; lent unto a friend; or (the more proper-
ly) due bya vaffall , ortenant; and to be dones ¢i-
ther (and melt properly) in bis one perf » or
| y


—


Corrompeur de filles. Adeflewrer of maids, a file


Original fron


THE OHIO. STAGE UNIVERSITY


ee En


ay


i


SP ON CRE OS RE TL Os TE


G 10: 5
by bis cattell;plough;or teame, in the ground, or about
the boufe,of bis Lord,or Landlord ; al/o,any feruice of


sen for which there is no recompence expetied; and

ence ;
Faire corvée. Todo a thing with an il will, as one
that knowes be fhall not be rewarded for bis paines,
Faire vne grande corvée. See Courvée.

Corybanter. Madly torun vp and downe, playing on a
Cymball,and wagging bis bead , like one of Cybeles
Priefls ; alfo,to fleep with open eyes.

Corybantiant. Sorwming ; or fleeping.
ryinbe: m, Az Ivie berrie,
typhée: m. The firflina ranke, the befl at a game,
the chiefé of an Order; a Prefident,Principall or prime
man; bence,the leader of a dauace; and, bee that
th manner of knowledge excells , or exceeds, all
olbers,

Cofcoflons : m, Curdes ; or as Cofcotons,
fcoté : m. ée: f. Spotted,or pounced.

Cofcotons: m. Frefh cheefé ; or as Cofcoffons.
fmographe : m.4 Cofimographer,or defériber of the
wbole world.

Cofimographie : f. Cofmographie; or the deféription of
the whole world.

Cofino-vague : m. A wanderer,er traueller through
ont the world,

Coffats de febues, pois &c. The buskes,or cods of beans


le
Coffe: £ as Gouffe ; Abuske ; alfo,the iurring of rwo
Rammes in their fight; alfa,the upper part of the maft
| _ ofa fhip ; aljo, as Cofte; a rib.
Coffe. Butted,iuried,
Coffer. To but,or iurre,as fighting Rammes,
Cofli: m. The warbling note of a Swallow.


on: m, A mite,or wecuell.
Coffonnerie :£. The market for Fowle, or Venifan, in
Paris,
Coffot. as Coffon.


Coflu: m.ué:£. Codded pusked,bulled,
Colt: m. du coft.coftmarie,Balfamine,Alecoaft.
al: m.ale :£, Belonging to the fides.or the ribs.
Coftamer : m. Coftmarie,or Alecoaf, '
Coftau : m. À little bill. ‘
Coftaux de môtaignes, The fides,or skirts of moun-
taines,
Cofté: m. The fide(of any thing; ) af, a partie,or fat.
"on; alfo,a coaftor quarter.
Haut cofté. À Surloyne,
De cofté. Sideling, fidewayes.
Clocher des deux coftez. Looke Clocher.
Couper des deux coftez. To play with both bands,
bet on both fides, intertaine both parties with good, or


hopefiill, tearmes.
Dormir fur les deux coftez. To barrell up fleepe;
¢ Dormir.
Cone: m. Th Aromaticall , and medicinable root


Coftus. :

Cofte : £ A rib; alfo,the fide of a man, ec; alfo, the
Slemme, or flaulke of an bearb ; alfo,a clone of garlick,
dc; alfo, a little bill, or defcent of land; alfo, acoaft,
“or land by the fea fide; alfo,the tow of fine filke.

. Lescoftes. The wedge-like peeces of wood wherwith

the fides of a Boot-trec,or Boot-laft areinlarged.
cofte. Equally, in euenranke, fide by fide,


iowle, |
ftea
Gall: Cote ) alittle rib,


Cotte maillé. Armed with a coat of maile.


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


COT


Ll


Coftelettes de porc, The Sparribs,
oftereauls. 4 nickname gjuen vnto certaine foot.
men,that ferucd the kings of England in their Frenct
warres; or as Corereaux ; or Cottereaux.
ec: m.éc:f, Sided, on a fide, of the one fide;
?, tainted , or (applied unto fruit) bruised,

er: m. cre: f Side, fideling ; of, or on, a


es

Coftiere.a coftiere. fide, fideli , fidewaies.

Coftin. huile coftin. =a 14 € ren medi-
cinable root)or, of the hearb, Alecoaft,

Cofton : m. The flaulke ofan bearbe; alfo, the Aroma-
ticall root , Coftus; (the beft kind whereof, being
white and light, comes from Arabia ; the fecond » light
and blacke , from the indies ; and the third, beanie &
yellow, from Suria.) :

on baftard. The reot of Chirons Allbeale,

Coftoyé: m. ée:f. Accoafled, fided, abberdeds coaf:
ted,or gone along by.

Coftoyer. To accoaf, fide,abbord; to bee, or ly, by the
a” of; alfo, to coaft aleng by, or goe by the coat
6,


Cotée :f. A Coot,or Moore-benne.

Coter. To quete ; See Quoter.

Cotcrcaux. as Coftereaux ; Or,a certaine crue of] pea-
Santlie outlawes, who,in old time, did much mifchiefe
vato the Nebilitie and Clergie.

Coteret: m. 4 fagot made of great flickes, or clouen
wood ; alfo,akind of peafantlie weapon ufed in old
time; alfo,aveffell containing 48 pintes of Neuers
meafure,

Coterie :f, Companie, facietie , affociation of countrey
people; or,as Cotterie.

Cothurne : £.4 fafhion of bigh-faled buskin fe by the
auncient Tragedians ; alfo,a bigh,and loftie fiilejas of
a Tragedie,

thurné : m. é¢ : F. Shod with high pantofles,or,wea-
ring high-foled buskinsyas in a Tragcdie.
~otice. as Cottice.
Cotignac :m, codinniack; Confêrue or Marmalade of
HINCES.

Cotile : &Rab. 2s Cotyle,

Cotillon: m. 4 Petticoat,

Cotine: m, Venice Sumach, filken Sumäch , red Su-
mach,

Cotis : m. The fparribs of a porke.

Cotifation See Cottifation,

Cotifer. See Cottifer.

ante. m. The upper part of a bennes, or capons,
necke, ' à

Cotollaire. iz lead of Corolaire : €Rab.

Coton, as che wie

oucre. 2s Cottoire. 2
ce te coat,or frocke; alfo,as Quote ; alfoya ticke
r a bed,
Cotte d'armes. 4 Coat-armor ; a long coat worne o~
Her armor.
Cotte de femme, 4 Kirtle.
Cotte de mailles. 4 fhirt ofmaile.
Ils tiennent cotte & ligne. They bane both ends of
the flaffe,the law in their one bands;or,the world at


will,


Femme fotte fe cognoift à la cotte: Prov. Locke


emme,
Cotté: m.ée :f. Coated; that bath gotten, or pulona


coat 5 alfo,(of a bave) filer well mued ; alfo, whofe


fides are underpropped, fuftained,or underfet,


X ig / Cotter.


Original from


am +* ~~


co 'T


Cotter. (as Accoter.) To underfet, [uflaine;vnderprop,
bold up the fide of. \

Cottereaux : m.Takers,outlawes frecbooters pighway-
robbers peafunt-fleecers, church-ranfackers; (an old
word ; See Cotercaux.) ;

Cotterie: f. A bafé,ignoble, and feruile tenure, or tene-
ment not held in fee,and yeelding only rent,or if more,
but cens, or furcens at mofl; as Poflefsion Roturiere,
or de main-ferme,

Cottice: f. A Cottice,or Battune; atbird part leffe than
a Bend, ia Blazon.

Cottier: m. ere: f.45 Roturier; Or,yeelding only rent,
and cens,or furcens, and no better dueties, nor ferui-
ces; alfo,bafe,ignoble,feruile, not held in fee; or, beld,
or bolding,by a feruile bafe,and ignoble tenure ; (for
this word is euer oppofed unto feudal noble,e> franc;
and, like enougb,is an original to our cottager.)
pes Cottier. Before whom a Cottier is, or ought to

e,tried,

Cottierement. Ignobly, baftly , Roturier-like, feruily,
not in fee, onely for rent,or cens, or at mofi,furcens,
Cottir. To incre,butt, rufh, infile, knocke beads toge-

ther.

Cottifation : €. 4 Cottifution,affeffement,or taxation,

Cottifé :m.ée:f, Taxed,afefléd,rated at bus part.

Cottifer aucun. Totax,affeffe, rate, or fet dovene bis
part of paiment.

ttité :f.4 particular mans rate, part,or portion of an
affeffément,or impofition, ;


Cottoire (de Perles.) A chaine (of Pearle.
otton: m. Bumbafie, cotton,
L' herbe à cotton. a Cottonnicre.

Manne de cotton. The worft kind of Manna, refem-
bling flockes of bumbafie. :
Cottonné: m. ée: f. Bumbafled,or fluffed with cotton.

Cottonner. To bumbaft,or fluffe with cotton,
Cottonner le moule du pourpoint. To feed found
ly, orexceffiuely.

Cottonneux. Cottonzie ; full of cotton ; foft as cotton ;
ouergrowne with a white, oft,or cotton-like downe.

Cottonnicre : f.The hearbe Chaffeweed, Cudwort,Cud-
weed,Cotton-weed, pettie Cotton. .

Cottouere. # Cottoire.

Coturniqué : m.ée: f. Bebuskined,in buskins : Rab,

Cotyle. An ancient meafure containing about 24 [poon-


Cotyledons : m. The mouthesor ends ofthe Menfiru-

a
die falls into nh :
child there(if there be any.)

—Cou:f. Awhetfione. 7 FA:

| Couäné :m.ée : f. AU foamiesor froathie, —~

ae ci Pre dafterd : :

dard : m. A coward,a La cow. © +

Jacoüard n’ aura belle amie : Prov. Faint bear
neuer woonfaire Ladies = + 1
-Mieux vaut coiiard que trop hardi: Prov, ‘Tis bet-

__ tertobeacoward than foole-bardie, ==

: Cotiard: m, arde : £ Cowardlie


de 26071 TRES
di À ‘Pluscoüard qu'un Lievre, More heartle[e than a


le, Hare. RAGE AU à

Hardie langue couärde Jance : Prov. as it Lan-
# €. FAR t eed 3
: Coüardement. Cong dafard, beartlef}, time-


sages ‘i Go. gle


Cosization:; &,Cottizer.as Cottifation ; & Cot-
er,


veines whereby the fuper fluons bloud of all the bo- |:
wombe, Gr giues nourifloment unto the


dafiardliemmanties
timerous, fear full,white-linercd,beartleffe, fainthear-


C O V 4


roufly, fear . i
Coüarder. 5) acoward,or play the coward.


Coüardife : f. Cowardife daftardie, cowardline[[e, vn- i


manilinefe, faint-beartedviel]e,timeroufneffe.

Couat: m.The pelle Ste ha ce dos f
of any beaft,or bird, :
oubde : m. as Coude; The Elbow, Su

Coubdée. as Coudée.

Couble. chevaux de couble. Paires,or couples of bor-. !
Ses; coach-borfes ; draught-borfes,

Coubte. The Elbow. à

Couchable : com. Fit,eafie,or poffible to be lien on.

Couchant. Couchant,couching,lying ; laying along.

Couche : f. A bedftead; alfo, acouch, or bed; al, a
( {quave bigh) bed in a garden; alfo,a womans lying ia

- (child-bed ; ) alfi,the Poft,or moft of a füte, at cards;
alfo,a fèt,lay or flake,at any game.
Couches. A childes clowtssalfèsreceptacles or ponds
for fea-water (as ia Amezeau ; ) alfo,a womans lying


in, :
Vn li à wiple couche de plumes, A bed fluffed
with three courfe of feathers one aboue the other. i
Panneau de couche. as Sommier.

Tentendsle pair & la couche. 1 rderfland the
matter throughly, s

Prins au pair, & Alacouche. Befet, intangled, in-
es at lope, in extremitie, on all


0 4 .
Couché : m, ée: couched, layed along, lying; alfo,com-


ched,mentioned,or fet downe in writing ; alfo, flaked,
or fet,at play.

*Couché À quatre pattes.Profirated, layed all along,
or vpon all foure, ;
Couché en eftat. Being made Officer ; qui n’eft
couché en l'eftat : Bawlked omitted,paffed in eleéli-
on,and not chofèns
Couché entre I’ enclume & les marteaux. Seated
in the middeft of dangers; or, inwironed on all fides,
with dangerous mifchiefes ; peflered , perplexed, af.
fliGied which way foener be turne bim. |

Coucheinent:m, A couching,/ying,or laying done.
a pr tah The weed called Dodder.
Couchenil : my Cuchammele.
Coucher. To couch,or ly (alfo,to lay\downe,pr along; to
goe(alfo,to get,bring,or haue)to bed; alfo , to mention,
ot fet downe in writing; alfo,to plant, or fet a root.or
, flat along within the ground; alfo, to fake, at


lay.
À cher de belles, Ils en couchent de belles.
They write goodlie matters fure ; 115 fweet fluffe that
‘they fet downe; ironically.
Coucheren chappon. Togo earely to bed.
Coucher foubs corde. To flake downe veadie coine;
“See Corde, 2
Coucher af enfeigne de l'eftoille, To lye without
doores all night. i
Coucher tout à bander & à racler. To venture all
on defperattearmes,to fit all on fixesand feucns.
Secoucher abouchon. To lie groueling, to fleepe on
the face. 4 ET se £
gt uiller avant que fe coucher. Said of bim
© that in bis life time gies bis beiresabfôlute pofefion
of all be bath,
Qui fe couche avec les chiens fe leue avec des
_ puces : Prov. From filthie companie what can one
“bring but filth ? i
Couchette : f A little bed 5 a conch, or bed of


ease.


"Mignon


Original from
THE OHIO STATE.UNIVERSITY


covyV


' Mignon decouchette. 4 Carpet-Knight, one that
euer lowes to be in womens chambers,
Coucheur: m.'A coucher,ftaker ; layer downe of; alfo,
a Bedfellow: ;
Couchille. The tree that beares the graine Kermes,
parts 3 Skarlet is dyed ; wee call it, the Skarlet
Othe; x
Couchine. The name of a certaine apple.
ucombre. 4 Cowcumber. See Concombre.
| Coucon. The little bottome,or clue of filke [punne by the
fikeworme. r
Coucou: m. A Cuckoe, ;
(l'ay beau luy remonftrer;) ie ne fais non plus que
le coucou aux cannes. No wordes terrifie bim, or
preuasle with bim.
Coucourbe. as Coucourde.
Coucourde:f. A round Gourd; alfo, a kind of large
Stillitorie; or;as Courge.
Coucourelle. The name of a certaine Fig.
Coude: m. The elbow,
Coude de la branche. The elbow,or out-bearing of
* the branch of a Bit.
Os ducoude. The under bone of the aime, from the
elbow to the wrift.
Ily a mis la main iufques au coude; &, il a entré
ena pafte iufques aux coudes. He bath gone very
farre in thematter ; be is up to the cares in it.
Plier le coude. To drinke bard, to ply the pot apace ;
or, to fall to-chat ferioufly, to fettle bimfelfe to talke,
f for, fitch as doe fo, commonly leane vpon their el.
owes. |
Poulfer du coude. Proudly to iufile, and fhoulder e-
uerie one that comes in bis way. :
Come ée: £. Bowed,or crooked,or ftanding,elbow-
wife.


Coudée:£ A cubit ; (extends from the elbow to the


a foot and a halfe.)
Coudées franches. Elbow-roome, free libertie.

udée Geometrique. Coataineth fix ordinavie cu
bits. ;

Coudée royale. is three fingers longer then the or-

dinarie one.

Coudéer. To iog,or ioult with the elbow.

Coudepied. The inftup.

Coudoyer.as Coudéer,

Coudraye: f. See Couldraye.

Coudre: m. 4 Hafell; a finall Nut tree; a Filberd tree;

(for this word comprebendeth all thofe kinds of finall
uttrees) ©. = 7
Coudre: £ 4 finall Nut, a Hafell Nut; and a Filberd,
(for it comprehends them all.) ..

C i ge cpa ss PATTES

.Coudré: m. ée:f. Tanned, fleeped ina Tanfat.

Coudre. To fiw; to flitch together. 2
Coudre la peau de pur À celle de lion, To at-
tempt that by craftie, which be cannot get by forcible,
meanes.

Tene fçay quelle piece coudre à cecy. 1 know not
what remedie to apply unto this, nor what art to vfe in
the repaire of it. 0.

«To tanne; to fleepeor fliffen,in a Tanfat. ~~


>


udrier: m, .4 f#all Nut tree, of what kind foe-
70s See aa ; ee eee SRM OK vs)
Coudroir. ATanfat, or |


end of the middle finger ; and is inordinarie meafure,


Couldre: a A Hafell tree, a final Nut tree, of what


C OV


Couet: m. (The name of) a certaine little apple.
Couéts. Two ropes belonging to the mixen fayle of a |


Couette: f. A ticke (toly, or fit ons) as Coitte.
Coufler. To fvell,or be Has Up. ;
Cougourde : f. A Bottle-Gourd ; the round Gourd |
whereof Bottles are made.
pion cia . The fame.
Couhoutrde. The fame. |
Couillage: m. 4 Tribute payed in times paft by Prief}s
for, Licences to keepe wenches.
Couillards : m. as Clides or, certaine round and rin-
ged pieces of yron, which in old time they rfed to fhoot


out il fhips.

Couillatris. well bangd (betweene the legs.)
ouille: f,.A mans yard; alfo (but leffe properly) a cod,
ballocke, or tefticle’; alfo, a long, lanke, and lubberiie
coward; a beartle(je, faint-bearted, or white-linered


imme.
Couille barbe.A certaineVittle apple,which is red on
the one fide ; and yeelds an excellent Cyder. ~
Couille de belicr. 4 hind of ball miade of a Rammes
cod.
Couille au chien. #5 Couillon de chien.
Couille à l'Euefque. À kind of fallet hearbe.

\ Couille au loup. Wild Prickmadame, wormegraffe,
great Stonecrop. : - ;
Les couilles luy perident à faute de gibbeciere. He
bath taken too much of the lover fhect , or be is tame e-
nough by this time : (Spoken of a young man, after hee
hath beene married {ome two or three moneths.)

Couille-barbe. See Couille.
Couilleu. Stoned; or,that wants not his flones.
Couillon: m. 4 cod,flone,teflicle,cullion.
Couillon de bouc. Goats fiones , Goats cullions ;
(an hearbe.)
Couillon de chien. Dogs-flones, Dogs cullions, Gan-
dergoofe, Standlewort, Standergraffe, Ballock-graffe,
Adders graffe,baftard Satyrion.
raise y de preftre. Spindletree ,Prickwood,Prick-
tymber,
Couinne. as Couénne. The skin of Bacon.
uionnade. as Coyonnade. à
Coulac. The Shad fifh; (called fo in Bourdeaux.) |


Coulagion: £. The running of a fore,érc.
Les Coulans d'un jardinier. 4 Gardeners lines where.
with he meafures out bis beds, and plots.


Coulant: m.Le c.d'une Riviere. The flreame of a ri-


Her.
Vn coulant d'eau de mer. Ar ayne of the fea.
Coulat: m.ante:f. Gliding, pr ee flowing gently
» along. as ages à
Vaine doucement coulante, 4 fiveet finooth veine
in Poëtrie dc. + Die,
Coulde. 45 Coude, The elbow. >
Couldée. ae Coudée ; aifo,a certaine crooked toole be-
aging to Mafons. “a
‘Couldier: m. Adware; one thatsno higher then three


lo
horfe-loanes,one thats but a fhafiment bigh,


Couldoye. à c. Made with an out nooke like an el:


Couldraffe: f. A hedge toad or land toad.
Couldray: m. as Couldraye. | at (7
Cou :f. A Wood, Groue, or Orchard, of Ha-
Sell, or of finall Nut, trees; a Hafell wood, or Hafell


foeuer.


Originakfrom a = er
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSE: am


Ce See:
Sn mu Pw de ul Ales


cov


— : £ À Hafell Nut, or finall Nut; of what kind
deuer.
Couldre franche. A Filberd,
Couldré. «s Coudré,
Couldrer. 4s Coudrer.
Couldrier: m. A Hafell, or finall Nut tree, of what
kind féeuer.
uldroir. # Coudroir, 4
ulé: m. ée: f. Rumne, glid, gone, lipped gently a-
long ; lid, trilled, trickled done; alfo, firained; al-
fo,leaked. ;
Coukée: f. 4s Coulement.
Coulement: m. 4 gentle running, eafie paffing, foft
gliding, glib fliding, (as of water, ec) along; a tril-
ing, or trickling downe ; alfo, a leaking ; alfo,a firai-
in


*


ning, |

Conk. To flide, flip,runne quietly along ; to goe glib a-
way ; to flow gently, glide eafily by; to tril, trickle,
or fall downe foftly ; alfo,to leake; alfo,to ftraine.

Se couler. To creepe through, or into; to crawle o-
Hers

Le navire couloit à bas en pleine mer. went, or
Junke,downe to the bottome.

ZE paye fait couler les raifins. Makes them drop,
or fall off.

Coule-fang: m, A certaine Viper, fo called, becaufe
thofe that are bitten by ber bleed to death.

t: m.#s Collet. : .

Couletage. Droiét de c. A pennie,or halfe-pennie toll
yg taken,of all wares, or marchandife bought
and fold.
ouleur: f. A colour, bues dye; laine; alfa, a pretext,
pretence,cloake fhew,fhadow,for a matter.
ouleus baftarde. 4 weake,pale, wan,decayed co-

“yr.


Couleur de Caflidoine. À mingled colour betweene
purple and white ; a Mallow colour.
Couleur chargé . À deepe colour, in any kind.
Couleur de ciel ferein, A bright shie colour.
uleur d'enfer. as much as,Noix-brun enfumé,
Couleur flamboyante, A flame colour.
Couleur de fleur de pefcher. 4 Peach colour.
Couleur de gris violant. A wbitifh purple, or the
Mallow-flower colour, é
Couleur de jaulne paille. Straw colour.
Couleur incarnat. À Carnation,or Damaske-Rofe,
Colour,
Couleur d'Inde. 4 Painters browne Violet,made of
the {cumming of woad fodden agen vo lyme , or
chalke, mixed afterwards with a little Amy-
ion. x
Couleur de Minime. 4 buswiues darke gray, or
es foote colour wherein there is an eye of gray.
Los À res The greene fickne(fe; or, a pale,
wan, He,
Couleur pafle. À vaded,or vnperfeët colour, fach as
Box wood 5. :
pers. A Blue,or Watchet.
ae pot Skie-colour, Azure coleur,a Blunket,
or tight bine, AS
Couleur de poil de fouris. A Moufe-dunne.
i Phrafes, conceits, ‘figures,


Yo
Couleur de Roy, #49 in old time, Purple ; but now
eh wee allo tearme, Colour


Coulomne: f. #5 Colomne; a pillar.
Coulon: m. 4 Doue,Pigeon, er Culuer.


One. . pe
Coulouëre. as Couloire; alfo,a channell,guttersor any


Couloudir: m. A fliding blow.
Coulouré: m: ée: f Celoured. See Coloré.


Couleurs

flourifhes of Rhetoricke ; ernam hb. Co
hr À The bef ee Crimfon, |. Co
or Murr


Comers f, A fault, offence, treSpalfe, mifdeed, or ill
di


L'OY


Couleur Turquine. 4 right blue,or Vinice bluestbe
colour of the Turkie fione.

Couleur de verd de mer. 4 fta-grecne.
Haulte couleur. 4 ferie 1«d,cr fieme colour.
Les pafles couleurs. The greene fickneffe.
Les riches couleurs. The ycliow laundife.

Il en parle comme vn aveugle de couleurs. Hee
fpeakes he knowes rot what, xor of wat; Secke A-


veugle, .

Couleurée : f. The weed Brycnie; or,as;
Couleurée blenche, Biyonie, white Brycnie, the
white Vine,Tettar-bervie.
Couleurée noire. The wild Vine, blacke Brycrie,
our Ladies Seale,
Coulcurée fauvage.Wild Bryoni¢,or the wild blacke

ryonie.

Coulevriner. as Couleuvriner.

Couleuvre : f. An Adder.

Coeur :m.ée: f Made after the fefbion of an

er.

Couleuvre. Srakeweed,Opfierloit,

Couleuvreau : m, 4 yong Adder.

Couleuvrin : mine: f. Adderlike,ofan Adder,

Couleuvrine:f. 4 Culuerin ; the peece of ordnance
‘called fo,
uleuyriner. To /quat,lurke,ly clofe,or flat along ; al-
fo,to glide wrigling along.
ulier : m, See Collier. ;

Coulis: mi, 4 cullis,or broth of boiled meat firained ; fit |
for a ficke,or weake bodie,

Coulis : m.iffe : f, as Coulant; Gliding.

Potage coulis. as Coulis.
Vent coulis . The burtfüll , or vmvbolefome wind,
which blowes through a bole,creuife,or crannie,

Couliffe: £..4 Portculliss or any other doore, or thing,
which,as a portcullis, falls or flips or is let ,downe;al/o,
a web in the eye.

Couliffe d'un arbalefte. The bollow furrow where. |
in the arrow lyes 3we call itythe gutter, or chace (of a |


cra bow)
Coullebobes : f. Thehearbe Alkakengie, or, the fruit |
thereof’; wiater-cherries,
Coullon, as Coulon,
Couloir : m. A cullander,or firainer,
Couloir : m. ire: f, Cullender-like, belonging to a cul. À
lander, firaining through it,as a cullander.
* Os couloir du nez. The bead bone, ot inner bone of
the nofe.
uloire: f. 2s Couloir, A cullander.
ulomb: m. 4 Doue,a Pigeon.
Coulomb bifet, A Stocke-doue, Queefi,Culuer.
oulombier: m. A Doue-cote,a Pigeonboufe.
ulombin. Dove colour, See Colombin.


Coul ier.À Cowfbot Ringdoue,Stoc
a geri Queefi,Cow bot Ring k-


Such bollow,along which melted things are to runne,as
Bell-mettall, from the finace to the meuld.


ulourer. To colour ; fhadow ; make pretences.
ulpable: com. c able, guiltie, ending, faultie, |
blame-wortbie. :


Batre fa coulpe. To beat bus breaf fir bis fault, of


Original from ;
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY. p-


———_———--__


Venice bluejhe


ie

ouleurs, Hee
bat; Suuke À
le Brycnie, the
blacke Bryeait,
the wild blacke


fifion of on


det
of ordnance


along ; al-


Arained ; fit


ome wind
mie,
re, or thing,


tomes,


ro wet to
rchace (of


or, the fruit


seit act
mer be Of


ur.
“a
le


at st

er gre
Lae
di


Joré.
pentes.


ding, fo
if il


ip |


ae


an dire facoulpe: Le méfie.


Cangas re To blame tax reprowe, cide, repre, find *


Ces ‘&Coultel 4 Goufitau, A knife.


Coultre: m. The Sexton of 4 Church; 5 alfa,the cases


er aPlow,
ture:f, A great plowed fau 3 a large clofe of tt
_ led land; alfo,p tillage
€: € A gentlerunni ippingor fliding along ;


trilling, or falling downe; creeping through, or into;
gangs crawling ouer ; alfo, a je 7 in 5alfo, a ai


‘ Conilite de Vignes. A faitlt,or" imperfettion in Vines,


the 9 grapes falling, and tbe vefidue verie little;
a much raine when ne were DENT in kait-


CRE m.A Comic.
unille : f. À Doe Connie,a female Rabbet.
unilleau:m. 4 young Rabbet;litile young Connie.


uni: m. as Couni. See Conn:


up: m. A blow, firoske; knocke, rap,thumpe; cuffe,
whirret; aljo,a bit,or touch; a Vennie, in fencing; al-
fe fiing,or cafl,as at Dice,@rc ; alfo, a Cuckold.
up de bec. A pecking, or pecke (of abirds vee)
ou qnip,taunt,cut,or bad word ; alfo, a kiffe.
~ Coup d’ cflay. 4 tryällpeece | or Maifier-peece ;
Eflay.


Looke

Coup d'efoc, A thruff, foine, flab; alfo, a prick-
ca
: de haut. 4 downe-right blow ; ;afèa quaffe,
cavou ee ordres bt.

de langue. 4 Ss taunt, rebuke; alfo, a

rs od gird ; flaunder, difgracefull nip, reproch-
ou a tearme of i ve oot hence the
Prouerbe;
Vn coup de langue eft dangereux qu’ un
soup de lance. 4 ards ft oft) more dangerous then


Coup de mer: A violent wane, 4 mightie fea’ 3 0r,a
blow giuen by a waue of the fea..
Coup de rets. The draught (of a Net.)
Coup de taille. A flafh,cut,gafb,yype.
up orbe. 4 brie craf ibn du dry-blow.
Coup-orbe. Red pimples in the face.
Coup perdu. 4 Mis alfo, a cafi,or throw made at
randome, and without any apparant bope, or likely-
- hood of bitting ; whence ;
_ ‘A coup per + Fruitlefly, in vaine,unto no purpofe;
seared fea without anycertaine al bope of |
Li
Prins on du. Atchiewed by hated ‘obtai-
ned by meere mp penta, ficceeding beyond expettati-


& on, ee ve dec Age ee of cun-


ning.
Le tiers co de bafton.. he knocke which in a


a Portfale(or Aét which any other way) gaines a filland


bfolut :
- Coup coup. Ee enerie time; ve from time-to


Coup fur coup - often, comes, ne and ana, fi


. fsb, one in a the necke of another.
“Acoup ; tout À coup; toutd vn coup; tout d'un


Coup: Speedily, fuddainly,at once, all at once, am to-
a Often, efifèones 5) euery ss


Aubon ‘when the matter is at
ecmmpmnrecericte | |


fr dou PER be. His ad cafling was


worth all other aduantages ; or,bis good play teas unto
bim as great an aduantageyas leading vnto the oth
Donner coup a. To firike the onely firoake ; Pr
moft auaïle 10 doe all in all,in.
Donner vn coup de gaule par fous I’ huis. To fup-
ns , or giue a pluie £2. See Gaule.

aire coup fur. To firike home vnto, be of great con-
Pme in, sera important effect on.

famain. Il a fait &c. He bath |-

pe ed a lend ba parte:


aire yn baie coup. de peur qu’il ne feift quel-
que mauvais coup. Leaf} be fhould enter into fome
naughtie practife, or execute any villanous proieét.
Faire felon la jambe le coup. (as we fay) to cut bis
coat according to bis cloth,
D'une pierre faire deux coups. To kil two birds
with = lone; 10 make a double vfe, or profit, of bis
trauell,
Gauchir au coup. To avoid a blow by turning, or by
wriaching, the bodie afide,
Gauchirle coup.To gine a winding blow shruf indi-
rectly, ftrike awry.
Porter coup. te bit bome ; to prenaile; to attaine to
the purpefe it was direëled unto.
Porter coup à la foy. To wrong,blemifh, violate, in-
fringe,breake,faitb given.
Prendre coup. cela a desja pris coup. Hath alvea-
die receined à fatall blow; or, is come vnto fo ill a
flate,that the ruine thereof muft of neceffitie follow.
Rompre le coup. To beat, or put by a blow. Seeke
Rompre.
Suivre fes coups. To profécute,or ‘fecond,with great

- earne(ine(fe,an enterprife begun,

Tenir coupalabefongne. To plya matters to fol.
ge it diligently, profecute it fèrioufly, bold bard vato


‘A tout perdre n’y a qu’un coup perilleux: Prov.
One sd blow ml à to under’ Ha all.

Chafcun eft fage apreslecoup: Prov. Looke Sage.
En adventure pifen tgtands coups: Pro. In donbt-
Sill cafes great blowes are beftowe

L’arbre ne tombe pas du premier coup: Pro. The
rfi blow fêls not the tree ; the firft attempt, or effort,
carries not a great matter.

On ne fait pas à grand coups douce vielle: Prov. _
Tisnot the fe sin the apt) firoake that makes the


Qui vife loing iamais ne rend fon coup heureux:

wi The farre-off leueller fhall neuer bit the :
ite.
ant: m. À Spade; or fuch another certian i

of Hus bandtie. à

Les Coupans d des coftez des traces d’un \fanglier.

- Learge edges , or fides, of the foot of a wilde


sina, ante #6) Casting ¥ cleanings bitchiig,
me launcing, Slitting ; 3 ie in


Coup: ! m. À Cuc alfo,a greene Goofs, a
one en ene Sea |
she Parte + da roofe of a ufe,
PRET ù


nd as he le cHtt. mg, or lo 0
3 alfo, the feafèn thats ie filing to cut, arn o nt
3 ; alfo, the fo Sole whercon wane fo cut,or felled;


Lora ir.


a


* f


Cov


on sou thats betweene ten,and thirtie,


yea!
bois a i co rouge. Such wood cuts red.
: m.ée:f. "eat clouen, fliced ; backed, flafhed,
d; carued, grauen,intailed; flit,launceds pruined,
lopped, felledyas a tree; mowed,as graf[e.
Croix coupée. 4 crofe-bumet ; Blazon.
upeau: m. The cop,bead,or tep of a thing.
Coupeau de bois. A chip.
Coupeau d’oignon. The head,or peele of am Onyon.
upeau de la tefte. The (rosme,or Noddle,
Piquant coupeau. 4 kind of pricklie thifile,tearmed
thus about Paris.

Coupe-aureille. See Coupe-oreille.
upe-bourfe: m. A Cut-purfe.

a en coupe-bourle. as bold as a Cut-purfe.

elle: £ A Coppell ; the little Afhen pot, or vef-
fe ero an wherein Goldfmiths ‘melt,or fine their mettals,
Argent de coupelle. Siler that bath beene tefted,or
tryed ; fine filuer.

Coupement: m. A cutting, flicing bovin flafin 5a
cleauing, flitting ; lauacing, incifion-making ; alfo, A
pruning, lopping, or felling of trees 5 a foecring of 0
corne, mowing of graffe; alfo,a diuiding, fundering,


Seperating.
Coupe-oreille :f. Phonak tala amt
ded E Frencbigifss | eares of rogues, and


petties


ine-queu


x mots 4 coupe. ieuË. Tivo
lo: or drswe ape -queuè Tm
yt two bare werds, and nomore.

t. To cut, flice,backe, flafh, bew ; to cleaue, flit ;


ceymake an incifion; alfa to carne, grane, intayle;

fo,to prune,lop.or fell wir pau corne, or graffe ;
Qsto diuide, funder, [eper

s Dors To cut nfelfés alfo (in fpeaking) to


Ces broche à. To prenent,cut off,cut fort.
pet ny à + LAN foreflall, prenent,

ae ocee

| ER Set D ne bands, to

: Frise ‘tb


les with
per her


slr bis affifiance,
fous | a. To fupplant, va-
ame marre on fr fet bela the cufhi-


les ongles de prés À, To curbe very fort; to


=


fe ba, or neere ; to reftraine, ii 5
bard,or (cant allowanceto; 3 or withdraw moft of
¥ Tis cms es fied ve from.

euë à.To defif,giue ouer, leaue off from;


a (and ei to breake off talke with,
Couper la queué au icu. To leaue playing with
- ned money be bath woons ce napa win-


Couper le vin. Toleaue blowne drinkes or to drinke
but part.
7 PP PTE Be bath amo farching it


co Vv
e, accompanied with many pimples,and rubies,
sr apr the nofe. à pe


Co fé:m. éc:f. Mingle d, or dre
mt Cipro pee soy om nr


Chea: m. The top bead height, cop, er ride
t de cheveux. A tuft,or top
Coupeur: m. A cutter,cleaner; backer, soa cme,
inta mie) launcer;flitter; mowerslopper, filler of trees,
moft particularly, a reaper or cutter of grapes, in
; re time of Vintage.
eur de Vols. A Cut-purfe ; whence; Efton-
né comme yn cou de bourfes pris fur le fair ;
Amazed like a Cut-purfe,taken in the manner.
upeur de cuir. A Cut-purfé.
en ne £ See Coupure.
upeule : f. 4 woman that reapes. orcuts in
Ge Vi NS = dor


Intage
Coupeux:m. cule: if. Cutting sar fill of custingygr ft


aoe
ents coupeufes, The fore-teeth,
Couper m. A cup-bearer; one that waiteth on bis ma-


ver f. ss a paire; alfo, a paire of dogge-


ovate als
pet paires, tw0 and two together.
neue m. ~ € Cos led; yoaked,united,joyned;grap-
together.


Coupler. To couple eme ya it together ; alfd, to
cr raple together, as in fight.


Coup let de chanfon. À Staffe,or Stanxo ofa Poeme,er


Countot de bois: A woodden fole, er Nut for a Scrue;
on foot of a Scrue,erc.

Coupon: m.4 great (up,or Bowlesalfo,a Tray of wood,
dre ; alfoya cut of; or,a thicke and fhort flice, or peece
cut from,a thing.

Coupon de io: Afbred of cloth.

Coup-orbe. Red pimples on the face,

EE cd as Coupe.

“bole, as Coupebourfe.

Cou ettes degland. Akorne cups.

: m. A Butchers Knifecr Cleaner.

Couppier: m. A cup-bearer ;or one that waiteth on his

mallers cup.


a Coupon
Coupute: f. 4 cutting; 5 flicings clee launcing;lop-
Far Ami in om er 8
asin Coupe; ) and hence;
Par coupures. Peece-meale ; by peeces 3im flices ; by


eds.

Cour: f. 4 Court of Law,or luflice; any Seffionser Af-
femblie of Indges; or the ncn re on ufe to af
Semble ; alfo,the Court efa Princesor of a priuat boue. à
See Court.

Cour des Aides. A foueraigne Court wberein allcau-

be rosiahr the Aides, Be pre are a
letermined : (Some t

that Charles the hab heer 1380, ie Oe ike that

_ which is at Paris; Charles the fenenth eretted another

at sia There gga alfo, at

Ro ‘at Montferrant in Auvergne ; and one at

i wbich was firft at Perigueux.)

A Court Lect, or Baron; the Lords
reto bis vaffales and tenants ewe their fuit,


rfonciere. À (ourt Baron; or, Court of ba in-
D. La


Originaltrom


FHO STATE UNIVER


SURF


C O V


noyes.
6 pr des Pairs. 4 Court Leet,or Baron.
La Courde Parlement. Looke Parlement.
our perfonnelle. See Perfonnel. |
Cours fouverains. The bigheft Courts, from which
there isno appealing, -
Retraictdebarre,ou de Cour.See Retraict.
De par la Cour. By the opinion, confent, or fentence
of the Iudges,in Court.
En pleine Cour. In the bearing of the whole Court ;
i all the ludges and Officers thereof were pre-
ent.

Courage: m, Courage; mettall,(pirit, bart, flomacke;
valour,floutnelfe,bouldne[fe,bardineffe, formardneffe;
alfè,confidence,affurance,bopefüneffe; ao linelineffe,

. alacritie, iolitie, chéerefülneffe; alfo, willingne(fe; al-

| fo,the mind,will,bumor,fancie,affettion,difpofition.
Courage de brebis.(4 merrie forme of incouraging,
or cheering up; wherein tis meant that,Le nezenter-
re, fhould follow) On with a fheepes heart.

Dur courage. Arude, fiffe, obdurate, inflexible,

_bumor.

Felon courage. 4 fiercene(fe, rigor,crueltie,an vn-

traélable, or unfociable difpofition.

Franc courage. Openneffé, plainne(fe, freebearted-
elfe; de franc courage. Cheerefülly, freely willing-


À vs a beart.
Lafche courage. Negligence,carelefneffe.faintneffe ;
flackneffe,weaknelfe; pr > pn Soa 4
_ Petit courage. Weakneffe, Salient pufillanimitie;

. psd wit, little fhirit,pooremettall.
e courage. as Courageufement.
Sans courage. Dully, flackly,cowardly.
Tu cognois mon courage. Thou knowe/t my minde,
thou art well acquainted with my humor.
Tay bon courage mais les jambes me faillent. My
pr is verie good but my beëles (viz. my meanes) doe


me.
“A grand danger grand courage : Prov. Courage
when danger pe on be ca si
Courageufément. Coxragiouly ftoutly, valiantly,
al Dem heds 3 confidently, with great aff

redneffe. :
| Courageux: m, eufe : f. Couragious, valant bardie,
bold, flout, walk. aduenturous, forward: full of con~

of


| fidence, full of affurance, full of afferedneffe.
: Couramment. ct rr ota Lp.
a: urance: f. À flux, or laxatineneffe in the bodie ;
k the Squirt..

Courans. as Coulans.


Courant: m. A current,or fai waters;alfo,
an upper. Mil-flone,, pohly ym atid


runner,


Spee Running , fhecding, poafling; courfing, cha-


fing.
Cusliecourant ea =e

_ Quefte courant. Such an impofition as e layed
by à Lord on bis tenants,when,and in 9


+ .


| int va rant. À vent-fecke,or charges raifed of or


bi with, money.
e: f. À Curranto.
ourbaflé: m. ée: f. Hulch-backed, or crooke-{houl-
Cour-baflon:m. 4 truncheos, or fbor Ua)
“Gaeilge of be armed,
Me Re : Aankiaa


a i at a a a ER RE
La Cour des monnoyes.#,LaChambredesmon- | Courbatu: m. uë: € Tyred, ouertoyled, wornt out,


Coureufe


Courge: f. The fruit called, a Gourd; alfo,a wide and


- wers kinds ; (though = un baue none.)


CoV


_ Srowne crooked, with extreame labour; alfo, beaten
. tilk be floope againe, or fo much, that be is grovon croo-
ked withall ; alfo, foundered. nae
Courbature: £. The foundering of a borfe,or beabizte of
bis feet,by oner-much trauell.
Courbe: f. A bought ; alfo,a crooked, or bowing pecce
of tymber ; and ( more particularly )a compalfe or
moulded, Rafter ; alfo, the Curbes (ina bor{es binder


legs.) loge ;
be d'un navire. The ribs of a fhip; called by
Mariners, the Futtocks, or Nauell tymbers.
urbes d'une voulte. The arching of a Vault.
bé: m. ée:f. Crooked,bowed, À 2 tr ve 1
ched,bent arch-wife. .
Le bras courbez en anfe. With armes a-kem-


0

Courbée: f.as Courvée. ¢Gate.

Courbe-efpine. The name of a delicate Normand ap-
ple.

Courbement: mi. 4 crooking, bowing; vaulting, ar-
ching ; plying,or bending arch-wife. à
ourber. To crooke, bow; vault, arch; ply, or bend, .
arch-wife.

Courbes: f. The legs; 4 Barrag; alfo, the plurall unto
Courbe. ‘

Courbette: f. LA finall crooked Rafier, or peece of
Due 3 aff, a curuet, or, the curuetting of a


2, ;
Courbure : f 2s Courbement ; or, bought,
urcaillée de cailles. The calling of Quayles.
Coutcie: f. Part ofa Galley tearmed,the Courfey.
Courde:f. 4 Gourd.
ourdier: m. A Gowrd-plant.
ée de mouton: f.4 Sheepes Plucke; the intrailes,
or inwards of a Mutton. .
urement: m. 4 running ; poafling, conrfing,paffing
on apace. ay 4
ureur:m. A runner; a courfer; a Peafler, a Pofte;
alfo,a roamer, or wanderer abroad; one whofe fhooes
are made of vunning leather; one that neuer keepes at
” bome,or where he be; alfo, a courror, outrider,
rank-rider; and hence;
Coureurs. Light horfèmen, imployed in the euerrun-
ning,ranaging.or foraging of an enemies countrey,
:£ À gadding huswife ; alfo,a common, pub-
Licke,notorious, whore. \


~~ 7°


L


* deepe Lymbecke,made fomewhat Gourd-like; alfo(and.
the more properly)the wide bellie,or lower part Ph
4 Lymbecke; alfo, a Stang, Pale-flaffe, or Coleftaffe,
carried on the fhoulder, and notched (for the banging
of aPale @rc) at both ends.
blanche. The white Gourd, a very holefome
fruit exther boyled,fiyed,or preférued.
Courge d'hyver. The ordinarie great round Pom-
pion, or Gourd, bung up in Kitchins for winter proui.
fon.


Courge d'Inde. as Courge d'hyver; fo calle bee
caufè of ae “Redes pam Bio out “if the Sele
€Mathiolus ; (yer ave there,befides this, three fewerall
kinds of Indian Pompions ; a fmall round


YOUNG One; a core
; and the mpion. rd.)
. The Snakes Gour Gourd.
e marine.The fea Gourdbereof there be di- is


HE.ORPOSSTATEUNIVERS


C O V


Gorge de Turquie, The Turkie Gourd,

Grande courge. The great reund Gourd.

Petite courge. The bottle Gowrd.or leffe Gourd.

rier : m. A Poft,exc ; as Courrier.
rin. 2s Coufin.

Courir, To runne ; poft, gallop; make fpeed, bye apace,
goeverie baftily, paffe verie fwiftly ; runne onsproceed
Saft in ; alfo,to ride a running hor{e, or (as in pofting)
runne on hor{eback ; alfo,to bunt,courfe vp and down,
follow bar d,purfue baftily,gine hot chafe vnto; alfo, to
ouerrun, ranage,r anfackmake boftile incurfions upon;
alfo,to bane courfe,or be currant ; to be in date,vfe,re-

uel},or fafhion. !
ourir Jes champs en pourpoint, To play the Bed-

lam; torunne vp and dovone like a mad man.
Courir les chofes legierement, To runne,or paffe o-
uer things verie fleightly;to take a fnatch,and be gone;
to gine onely a touch,and away.
Courir danger. To be in danger, or in a doubtfull e-
flate; tobe as like to (peed ill as well.
Courir au deuant de. To meet with.
Courir l'efguillette. To play the impudent,or impor-
tunate whore; extreamly to luft, or maddingly to run,


ge aP,
Jourir fortune. Te be in danger of fhipwrackes or,to
abandon a [hip,in a great flovme, unto the mercie and
conduétion of the wind and waues. _.

urir fortune avec ; ou,courit Ja fortune de. To
imbarke bimfelfe,or take part, with another, in all bis
attempts,or hazards whatfoeuer, PAR
Courir la lance. To tilt, or,to run at tilt.
Courir la lance S. Crefpin fur yn efcabelle à trois
ieds. To play the Shoomaker.
Courir vn livre; To vunne éuer a booke with the eye,


toread a pops: btly, and haftily oner , without
much refpeët had,or beed taken,either to the pbrafeyor
matter,

Courir vn office, To ride poft for the getting of an


Office,

burir apres fon ombre. Tofhend his time idly,
fondly,vainely ; or,to loofe time,
Courir la poule. To forrage,rauage;ranfacke, fpoyle,
or make pillage of, every thing that comes in his way;
(Said of a diforderlie,and ill. g > who
in his march,or refidence in a countrey, twitches vp e-
uery poore mans benne that peepes out.) —
Courir comme vnerafle,viz. Very |
Courir les rues. To play the Bedlam;to range,roame,
or gad up and downe; like a mad man.
Courir fus à, Furioufly to innade, affaile,or fet vpon;
alfo, tovfurpe, or incroach on, toimterrupt, or inter-
meddle with,another mans profit,or imployment,
Cen’eft pas tout de courir, I] faut partir à temps :
Prov. Tis not rt, to purfüe diligently, unleffe we


> baue begun difireet
. Ine faut iamais courir apres fon efteufProy. One


À af neuer let go a thing,which be bath,and may bold,
ie with a purpofeto follow,or Pragioe Jo reconer, it;


: L'eau qui dort eft pire que celle qui court: Prov.
= Standing waters are much worfe then running ones ;
fo fe worth (ormore dager)


YR A]
ox
cf W
ti + alfothi ,


. Couronné: m.ée: £ Crowned.


noting onely the words,and ee the matter; or,


+ at bis own morfels ; rather toflarue then clave bis own


co V


Courlis: m. 4 (urine.

Courmaran: m. A (ormorant. eo

Couronne: f. A Crowne ; the Diademe,or circlet wber-
with Princes be crowned ; alfo,a wreath, garland, ov
one of flowers, rc, for the bead ; alfo, the coyne fo
called; alfd, the crowme, top, or beginning of a horfès
hoofe; the place,or part whereat it ioynes vate the legs

alfo,a vound,or aring made by many perfons that et

clofe,or bold bands, together ; (in Architetture) alfo,

abe Corona, crowne, or member of greateft fayle, ina


Couronne de Cleres. The crowne of a Shaueling,or,
aPriefts fhauen crovne. a
Couronne Imperiale. The Imperiall Crowne ; (a
oodlie ee à

uronne de Preftre. Dandelyon,Piff-a-bed ; (an
bearbe.) "Re
Lettre de couronne. 4 cup; or as Tafle.
Enter en petite couronne.Seeke Enter.
Femme bonne vaut vne couronne : Prov. 4 ver
tuous dame is worth a Diadem.


Couronnement: m, À crowning; alfo, the outward
mouth of the wombe, fo tearmed by Midwiues.

Couronner. To crowne ; to fet a crowne, diadem,cir-
clet,or garland upon (the bead.)

Couronneure: f. The broad-fpread, and crowne-re-
fembling,top of a Deeres bead.


Couroye, & Couroyer. See Courroye, & Con-
royer.
Cour-pendu. Pomme de cour-pendu, The fhort-


flart,or fhort-fhanke; (an excellent apple.)
Pme fr A Quayle-pipe.
Courraéteur. See Courraticr, qRab.
urrail: m. 4 Courreau.
Courratage :m.Brokage ; {cour fing horfe-fcourfing,See
Courretage. j
Courraterie: f. # Courratage.
Courratier: m. 4 Broker; one that fels otber mens
fluffe for them; alfo,a foot-poft,meffenger,or carrier.
urratier 4 Pr Et roe Fu
erc:f, ABr sor Brokers wife.
Le as Courir; laïfler courre; to let flip, or, to
hound a dog,at.
Courteau d'une huifferie. The bolt,or barre of a dore.
Courretage: m.Brokage; borfé-fcaurfing;bufie dealing |
or intermedling betweene partie and partie.
Courretier : m. 2s Courratier.
Courrier: m. A Pofi,or,a Pofter ; alfoya borfe-rider;at-
fd,a Broker. 4 É
Courrier de mer, A kind of very fivift fifh. Looke
Poîte de Mer. : ès
Courroucé: m.ée: f, Angrieoffended, fuming difplea-
fed,in a great chafe; afo,vexed,grieucd,affhéted ; im-
© patient out of quiet.
Bien courroucé de peu pleure : Prov. He thats


e
thr angred ardly weepes.
eet pas ae qui et cuves Prov.Hee’s not
at eafe thats in a chafe. :.

Se Sa ee that is

rina fame.

Genes To anger ; offend, moue,difpleafe ; vex,
: CHE A) Gi put out of quiet. \

courroucer. To fret, fime, chafe, be angrie, take
pepper,in the nofe. |

ourroucer contre fesmorceaux. To be angrie


| meat,rather to want then vfe bis owne meanese
“Cour-


— JT if il Tron
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


SO”


 Courrouceufement. wrathfilly; moft angrily,
Courroux: m. Anger ; chafing, fuming; wrath,rage,in-
dignation; difpleafure, Romacke againft; alfo, vexati-
on, griefe, forrow,aff:ction of mind; impatiencie.
urroye: f, À thoag, or belt of leather; a flrong lea-
therne ftrap,or firing ; alfo,the latchet of a fhooe.
Alonger la courroye, To delay, prolong, or dravp out
in length,a gainefill’ imployment; as many Lawyers do
their clients caufes,and fome Generals the warres they
.commaund in,
~ Avoir les deux bouts de la courroye. To bane the
Law (or the abfolute difpofition of a thing) in bis owne
5,


hand.
- Il veur avoir les deux bouts de la courroye, & le
i is a bard, and fore dealer: he will neither
2 wrong ,or,no lefe will ferue bim then
vie extremitie of Law, —
cuir large courroye. To fpend libe-
er mans purfe, ‘.
in a fait de fon dos courroye. He hath been whip-
» eamely,
Mieux vaut avoir amy en voye qu’or,ny argent en
courroye: Prov. We {ay (with fome little difference)
better is a friend in Court then a pennie in the purfe.
Qui cuir voir tailler courroye en demande: Prov.
Woile a thing’s whole it may be wholly kept. ,
Fa € : m.ée : f. Curried; tawed,or dreffed,as lea-
t er. 4


Courroyetnent. 2s Conroyemenc(ix the firft fence.)
pond as Conroyer; ta curry; tew,or dreffe,lea-
ther,
urroyeur: m, A Currier (of leather.)
Cours: m. 4 courfe, race, running; alfo, the place
wherein a race is runne; alfo, a continual iourney,
pafage, traine, trace, motion forward ; alfo, length, or
tract of time ; alo, a file, fafhion, way, manner, or
meanes of proceeding ; alfo., a road, or expedition a-
gainf an enemie at fea;(and hence, piracie,rouing,(ea-
robbing, win
Cours uy ciel. The courfe of the Starres, Planets, or
of the Regions wherein they are feated; alfo (among
Érer a certaine bad conjtellation, whereby the
growth of hearbes is hindered, ~ 3
Va Cours Civil, ou Cannon. Al the Volumes, or
Bookes,of the Ciuill,or Cannon Law. . wt)
Le cours des Loix, de Medecine, de Philofophie,
&c; the whole order, or proceeding of fiudie in thofe
Arts, from the firft and fleightef rudiments, to the lat
and deepeft myfteries thereof, ete
Cette maïchandife n’a plus de couts. Is cleane out
of date,out of fe, out Ja 370 cha, will buy
it,no tradefinan can vtter it,there is no further dealing
init, + x
Courfable, Morinoye courfäble. currant money.
on : m.4'Rouer,a ‘Pyrate,a fea-theefe.See Cor-
aire, Bae Fa
Courfe : £4 conrft,a race ; a courfe running fpeed;alfo,
a road, or incurfion into an enemies countrey ; alfo,a
fimall and light chariot,or waggon, _.. ;
Courferot: m. A little Pyrate; af, a little Courfer, or
Horfé of ferujce. als
Courfey. 2s Courfon. - aa
Courfie: £ Part of the Hatches of a Galley, tearmed
the Courfty ; or, the Gallerie-like (pace, on both fides
hereof the feats of the lanes are placed,
Courfiet: m, 4 Courfer of Naples ; alfo,a Tilting-hor{e,
or frie Caretre. scihzy


Courfier: m, ere: f. Belonging, or like; unto a
À PR | me ian Sis


mm


C OV
Courfer;andbence;
Mule courfiere. Which in height & breadth refem-
blessor equalls,an ordinarie Courfer.
Courfiere: f, The Grating, in a fhip of warre ; alfoa
compendious courfe, readie meane, fhert cut, (beedie


way.
Courfif:m.iue :f. Swift, fpecdie, fifi, running.
; an courfives. Written by a quick,or [wift band;
written,
Courfon:m, A young vine-branch, or fboo!, referued,
in the cutting of the dine, for flore. À
Courfouër. as Efcourfouër.
Court:f. The Court ofa Prince; the ESlate, or State,
of bis houfe, and houfhold ; alfo , his houfhold fer-
wants, or followers; alfo, the affembly of Nobles a-
bout him ; alfo, Courifhip, the bumors , or fafbions of
Court ; and the courting, or wooing of a wench; alfd,
a court,or yard, or,the court-yard, of a boufe ; alfo,as
QUE. ee: -
Bouche à Court.
Court.
Eau benifte de Court. Court holie-water; ‘fawning,
{oothing, fmoothing, flatterie, faire (but falfe)words,
Faire la court à. To court, wooe, favne upon, folicite,
or fie nto; collogue,or cog with. É
Sçavoir facourt. To be a skilfull Courtier; to know
well the fafbion of intertainement, the phrafès of com-
plement, the humors and proceedings, vfed in Coyrt.
Tenir Court; ou,Tenir Court planicre.4 Prince
tokeepe openhoufe ; or tointertaine, and feafi,all com-
mers.
La Court du Roy Petaud,ou chafcun eft maiftre:
Pro. Looke Petaud,
En li Court du Roy. chafcun eft pour foy ; Pro, In
Court men fludie onely their ovene fortunes.
urt:m, courte: f. Short, briefe, fuccing, cutted,
compendious; low ; alfo, little, fmall. =
Courte boule. Our round bowle, 3
Courtes chaufles, Short bofe; af, women.
Court en pafte, Short,crummie not holding, ill clea.
wing together.
Robbecourte. Gens de robbe c. Noblemen, Gen.
tlemen,or Souldiers ; or Officers that be any of them, x
‘A leur courte honte. To their exceedingfhame.
Demeurer court. To play at Mumbudget, or be at a
Nonplus ; not to haue axvord tothrow at a dog,
C'eftoit le plus court, & le plus aifé,de les renvoy-
er. The bef orthe neercft, and eafieft courfe was, to
Send them backe. Ee
Il y alla tout court.He went thither on a fuddaine,or
without any manaer of flaying. eta
Pour le faire court. In famme, or in few words;
ra conclude; to abridge the matter, not to bold you
Tenir court. To reftraine, bridle, keepe undertye up
vntobard meate ~ 1!
ourner court : l'apprédray bien at
* à celuy. 1 will teach bim to be more duetifall, :
fi f j le. aS : tres Mann
ce ies font les meilleures : Pro. The fborteft 4
folies are the bef, … An) à
Couftault,ou Courtaut :m. 4 Curtall, © *
Courtaut À boutique. À trade/inans prentife; a | .
: p-keeping lat Es VP PET onan biel DT TMS
Double coureur. Monger de ny RE


Budge.a- Court, diet allowed at


impi


“:


*- middle fixé berweent th ordinarie curtall,and borfe of
Roc a: en Yes


Courtaut: maudesf Curtall; being curtalled, Es


he


C,O Vv


” Fouttter quelqu'un en chien courtaut. Te whip | _affiledbim, a ,reat miftreanedbehonbim quelqu'un en chien courtaut. Te whip
one extreamely.

Court-balton. .4 truacheon, or Short cudgell ; See
Courbafton.

conte aleauine. The name of a certaine bitter fweet


Couai ointe: f. A Quilt.or quilted counterpoint.

Courtesttetics, PV ; one that is pin-but-
tockt;-or hath but (mall or flender buttocks.

Court-feftu: m. Drawing of cutts,

urtiban ; or Courtibau. A coat-armour, long caf
Sock,or horfémans coat, worne by a Prince,or Comman-
der in an armie.
urtier. as Courratier 5.4 Broker ; Horfe- feourfer,
| _ Meffenger.
Courtil : m. 4 backe-yard; or garden.

Courtilliere : £, 4 kind of Palmer,or yellowifh,and ma-
ny-legd vermine, that abides almoft euer in the ground,
and is a great enemie to bearbes ( efpecially Onions)
whofe roots fe gnawes afunder.

Fin gar m. Curtaines; hangings for beds, or win-
owes.

Courtine: £ 4 Cartaines and (in fortification) the
seo à of the wall betweene bulparke and bul-
Warre, -

Sous la Courtine. Secretly, clofely, privately, vnder-
hand,in corners,in bu peer mg igger.

Courtineau: m.4 ditile Curtaine; alfo,the bead-peece,
LA: peece that hangs downe at the head , of « fiuffe-


Courtifän : m. A Courtier.
Courtifane: f. 4 Ladie, Gentlewoman,or waiting-wo-
“man of the Court ; alfo (but lefe properly) a curtixan,
profeped firumpet, famous(or infamous) whore.
Courcinie: f. Court-fhip ; towrtle behaniour , or bu-


Courts f. as Courtifane,

Courtifanneau: m. A young, little; paultrie, Lait
uie, Courtier.

Courtifanner, To play the courtier,

Courtifé: m. ée:f, Courted, fued unto; intertained
with refpectiue complements ; ao, fattered, frowned
on,cogged with,

Courtiser. To court, make Court unto; ee
all complements, or offices of re(pelt, and Ice;
alfo,to flatter, footh, fawvne on, cog

Courtois: m. ife:£. Courteous, gentle, amass ti
wile; gratious, benigne, affable ; j trattable, füire-condi-


tioned; complementall.
Chambre courroif.4r Aiax; asser; Chambre ile,
Lance courtoife. A tilting- 50r,launce with a
blunt,or. Ane Hi pi Pro,
i fut Francois fi courte e rench
ed ener fllofcourtefe. 5: Bette


cv Courteoufly, gently, afabh, Ah


Courteihert da Courtefie ciuilitie fabilitie, ent
puro saffabilitie, ¢


debenaricie NN


kindneffe, fauour, good
* Combeiticeas erardiue D à nn Sit, fe
tie “Chimnoie tte eng Sched peut


Cane Saud: £ remonté


nee pis


ga 5
fos couru ee affentted, or


Go gle


Co bé
Co
Coufant. Sewine,or
Coufement:
reft
C
Co ag
S a


¢


RN ee DO eee


afflitted bim; a great misfertune is befallen him.
urvé, as Courbé.
urvée: f. A dayes worke, due by a Tenant crite his
Lord. See Corvée.
Ila mae AS 8 rande courvée. He hath done a great
¢ hath made a long dayes icurney ; or be
bab dipatthed the matter with verie much toyle.
To thet archvault.
ant. S$
Coufe: £ A ieafl,a toy, fle
it: m, Ase


ight matter.

or,a feame,
man;al/o,a Gnat,or Midge,
au rendre fils de putain: Proy.
Some, when they jean borrow gine good pelle Hae
when they fhould + bad ones,


Coufin: aay ie. Saba
Au prefter coufin,


oufinage: m, Ki re
ufiner. To clayme kind

lar ends; as he, who tofaue à

soe houfé to houfe, as coufit


Cal The name of a PO ATEN ae
ouffegail: m. Mefélin,corne nur as
To butt,or inrre,as Rammes do
ur: m. A butter,a iurrer.
ca 1: m, The name of a mall (but esis Buste


Cou: m. A cufhion to fit on,
ffinet :m. A cufhinet, or little Zan alfo,a fof.

“ee qe Ufed in womens garments, when one
Shoulder is higher then another, to make them fèeme
Straight though they be not;alfi,a cufbinet,or er of
folded linnen,layed on the plaifter of a wound,
Coufliner de la fefle. The flefbie tip,or mufcle of the
attoc

inet de la tro
flones,on the right

rome Trompe,
Couffineux: m. eufe: f. Full of; or flored with, cufhi-
ons : alfo, foft as a cufhion ; fit to vfe as a cufhion.


€. The firfl bed, or couching of
oi of the Pet of the out-iuttying


iffon: m. The gufe upset of a fhirt, or finocke ; alfe, a
Mite,or Weeuill.
Couft: m, Ch toa es, expence.
omange: me
tangeux: m :f, Deere, copie, charge.


au: m, ab AL rifing of ground ; a Downe,
or
cot | | de montaigne. The fideor skirt of a moun-


gout ce Participle of Coufter;) coft.


U:m, A knife,or whittle; alfo,afword, or a-

_ Mpfuch cutting weapon ; alfo, the principall feather in

~ a Hawkes wing, tearmed by our Faulkoners (in fhort-

winged Hawkes) the Cut,or Cuttie,

ufteau marin, oude mer, The Pyrot, or Hag-

fifh;a jong and round {hell-fifb, of a bright, and {hi-
colour; Jn fome parts of France, the Sleeue-fifh,

oni fome French Authors, the Sword. fifh, are alfo

called fo.

Coutfteau des moiffons. Corne-Sedge, Corne-Flags,

Corne- “Aang a right Gladen.

"are pied, A Shoomakers round cutting-


teau à rongner. The knife wherewith Booke-
binders cut the leaues of their b

Coufteau de tripiere. 4 (fefbion of) ) 1wo-edged

ife ; and by Metaphor, one that playes lacke on both


es. }
Manche


71€ 0 v


. Manche de coufteau, 2s Coufteau marin (in the
fir fine, lis mue
Pied de coufteau.A Play at Shufflebeord with keyes,
a knife being the marke. 4s
Au pain,& au coufteau avec. Familiar conuerfant,
4 daylie Le AB A fellow well met, with.
Se couper de fon propre coufteau. To cut bimfelfe
with bis owne knife; See. Couper.
Iouér des coufteaux. To fight, combat, bicker,bat-
taile ; to come to open warre ; to lay lufirly about bim;
aff, to feed eagerly, beftirre bimfelf at a Table, fall
hotly 10 bis viétuals. AC
Les coufteaux de Jehan Color, l'un vaur l'autre :
Prov. See Colot, .
Darnisvne gaine d'or vn coufteau de plomb: Pro.
A leaden Foard in a golden fheatb ; a foulebeart in a
faire bodie. |
Peu peut bailler à fon efeuyer qui fon coufteau-
leche: Prov. where the Maifler pinches the feruants
pine; or, be can {pare others but little that bath but
ttle for biwfilfe. ,
’ Selon la gaine le coufteau: Prov. An infide anfive-
vable unto theoutfide,
Selon le pain il faut le coufteau: Prov. (Like our)
© the coat according to the cloth.
~ Vn mefme coufteau me coupe le pain,& le doigt:
+ Pro.One knifé both cuts me bread,and my finger; (faid
of any thing that one while belpes,and another while
rts, î
Coultelet: m. A little kaife;or fivord.
-Coufteleux. Full ofjor fürnifhed with,knines.
_ po coufteleufe. 4 sheath which is newer without
ues, - : à
Couftelier : m..A Cutler,or maker of kniues.
Conttellerie : f. 4 cutlers fhop,or worke-boufe. .
Couftemens: m, Cofis,and charges, >
Coupes: f. A counterpoint, or double couer-
: te 4. \Y \


‘livres; J gave a bundred pounds for this ; Telle chofe
ne me coufte gueres.1 bane fuch a thing for little,or
nothing.)
Coutie &vaille. whatfoeuer come of it, bowfaeuer 1
come by it ; at what price, or perill foener I buy it; or,
1 care not what I pay for it fo it begood. . -
© Compere dé la Pouille,coufte,& defpouille : Pro.
(Said of a dangerous companion) one that will both
feed on yon, and filch from you, and at leagth wholly
fleece you ; See Pouille.
Coufieux zm, eufe: £ (ofilie, chargeable, very
ecre.


— er: m. ere: f. Wide,afide,or of one fide ; alfo,as
Ottier. À
Co Ml: Coutil; ‘tick bed. re
Couftilier. eae RE PRE
Couttillade. See Contillade. erates
er :f. Akind of long Ponniard, ufed heretofore
| Efquires. : | : Ÿ
Couftillé: m.ée: f. Oft firucken, or flabbed with a
Couftiller-re irite,or labsoften with a Coufille.
iller.To c.
Gouttilleur. as Couttllier


M eatin


bearer vntoa Knight ; the feruant of aman at Armes;
@ gr wh a fiable, a borfè-keeper.


t € Cufiome, sure; ife ; ba-
bit,manmers continuall fafbi Rees à A


…… for other leffe beafis,as Hogs,and Sheep,a balfepennie,
\ for a Hoi
Droi&


Coufter. To cofl, in price; (Cecy me coufta cent |


ier: m. An Efquire of the bodie; an Armour- |.


… maiflers;letsroundhy about


cient Law, or Cuflome in a countrey; alfo, a Cuftome,

Impofition,Tax,Toll ; alfo,a cuflomarie Rent, Seruice,

or Tenures alfo,the ufé of or freedome in another mans
_ woods,or grounds. ;

La petite couftume. is (in moff places) a pennie for

a2 Ox,Cow,Pipe of wine,or load of corne foldyand car.

tied out of the Territorie belonging to a Lord Iufticer;


or Maille; for a cart-load of moucables iiij d.Tourn:
1j d; for a mans burthen,a pennie.
couftumc. is(in Normandie)the Toll thats
payed for commodities vttered in the Market place;
and by the cuftome of grand Perche, a pennie Tourn:
due vato the Lord (that hath low Iurisdiétion) for eue-
ry fourc-footed beaft (not milch) that hath beene bred,
- bought,and delinered,within bis Territorie.
Droi& de grofle couftumé. Looke Droi&.
Prendre heritage en couftume.That is on condition
to pay yearely a certaine quantitie of Corne,or Hennes;
which if they bennpayed (bauing beene demaunded)
three yeares together,the Landlord may rcenter ; as be
may alfa,if the thing be aliened,or fald without his con-
Sent ; or if the Tenant die without iffue lawfully begot-
ten, : ;
Gafteau, & mauvaife couftume fe doïventrom-
re: Prov. (Forthe one does no good,the other much
Hrt,if it be kept.)
Leloup alla à Rome, & y laifla de fon poil, mais ri-
: endefes couftumes: Prov. The wolfe went unto
Rome,and there left part of bis coat, but none of bis ill
conditions,bebind bum. —
Couftumerie : f. 4 cuftome-taking,or cuflome-leuying;
alfo,a Place,PalJage or Libertie,whereunto cuflome is


Couftümiet : m. À cuflomarie tenant,or tenant bycus-
tome ; a Copie-bolder ; See Couftumiers.
ftumier: m. ere : £. (uflomarie,ufiall,wonted,in-
ueterate,
Aides couftumiers, as Aides chevels.Louke Aides.
Bourfe couftumiere. 4 purchafé of land made, or
price giuen for a purchafe, by a yeoman, Roturier, or |
ignoble perfon.
Pais couftumier.4 countrey thats altogether gouer-
ned by particular cuflomes;(as moft of the Prouinces in |
France be.) ge : f
Quin ¢ couftumier.The portion of younger brethren
in the inheritance left by there futhe?, which is (by the |
a of diuers places) as fift part onely, dinided a~


mong them. KES NAST Le
PR: pe A Ordinarily vfially, commonty,cu-

flomarily ; after,or according to,the ordinarieufe, and |

cuflome. ! Er


0


CT SPAS


iat


Couftumiers. Auncient,and experienced Lawyers, Fee
who are able to informe the Court what the Law, and | 2
locall cuftomes are in any cafe. +

Coufture:f. ASeame ë


eincarnatiue. LookeIncarnatif,
Herbe fans EL AN Adders tongue, Serpêts tongue.
Desfait à plate coufture. Viterly defeated ; ouer-
throwne borfe and man. aoe
Hatenguer à plate coufture-To make a rude,plaine,
or bomelie,Oration. ;
De forte coufture dure defchirure: Pro.  firong
feame firongly rent afimder. {
i Singer il ier gla
little ved mp of the kind of Moatbes.
Aca jers.Tothis Maat it, fet to it my
04 al €


ail se


a A y


ah 27 : Pate, t


Dis. pee eer ey EL Das


« SS ewe ST FU


:


co V


coy


Coutfturiere: £ A Seamfler;or woman botcher.
ufturiers : m. Certaine long mufèles in the outward
part of the eee they make plyable,to croffe one
Cox ant Sheed amed,flitched faflened
u: m.ué: £5 itc toge-
+ ther; He  ryn p througb.
Vn vifage coufit. A wrinkled, or awrithen vifages
that lookes as if the skin thereof had beene gathered,or
» plaited with a needle, +
Ses finefles ne font coufués que de fil blanc. His
dewifes are plaine, and apparant enough ; euery one
may fee bow fubtilly be bath dealt.
Coufyre: f. Bugle,Comfrey wallwort.
Coutau: m. 4 billocke,or little bill ; a Downe, or bigh
ound.


ground.

Coute: F. 4 feame ; as in Coutes.

Couteau. A knife,erc See Coufteau.

Coutelas: m. LA Cuttelas, Courtelas, or fhort fword,
for a man at armes.

ne furle vifage: £ A flafh ouer the face with
a (uttelas.

beeen m.éc: f. Wounded, flafhed,or firicken with
a (uticlas.

Coutelaffer. To wound, flafh,cut,or firike with a Cut-
telas.

Couteleu. #s Coufteau de mer.

Coutes: f. The feames ; or diflances that are betweene
Platte and Plane ina fp)

Coutil: m. 4 Ticke,or Quilt fluffed with flocks wool,


: 3 PE Mattre{e,Woolt-bed,Flock-bed,Feather-


ea,

Coutillades: £ Races ele PR
uen or made by edge-tooles.

Couton : m.A faggot-ficke;or,the thicke flalke of fome
Plants,as of Cabbage,c>c.

Coutonner. To cudgell,thwacke,bafle,belamme.

Coutre :m.# Coteret (in the firft fence.)

Coutre: f. 4s Coutil (in the latter fence.)

Coutrepointer. (im flead of Contrepoinéter)to quilt.

Couture. Sec Coulture.


gentle kind,of a right noble firaine ; be hath no manner
of ill breeding in bim Set


Couvercle: m, A (ouer,or Lid.
Couvercle digne du chauderon: Prov. 4 (ower
‘ood enough for the Cauldron,
[cl por tel couvercle: Prov. Such pot fuch pot-lid,
like maifter like man.


Couverefle : £. 4 fitting benne.


uvert: m, À Covert ; a wooddie plot,or countrey ; a
place full of bufhes,and trees; alfo,the couering,or fia-
niture of Table for the meale of a Prince, ec; alfo; a
young Shad (called fo in Anjou.)
Nous fommes mal à couvert fous. wee are il! fha-
dowed,or fhrowded under. =

uvert: m.erte:f. Covered, vayled; clofed; fècrer,
hidden; buried ; ouercaft, ouerfhadowed ; clowdie,or
darkened,as a thing ouerfbadowed.
Fief couvert. 47 inheritance for which homage and
féaltie is done or bath beene duly offered, vpon change
of the Tenantor Tenure,
Homme couvert. 4 fill, filent,or clofe fellow.

e > Or prefcription; a quiet enioying
land be by Cons fr thirte yeares together. à
Les rachapts d'un fiefcouverts.Happening,or fallen
before the receit of homage and fealtie , or a difcharge


_ ginen by the lord to the vafjall for them ; and without


any referuation of them; fo that be bath no way to get
them but by Aétion.

Vin couvert. Red,blacke,or darke-coloured wine.

* Le feu plus couvert eftle plus ardent: Prov. The
fre thats couered moft burnes moft ; or, the more tis
hidden the hoter it burnes.


Couverte: f. 4 Coverlet or bed-couering.


Tirer la couverte de fon cofté. Looke Tirer.
vertement. Couertly, clofély, fecretly, obfcurely,
darkly prinily,under band. :
ouvertoir: m, A tricke, or Engin wherewith water-
is caught. ;


Couverture : f.  cowerture,or cowering ; an arraying,


Couvade: f. a Couvée; or,as Couvement, cloathin ; alfo, apparrell, rayment,
Faire la couvade.To fit cowving,or ing within atiresalie i y , aie rl
dores ; to lurke in the campe when G are at the ngs alfo,a couerlet or couering for a bed.
Battell ; (any way) to play leaftin fight. verture de maifon. The roofe of aboufe.

Canne no Men e | top seedy Preis rupert itso

uvé: m. ée: f. Brooded,fet on,couered or cowred 0- j ite-liming, par getting, rough-cafling,alfo,the
uer,cherifhed,or kept warmesbatched;bred,or brought — pe of walls.
to perfection, by being continually fet on. tag, rture veluë. Ax Irifh Rug, Mantle, or Ca-
Couvé de maw “a pie. Il-bred, of an euill race, j
come of aneuill kind. 9 | Sous couverture de. Vader the pretext foadow,or
uvecendre. A laxie huswife; one that is ener ban- colour of. ;
ging her nafe ouer the fire. | Couvi.ocuf couvi. Am addle egge, or a rotten egge

Couvée de pouflins: £.4 brood,or batching of chickens; (that bath beene fét on.)

analy na Fea LIEN Couvine:f. Il enfcait bien toute la co. Hee is well

Couveleque: f The lid of a potorcup.(v.m) acquainted with their packings be knows fisll well how

Couvement: m. 4 brooding, fitting on,cowring ner; | : the matter bath beene carried.

=  acherifbing,or keeping ware ; alfo,a batching. Couvoir: m. A bennes neft; the place where fhe fits ber

| Couvement de pouflins.A brooding,or hatching of | _ egges; alfo,the beight,or top,of a bed in a garden.
ee ee, |e a i
ao , To br ! owi +; t0 cheri railles : f Geffimeare ; or the white,and co
° |: warme; breedor bring to. (by like exbalations which flye abroad in bot Sunnie wea-
+> Couver vn mauvais oeuf, To nourifh an ill def. | Couvre-chef:m. A Kercbie®.
a | Couvre-coeur. The Pericardium,e thin skin,or mem-
: y peut bien pondre, mais elle n’y couvera brane,wherewith the heart is couered.


Couvrement: m. A couering ; comtealing, hiding, ob-
Stusring ; burying ; vayling, enercafting, 0


is Couvte-


be there for a day or two,but lon-
not.


Sriginal-trom


HEtO HOT STATE*UNIVERSITY


co Y


Couvre-ordure. Gold; alf,a womans Maske.
Couvre-rive, Banke-couering, fhoare-furrounding,
uvrir, To cover; vayle,cloake; hide,conceale, flop,or
clofe up ; to hoodwinke, ouerfpread, ouercaft, ouerfha-
dow ; alfo, to cloath, apparrell, attire all ouer; alfo,a
dog (or füch like beaft) to lyne.a bitch; (7e which fence,
Le is the word for Wolues;and Saillir for Horfes,
Bulls,and uch other great beafis. )
Couvrir le feu de fon fivatier. A Lord to faifé, or
make an entrie vpon,his tenants land for default of pay-
ment of the rents, rights, and féruices due unto bim ;
which, as it fcemes, is done by raking out, or couering
ouer,the fire found in the tenement.
uvrir Ja jouë à, To gine a box on the eare unto,
Couvrir fon mommon à. To tickle a wench.
uvrir leur raftelier, Secke Raftelier,
Se couvrir d'un fac mouillé. To colour bis bard, or
ill dealing with idle, and infufficient pretences ; to al-
ledge for himfzlfe excufes, which rather condemne,then
cleere,bim.
ol: m,as Coyon.
Coy: m. A Sinke ; or,as Fofle coye.
Coy: m, coye : £ Quiet, flill,peaceable,calme,refifull,
bufbt ; See” Quoy. |
Fofle coye. A Priuie, Jakes, houfe of Offer.
au: m, A returned,or hip,Rafter.
Coyed. as Cayer. Pic.
ement, ‘Suicth, peaceably, lily, calmely; foberly ;
patiently,
Coymeaux: m, 4 kind of cherries. \
Coyon: m. 4 coward, cullion, {cowndrell, bafe fellow,
… fai sat ci j
onnade: £ A cowardlie,or cullionlie tricke,a bafe,
ef daftardlie port. :
Coyonnerie: f. Ba roguerie, cowardife, cullionne-
Thee.


Co


cus as a flicke,erc,

Coypeller. To chip; af, 10 thmyte, or cut
de. ;

Coyraul. see Coiraux, :

pone É roma peaceablenefre, gen-

eee £ in 5 great Ropes ufed about the (maine)

[al a Jhip.

Coyris. as Coytes. Ticke ; or, the blew-rewed fiuffe
whereof Tikes for beds are made ; alfo, a bed.


a flicke,


we


3 Ticke,

£ Coyts. as Coytes.

5 Crabbat:m. ate: f. Comelie,proper decent bandfome,
‘ gracious,of a {weet presence, pleafing to the eyes

: Crabron: m. 4 Hornet.


Crac:m, A cracke,or thing that À
Crachardsa Gach ee Rx"
rachat: m. S; t ; alfo,a pitting.
at decd yeh ont 34 ered, be-
"eftoi t craché. He refembled him in euerie
parts ion ebm 28 if he bad beene fit ont of
is mouth.
Crache-en-ruelle, 4 Pawling, or pattering flow. —
a efi. Trend Bénin apse gree)
achement : m.4 pitting, (patling, (pattering, paw-


Cracher. ro it ; Shawole ; hattle,befhatter.
Crabe mn cs 3
r a


readie money; to with round fees; to befor
row ard inbendy al, tit (asa srt doe with


- Craïon. see Crayon,


ypellé: m. ée: f. chipped alfo,thmyted,whitled,or |


CRA


bis mouth fhut) into a flefblie bafèn ; alfo,to play a mad,
marlin ie part. a ge
Cracher vn Iacobin, Looke Iacobin,
Cracheur : m. A spitter, awier, Hatterer.
uer. as Craquer.
es, as Croye, Chalke; (a rufiicall word.)
Craie: f, as Croye, Chalke.
Craies. wild Peares,choake Peares.
Craig ignant, Dreading, fearing , doubting, redoubting,
landing in awe of. . .
Craillement: m. The croaking ofa Rauen,or Toad.
Crailler, as Croailler.
Craindre, To dread, feare ; doubt, redoubt ; fland in
awe of.
Ilne craind ny les rez, ny lestondus, He refpeéls
10 man, feares no bodie, is awed by no creature lining ;


Craine: m. The skull,or braine-pan of the bead.

Crainfer, Tofbrinke in, or together ; (alfo,to crackle) as
Parchement,e>c,throwne into the fire.’

Gai : m. ainte: € Dreaded, feared; doubted,redoub-
te ;

Crainte: f. Feare,dread ; awedoubt ofredoubting.

Craintif: m. iue: €, Fearefuldreading,timerous,bafb-
fills cowardlie, daflardlie, faint-hearted, white-line-
red, "rs"

Craintivément, Fearefilly , timeroufly, with a faint
heart.”


Crainaillere: f. The pot-hanger, or pot-hookes.
ramas: m. Stones torne from rockes by tempefts, inun-
dations or the violent working of the fea.
Cramoifi: m. Crimfon cobour,
Sot en cramoifi. 4n Affe in graine,
ramoifi: m. ie: f. Crimfin, Crimfan-colouved, of a
Crimfon bue.
Crampe: f. The Crampe. .
- La crampe du pied Pun cheval. À horfes hoofe.
Les gouttes crampes. Convulfions; tenfions, or ftiffe-
neffe of the mufeles,canfed by fharpe, and gro%e vapors
inclofed among the Membranes.
Crampelle: € 4 Grampell,Grit,or Pungar-fifh.
Crampon: m, 4 Cramp-yron; a booke,or crampe of y-
TON, OC. sits
Crampon de cuir. À loope,or tab,of leather,
tine cratnpons d’un fer de cheval, Caulhes;or caut.
ings, ;
Cramponné: m.éc: £ loyned,or fafiened with Cramp-
yrons ; alfa,tatched,bafped; hooked; looped; caulked. ;
famponner. To soyne, or fafien together with Cramp-
prons; alfo,to tatch,haspe,booke;loopescaulkes |
Cramponnet: m. A little Cramp-yram;tacke,or loope,
Crane: m. The skull braine-pan,or bone of thehead. >
Cranequin: m, The Gaffe of a Croffe-bowsor,as Creg-
nequin; al/o,en Engin for batterte,v(ed in old time.”
inier: par Crofe-bow man Sa
on, bei feback or on foot)or,as Crennequinier ; at/o, an
(aire) Officer that had jn old time, the conduction of
warlike Engines. sith) 2 Te
Crannequin. as Cranequin.
i md Toud, 19%
paud de mer. nr asp ; an ouelie, and un-
Élh; or, the full-romed bellie of the Dog-fifh,


2 ee RES
A State, or Gouernment


_ La danfe des crapauds,
: wherein, knawes and fooles are fupported.
Hen eftoit chargé comme vn crapaud de plur
*Hewas little bur thened nothing trex bled) withall,—
; T Cra-


AA


Crapaudaille £ Acrueof pee à of ho
Rogues ; æpacke of baft,and beafilie Scowndr

Crapaudeau: m. A joung,or little,Toad. .

Crapaudine:€ The flone Chelonitis , or, the Toad-
Jioxe ; alfo, the fquare peece of yron, oe, where the
Pinot  playes, or turnes, in the bottome of aGate s.fome
of our workmen call it,the fole.

Crapaudon : m. 4 young Toad.

Crape : m, The Crabfifh tearmed,a Pungar. °°“! "à

Crap appa: 7 f pha etn or fea“Dinells (an ouglie,

rauenous fi
rappe. as are Ph

Crapule: 6 Drunkenne(fe, or drunken fur fettings beaui-
neffe of the bead by exceffiue drinking.

ao m. ante: f Cracking, creaking, crafhing,
clafhin

Craquelin: m. À Cracknell; made of the yolks of egges,
water,and flower; and fafhioned like a hollow trendle;
hence alfo,a little light cap of that fafhion.

Craquement: m. A cracking, creaking,clafbing.
Craqueinent des dents. The crafbing of the ath.

| Craquer.To cracke,to creake ; to crafhsto clafb.

| Mu m. ante: £ Cracking, creaking; crafbing

| often,

| Cerceau craquetant, Theierting circle made by a


SSS eee es


‘Peacocke with his tayle, by a Twrkje-cooks cod his


wings.
Craqueter. Often to park zeke
| Craquens: m. 4a often creaking, cla eis cracking,


crafhine.
Cras. as Croye. Chalke, €Villageois. “ces
Cras. as Chraies ; Choake-Peaves,


flutrifhnefe, greafinelfe, bawdineffe, waplinefse's ak
fome array.
Craffe de bronze. The skumme of melted raf
Crafle de la tefte. Dandriff’; the shales that fall from
thehead,éc;in combing ee.

Crafleufement. Filthily, nafiily, greafily, bawdily, fto-
uen, fluttifbly.

Craffeux: m. cute: f Filthie,greafie, bot Degree
fedinafi, durtie, flowentie, fous h, fa of bs cua

nelle, fall of ordure.

Plus craffeux que la taffe d'un Mefeau. Moro out
fome then a Laxers di MES sia *AOGEEN

Crafli. A certaine Jtalian coyneworthabout pag:

Craffitie: f “¢ CS tude. asc: silat

Craffitude: icknelfe,

cor m, The ess cer Goof Ps Le
med, a Brig ander. Le


Te


AE ACT
HER ad) EURE
Cc (ous bn bre ne
i or Pidture
l the Ta ie ores
STE or. Helen
| | Pa pr ne vb an press
Cre À Painted, eo wine Ge dry


in Schalk; dete
ax, thal .


Craffe: £ (Thick- grown) filth, or endure j fosewic,


G DE


colours ; alfo, rudely drawne, as a Pifture is at the


Crayonner. To paint, or draw in dry colours-; alfo, to
drave the firft lines, or make the firft draught,of a Pic-
ture,


Creable, # Credible ; or,Croyable.

Creac,ou Creal; a Sturgeon. € Langued.
Creac de Bufc. The Scate-fifh.
eance: f. Faith, beleefe; truft, affiance, confidence;
alfo, credulitie, or creduloufneffe ; alfo, credit with
Marchants, ec ; alfo, a debt entrufled ; alfo, docible-
neffe; apprebenfion ofsor obedience vnto, precepts;alfo,
behauiour, fafhion, carriage, good ov ill manners; alfo,
a-tafle, or effay taken of another mans meat ; alfo, a
Hawkes cryants.
Lacteance d'un Embañadeur. The effect, or fub-
fiance of bis Embaffage, referred vmto bis owne re-


port.
Lettres de crearice « Letters of trufl, and credence ;
wherein the writer wills, that bis mefsenger be cre-
per in thofe things which he fhall deliner by word of
mou

Creancer. To promife; to afsure by bis promife,to vnder-
take upon his word (v.m.) alfo, to taft another mans
meat,or driake ; to play the tafter.

Creancier: m, 4 creditor, or trufter.

ciere: f, A creditrix ; the woman that truf-


Createur: m, 4 Creator ; maker, ar: founder,
Creation: f. A creation,creating, framing; making,
e: £ A creature ; a thing made of nothing,
Il eft creature d'un tel Seigneur. He is the creature
of, or bath beene onely aduaunced by, fuch a Lord ; he
bath made himall that he is ; but for bim he had beene
of novwealth,no credit,no authoritie,
Crecerelle: f. A Rattle , or Clacke for children to
0 1 with ; alfo, a Kefirel , Fleiagall , or Fuck:
|


Credence. a Creance.
Tefmoing de credence. That depofés sit what be
here thinkes à is trae prithout any abfolute, or far-


Cre ed argent. Siler plate; or, cwpboord of filuer


tat


Credence: m, 4 cohorte Princes Taf
Credible. com. Credible, beleeuable to be credited,


or beleeued.

Cr red: m. Credit; reputation, account, renowme; e-
oF in, fauour wit 5 ee opinio of, the world ; “al-
So, traft, beleefe, affiance, faith ; alfo, loyaltie ; alfo;as

— 5 tuft, 8 or credit ginen ; or, à debe entr uf
ted.
Batre a: credit. Loo Batre. :
Plaifir à credit, A fleight pleasure.
Perdre leurs aines à credit. To hazard their foules on
a chars or upon no, ground,
Servir Dieu A credit, & par procuireut! Tete God
Seapets onely for a fhew.
z a qui bon credit a : Prov, 4 good name is
t treafure. ©
eur: a ati: one that beleenet, or truf:


Cretos qui fait credos charge fon dos: He that len-
deth often'loofeth. ©
Crec le: com. Creduilons,trufifull; eafie,or light of be-


duité: f. credulitie lightnefie of beleefe, !


Original.from


THE OHIOSTATE-UNIVERSITY


CRE

Crée:fasC

Creé: m. cet ne ani moe famed fem cho
fèn,ordained eflablifhed ; alfo,marked with chalke.

Créer. To sete Joue, forme, frame, giue the firftbeing
onto; alfo,to chufe,ordaine,eftablifb; pe Croyér ; ;
to marke with chalke.

Creiche:£ A crateh, racke, Oxe-flall, or crib; alfo, a
Ballace,or fnall plummie.

Cremaillée. as Cremaillere.

Cremaillere : £ 4 booke to hang any thing on; apré
lpa pat-booke,or pot-hanger.

Cremant. Fearing dreading.

Cremafteres.Two fnewes,9? muskles, sh the cods
do hang: qRab.

| Creme:f. creame
Pad as ME er ravi (
temcu: Péarefhllor read, (v.mi

Cremeur:f. Feare,dread; ir iberd milkie dif
pofitionor bumor.

-Cremillée,& Crernillére, as: Crémaillere.

Cremir. To 0 feare,to ¢ dread,

Cren : m. A breach,or frip in a knifl,toule,drc ; a notch

_ inaficre;a nockei in a bow,or artow; alfo, the cleft,or
clonen neb of a pen; alfo,the nioke of an Indenture ; or
iag about the edge of a leafe.

Crene : f, as Cren

Crené : m. ée : f. Nicked, (nipped, broken into ; nocked,
notched ; iagged, indented.

Creneau: m, 4 mooke,or corner...

Creneauxi as Carneaux ; the battlements ofa wall,

Crenelé:m.ée:f. Imbatticd; ms made into, or fafhioned
lke battlements ; or,as Crené.

a To inbattle 10 make into, or fafhion likesbat-
ilement

| Creneleure:f. An imbattling; a making i intoyar ite

; tlements.

Crentequin. as Cranequinior Crennequin.


| an imbattling,or making intofquare note
Crenne. as Cren, :
| Crennequin. as Cranequin; or (as fome à it)
a fafhion of borfemans bead-peece, refembling t : Hel-
met.
| Crennequinier. @ Cranequinier ; or, 4 crofibe)
man armed witha fafhion of bead. Ever that pen.
bles an Helmet.
Crenquenier:m.4 CotebpoteSergeannsr Offcer,that
can execute,or ferne Executions.
enure, as Crencure ; andas Cren.


| Cree f. A burfingcracking,rining afander.


iC CES wile
. ae erste i


Crepiffage:m. Parure magi afting, «> a | ny
| Crcpifleure. as Crefpiffeure. à #16
| Crepitation:f. ‘ent


eae


refpe.
pales m. ie twilight, (ibèrinshe sale


a as Croiflant; an halfe-DMoone, *
< * aioe: serre pan >
re AS


.


Ya ee ee Ea à AR Les | is, ir dé
: .oM


| Creneure:f. ‘ace tc eur


sue yu. “ a ; at
Li m. vider! 4
Ceer on : et + °


Crp: mine :f, noté if |


CRE


| Crefeul :m. 4 Cruxet,or Crurible ; a Goldfinithes mel:


tingpot.

Cresime : m, The Crifome, or oyle wherewith a Baptized
child.is anointed; (And becanfe it is to be blejjed,by a
" Bifhop before it be ‘ufed,it fignifies) alfo,a Dioces.


Homme de bon crefme. 4x open-bearted, good-na-
tured,plaine-dealing man,
Crefine:f. Creame,


Crefmé : m,ée:f. Fleeted,creamed,or, whofe creame is
Seummed off’; alfo, full of creame.
cfmeau im, The Crifome wherwith a child is annoin-
ted (in Papiffi Churches; or(more properly) the cloth, or
Chriflening cap, thats put on the bead of the child as
fèone as it hath beene annointed.


Ni +R Apen-knife ; or,afharpe,and finall graf.

Cresna sum, Cipres ; alfo,Cobweb Lawne.
Cr cron. À Grepines the Crepine of a
French-hood (moj! commonly of Cobvocb Lawne , or
white Cipves.)

Crefpe: com. curled, frixled 5 crifped; allripe,

Crs im ée:f. The fame; alfo, crackled, creaked;
crafbe

Crespelet: m.ette :f Curled,  frizled, crifped,a little.

Crespelu. as Crefpelet.

Crespelure: f. À curling, frizling, vuffling.

Crespément. Crifpingly; frixlinglycurlngly,

Cresper. Tocrackie, or creake, as new fhoves, or drie
ftickes that are layed in the fire ; alfo, to crafbbetween
the teeth (a thing thats crifpe,or brittle; ) alfo,to crifp,
curle, frixle,ruffle, braid ;.alfo,to fleeke, make to fhine,
or glitter,

Crespi :m.Parget,rough-caft.

Crespi:muie: f. Pargetted,rongh-caft; alfa, curled, or


Femme crefpie de couleurs. whofe face is all-to-be-
_ dambed,er plaiftered ower with painting,
Crefpillé: m.ée: fi Frizled,curled,crifped.
Crespiller. To frixle,tocurte,to crifpe.
Crespillonné. as Crefpu.
Crespillonner. as Crefpiller.
Crespiti: m. 4 proper name fir a man; and,the name
of certaine Saint , who is Patron to Shoomakers ;
€;
A ntide S. Crefpin. À Shoomater.
Lacodés. Crefp < An Awle. ee
“Ete :f. The cana of a French-hood,
espine de chevréau: The call ofa Kid. ~
eae du ciel. The skie,the coape of heanen.’
tte: fi A third kind of Kuot-erafe, beld (by
“pe noire be Gerards Knawell,or Parfley parte:
Crefpir. To parget,or rougb-cafl; alfo;tocurle, ©


ferment: m.4 pargetting,vough- -caflingscualing,


Crespifleure:f. A pargetting,vough-caftiags
LE be im. 4 éd frrged lock “a sua
Crespu :m.ué : € arf af eds ‘fle


hed fining;
Crefferelle as Crecerelle; a Rattleor Clacké for chile
drew; alfoya Keftrell,Staaniell Fleingall,. ;
iné.crackled,or clattered; a/fo,chattered...
Creffiner. To creake,or crackle,or clatter. 1:
Creffiner des dents. To chatter ; 10 fan Apes Pa-


Re Jhelmiche tard Karres, orGoeffes. :
alenois. Ker/t,ga7 den re mme Korres


efgon d'eau. as Creflon de ruiffeau, : den vé :


onde ruiffeau, Warer Karres, water, ope |


2
>


os


. : | | ARTE
: Orig Darirom ; a
igitiz 4G L Eee
cs oO 2g € THE:OHIO lle UNIVERS SR
| Ee MO SS — = dll


el =a Per. CR or —


ov oF


CRE


CRI


Jes, browne Crees,
Petit creflon aquatique. Little water Creffes,or Cuc-


how ers,
onidnadicre :f..4 bed of Creffes,or place where they


grow,
Creflonniere : f. The place,bed,or plot whereon (refes
grow ; alfo,a woman that ordinarily fells Creffes.
Crefte :£ 4 crefi,cop,combe ; alfoya tuft, or little plume
Standing on the top of.
La crefte des cheveux.The feame of the bead or par.
ting rf the baire in the middle of the bead,
cte au coq,ou,de coq. The hearbe Coxcombe,P e-
nie-gvaffe, yellow and white Rattle ; alfo, the hearbe


Clavie,
La crefte d'un fer de cheval. À welt about a borfe-


0e.
Crefte à geline. 4s Crefte au coq; Coxcembe.
Crefte marine. Sampier, fea Fennell, Crefimarine.
Fourni d’entendement comme yn oifon de crefte.
As wife as a Woodcocke.

Crefté: m. ée:£ Crefled, copped, adorned with a


comve,

Crefteaux : m, The battlements of a wall,érc.

Creftelé. murs creftelez. Imbatiled, bauing battle-
ments.

Crefter. crefled,combed; hauing a cref,or combe.
lamais tigneux n’aima le pigne, ny chaponcrefter
geline: Prov. The guiltie cannot abide reproofé, nor a
Weake man a woman.

Crete. as Crefte ; and hence;

Crete marine. as Crefte marine ; Sampier.

Crete: com. Gay, fine, gawdie, (pruce,neat.

Cretelé. tour creteleé d'argent. Imbattled filuer,

Cretifme. Lying ; falfhood,or falfeneffe,in words.
retonart : m. The drug tearmed Zedoarie, or Serapi-
ons Zedoarie. .

Cretons: m. The crifpie peeces, or mammockes, ve-
maining of lard,that hath beene firft fred then boiled,
and then firained through acloth,erc.

Creu : m. Groweth ; increafè re ; as Cru. Fe)

Creu : m.eué : f Growne,waxen,increafèd ; (The Par.

ticiple of Croiftre ;) alfo,trufled credited, beleened;
(of Croire.)
Il veut eftrecreu. He will fend sel qu 4 me
none fhall ouerrule him; (Creude;) He will bane
what he propounds,or appoints, to paffe for currant ; be
will bane things to goe as he lit himfelfe,

tegen :méc:£ Rinen,cleft,chinked chawned,chap-

e


pea. ;
Gerpites to ay . re illes. He rer i

vs unto his j oken of a -quis,
Crevaffe :f. 4 nt rset Ge chawne.

Crevafles d'un cheval, Cratches, or Rats-tailes in a

hor, rfès le . q

Crevalies du fondement. The Piles or Emrods.

evalle : mée : f as Crevacé, ge

ler. To chop,chawne,chap,chinke, riue,or cleane


er.
Creué: £ A groweth,acceffe,rifing; augmentation ; in.


eens ai, 3 or any other increaje of
De creué. Ouer and befidesmoreoner.


Crevé : m.ée: f.


Creve-coeur : m. Herr eat enor


re Sore againft Sco; ore defpight,


breake, bis heart
omni


muraille ctevellée, See Crenelé.


‘Go gle


Creventriffime. Anironicall allnfion veto Reveren-
ime.
Crever. Tobwrf, er breake afinder ; 10 chinke, rive,


, cleeue,or S


les yeux à. To put, plucke,or dig, out the eyes


oj.
Crevette:f. A Shrimpe,or Prawne.
Petite crevette de riviere. The Beard,ov frefb-water


Shrimpe.
Creveure : £25 Crevafie ; a chinke,cleft,rift.


Creufé: m. ée:£. Hollowed, made bollow ; undermi-
ned ,under-digged,


Creufement :m. A hollowing, or making hollow; an


undermining a digging into,or under.
Creufer. To ices bollow,dig into, or under; to
undermine,


Creufet: m.4 Crurible,Cruzet,or (ruet; a little earthen | .


pot,wherein Gold{mithes melt their filuererc.
ux:m, A caue,hole,bollow place,or corner.
pa gp de l'eftomach. The hole, er pit of the flo-
macke.
Le creux des mains. The palme, or middle of the
palme, of the bands.
Creur:mecreufe:£ Hollow , deepe, cawed , full of
Se
Racine creufe. The bearbe Holewort , or Hollow-
root. :


Songer creux, To mufe deepely of a matter.


Tefte creufe. Afballow braine,
La viande creuse(afgavoir,les beftes à deux pieds)
Wenches,trulls, female raskalis.


Creziou : m. as Crefeul: Rab.
Cri: m, A ctie,clamor, skrike ; fhowt ; an outcrie, lowd
n0}fe,acclamation ; alfo,a Proclamation.
Le cri,& les Armes. The name,title,qualitie ; Armes,
Deuice,or Scutcheon of a noble fumilie; belonging one-
b, A y (at leaft) vnto the eldeft heive (as be
etends.)


rs gr cri. See Cry. egies

n bas cri. Whifperingly ; o7,in a ill voyce.

Criage:m, 5e alfo,a crying, or setclcinieg
of; alfo,a Crierfhip; or,the Office,or place.of a publicke
Crier. .


Criaillé. Bawled, cried, fauesked out oftenand alowa ;


chin € sprotefted vehemently,

lement:m. A bawling ; as Criaillerie.

Criailler. To bawle,crie,or fqueake out often,c> alowd;
to fpeate high and earnefily; to protest with great ve-


Criaillerie : £. Lowd babling, or bravoling ; a clamorous
vrging,or proteftation,
jailleur : m. 4 bawling fellow, clamorous pein a
loved and importunate (peaker ; one who with bis bigh
Speaking deafes all that are about him.
Criard: m.arde :f.Clamorous,out-crying, full of noife;
that does nothing but bawle,bray,and crie ont,
Criarde : € Aftowld; an vnquiet woman of ber tongue,
Griblage m. Fe ffimg. wg 2
tible:m. 4 fiue,or fifter ; raunging fiue.
Criblé


: me: f. Sified,raunged.
Cribler. To fft,or to raunge. les
3 r im de bp” 4
Cribleure; or,Criblure: £ 4 (fling, or raunging of


male ; alfo, fiftings.

Cribleux f, Siue-like ; full of boles as a fine ;
~~ alfo, fad of fines.

Os cribleux. The bone Etmoide, whereof the top of

the nofe is made ; fo tearmed, becanfe it is full of ,

s


Original fron


THE OHIO'STATE UNIVERSITY“


boles like a fiue. *

Cricaille : £. Chinkes,coine.

Cride. A publike Crier.

’ Cridons : m, Certaine thicke baires ofa pinnes length,
which vex,e paine children in their turning,as muc
as if they bad fo many thornes,in their backs.

Crie :f. À Proclamation,Crie, or outcrie; alfo, a (riers
‘fee; alfo,a Crier, . |

Crié : m.ée : £ Cried, skreeked , fhowted, ballowed ;
exclaiinen of, complained on; alfo,proclaimed,

iéc :F. Any Proclamation, crie,or outcrie; whence alfo,
an outrope,or outcrie of goods (tearmed more commen

* lythan properly, a Portfale, wbich is rather a prefènt
See fs fifh in Hauens; ) alfo,a crying,e xtlaiming,baw-
Ag, baying.
Criges:Thepubication of a fütureféifure,ér fale of a
mans goods , made by a Sergeant,or Crier, at the doove
of bis parifb Church,on ie dayes ec findrie times,

. before the fèifüre,or fale,be executed.

Criement:m. 4 crying,calling, foowting; an exclai-
ming, railing, complaining, crying out againft, a pro-
claiming; alfo,a wrangling,brabling brawling.

Crier. To crie, skrecke ; ballow, fhowt ; bray, bawle; ex-
claime,complaine of, crie out upon; alo, to wrangle,
brawle,brable, contend ia words ; alfo, to proclaime ;
to fammon; fignifie, denounce by proclamation.
Crier harol.Tomake bue dr crie after ; or to exclaime
oe ec; Seeke Harol.

ier au lard fur. To flowt,deride, (coffe at publicha
ly; 10 difgrace with outcries and acclamations.
Crier au regnard lun fur I autre. To reuile ex-
treamely,raile on bitterly one another.
On crie le loup plus grand qu’il n’eft: Prov.Report
makes mifchiefes greater than they be.
La pire rouë du chariot &ft celle qui crie le plus
fort: ps hi wbeele of À aan ss
which creakes t ignorant {ot in afjemblies
talkes bighe(t; and the su pu companie brags


mot.
On plume [oye fans la faire crier: Prov. Looke


e.
Tandis quele chien crie le loup s'enfuit: Prov.
While the dog doth nought but barke, the wolfé hath
- deafüreto efcape.
Tant crie on Noel qu'il vient: Prov. We call fo oft
» on Chrifimas,that at length it comes.
Trop tard criel oifeau quand il eft prins : Prov,
Too late cries the bird when fhee is taken; too late
"comes repentance when we are fire of punifhment ; or
we repent vs too late of wrongs done when wee are
paying, far them, Lots :
Crierie: & A fhowt , exclamation,bawling , or crying
Ont. : mai : 1 F
Crieur : m.A Crier; proclaimer sexclaimer.
Crieurs detseipalicy. cerise Be 1, who atti-
red in blacke és bearing en either sok pres ei een
the Avmes of one thats latelydead , go vp and
a tinging their bells,and publifhing bis death,
the time , and place, of bis buriall ; at which
they march before the coarfe , attired , and ting-
ing, as before : In Paris there be 24 of thems; all which
arenener imployed except it be at the finerall of the
“4 : Queene; for at otbers(bow great foeuer)there
be but 23 at themof,


de vin. Wime-criers ; thofé that.
the neighbour fireets the nem at


» the pric the at and goodnefe itis of ich 10


Cr
b
Criminat
C
Cc
Cr
Cr
C
C
ft
eae


Dok by) pe ee a A Ok) din, OU AR
ing ; ‘>


CRI
approue they carrie fume of it in a pot,and a filuer cup,
10 giue any man,that demaunds,a taff of it.

Crignon: m. A field Cricket,or Graffebopper.
ime: m. A crime, fault, offence ; imputation,
Critninalité : £. criminalitie; a criminall aétion, cafe,
or cape.
ination : f. A crimination, or accrimination ; an
accufing of ov charging witha crime.
riminatoire: com, Criminatorie accufatorie ; crimi-
nall,accufing. :
riminel: m.4 malefattor guiliie perfon, offendor;the
defendant in a crimial! attion,or accu[ation; the pri
Soner at the barre; alfo,an accufer.
Criminel : m.elle:f. criminal ; guiltie, faultie , cu!-
pable; alfo,capitall,or,of life and death; whence ;
‘Iuge criminel. The Judge that fits on Life and death.
Lieutenant criminel. The fame ; See Lieutenant.
Criminellement. Criminally ; culpably, faultily guitti-
ly; alfo,capitally,
imineux : m.eufe:f. Faultfüll,naugbtie, lewd, wic-
hed, fibieét unto accufation.
in : m. À baire ; See Crins.
I n’eft fi petit crin qui ne porte fon ombre: Prov.


The finalleft haire bath itfhadow ; the leaft aët a cir-
cumftance;the lowef word a found.


rineux: m. eufe :f. Hairie, full of baire.

Criniere : f. A baire-cloth ; alfo,a hood for a borfe ; al-
fo, Crannct; armor for the necke.or mane,ofa borfe ;
alfo, bare ; or a lacke,or tuft of baire; whence;

riniere horrible. Az ouglie bufh of haire.
Verte criniere. The baires of trees ; viz.the boughes,
or branches.

Crinons des cheminées. Crickets : Pic,
Ila beaucoup de crinons en la tefte. His bead is
amnion full of crochets ; be is much perplexed in bis
thoughts.

inons en tefte gaftent la fefte: Prov. Looke
cite. ¢

Crins. les crins. The haïres ; baire.
Les crins d'un cheval, &c. The mane of a horfe;


cre, :
Cripaulme. 2s Agripaulme ; The bearbe Mother-

wort,
Criquemelette :£ A crackling, rufiling , ruffing, or


buffing wench ; one that buftles,or brufhes the ground,


as fhe goes.
Criqueinent:m. 4 creaking,crackling, ratline ; buft-

Fr pret rs mee dns D
TUE To creakesratile, crackle; buftle, rumble, ru-


Criqueter. as Criquer ; Alfo,to knacke, or knap with

* the fingers. ;
Criqueter des dents. To gnafh, or chatter with the
teeth.

Crife: f The Judgement of Phyficke vpon the alteration
of a difeafe Erni pa Lo éme the
difeafe. LEA

Criffant. Crackling,or creaking; orcrafhing.

Criflement: at créaking.as of a doore ; a crafhing,

~ of things broken ;a whiftling, as of the wind ; amy [uchb
lowed or fhrill noie. ;


Criftalin :m.ine :f. Cryflallie, cryftall-like, white,and
tran{parent, as erpfiall; of, or belonging to, cryftall.
Humeur c The c ne humour; feated in
the middeff of the eye,and of a round figure, bat
flattened both before and bebind ; it is the firf infiru-

. ment of fight ; and a glaife wherin the fpirit mn
Ma es


»


‘ »
ÿ s


a a.) 7 oe


Judges of,the formes veprefented vmtoit.
Chaque we the Criticke ; to controll, or correct
what another hath.done ; alfo, to fhew the fignes of it
Self s or,to forefberw,by fignes,what will fucceed.
La maladic critiquoit.Came to a Crifis,or altered on
_ acriticall day.
iqueur : m. 4 Criticke;a Controller,or Corrector of
‘other mens works,or doings.
| Croac: m. The croaking of Raucns, Frogs,or Toads,
tr :m. eufe:f. Croaking,as a Rauen,erc.
oi :m. The croaking of a Ranen , or
‘oa .


Croäiller. To croake like a Ranen,or Toad,
Croäillerie : f. The croaking of a Rauen, or Toad,
Croäilleur :m..4 crocker.

Croäilleur :m.eurc.# Croäilleux.

Croüilleux :m.eufe:f. Often croaking, full of croa-
king,vfng much to croake.

Croaquer. To croake as a Raucn.

Croässeinent. as Croäillemene.

Croaffer. To croake like a Rauen,or Toad.

Croäffeur : m. 4 croaker,a croaking Rauen, or Toad;
one that cries like a Rauen, or croakes like a Toad.

Croc: m. A graplesor great booke,

Donner le croc en jambe, To ouerthrew, foile, o-
uerturne ; füupplant.

Vn proces pendu au croc. A fit put off,deferred,or
hanging by the wall; the like is; :

Sac aucroc. A fuit undecided.

Croce. A.Crofier,or Bifhops flaffe ; alfo,a kind of game ;
Sce Croffe. |

Crocer. as Croffer ; To play at Cricket.

Envoyer crocer. Tofendpacking ; See Croffer.

Crocette:f.4 vine-flip; a fmall twig,or fhoot of a vine,
[bringing from the fiaulke,and fit to be planted,

Croceux. as Crojiceux.

Croché : m.ée : f. Crooked,booked; as Crochu.

Crochement des dents. The crookedne([e,or outard
bending of the teeth,or tusks,

Crochet: m. A {mall booke,or fifh-hooke; alfo, a nut-
pe oe “9 of beets me ith Mulberries bee
gathered; alfo, a grubbing forke, or booke-like inftru-
ment, wherewith the earth is digged, pe ni up ja
fo, the double skrue-hooke wherea es be bung
in Stables; alfo,the tufh,tuskeor fang ofa beaft; alfo,
a Quauer in Muficke ; alfo,a place im, or partof, a
market, wherein many things are confufedly fold toge-


ther; alfo, a Romane Beame,or Stelleere;a beame of ;


yrou or wood full ofnickes, or notches, along which a

certaine peixe of lead,erc, playing, and at length fet-

ling towards the one end 5 the tuft Det of a

commoditie banging by a booke at the other

Le crochet d'un crocheteur, The forke, or crooked

Jlaffe, vfed by a(burthen-bearing) Porter.

Clou äcrochct. Atenter booke. |

‘A crochets. Cleauing one to another; by beaps, or

budling one among another...

ue le crochet à. Totrip,caft,omerturne, ouer-

Tne faut fea gee ctochet: Prov,
« ies mult not be gatheri a hooke;nor
barfh worke fingered vith waked bares {By ay .

Cro al,

ona.


cheté: m. ée: f. Picked openwitha k
Cr ee eee.
Crocheterie:f. .A picking of lockes.
Crachetent gt Sete hebte-bésrer


* ‘Sivousnele voulez Poire,charbonnez-le. Ifyou


Crois:£.as Croix, .
Croifade: f. An expedition of Chriflians jaffembled, out
. of diners countries, (by preachings and the Popes Bulls)
«© againft the Turkes, or other Infidels; tearmed fo, bea
… caufe euerie one of them, when be dertakes the jour.
plane ye sof tbecrfe on bis calfocke; or coat ar-
© mour,the badge Croffe. - |
Croifa


Crocheteur deferrures. 4 pic a filtcher,or
filtcbing theef.. ha pati
Iles ft crocheteurs. He laid load on them,

Roche A peece of filuer money, worth about iÿ.s.
1X. 4.1teri, % :

Crochu : m. The Cormorant tearmed,a Sea-Drake.

Crochu: m,ué: f. Hooked,crooked,bowed downwards,
or imards.

Avoir les maines crochués, Looke Main,

Crochué: f. 4 Quaner in Mufic seo,

Na À crochués en tefte. (we fay) bis bead is full of
crochets.

Crochuétnent des dents. The crookedne(fe,or bending
out of the teeth, or tuskes. Frs

Crochure : f. Croskedsefe onde,

Crociteur. as Crocheteur de ferrures,

Crocodile :m, A Crocodile.

Le petit crocodile. The final! Crocodile tearmed

re ue. ‘. ,
rocodilée: f A medicine, made of fome parts of a
Crocodile, for the fiuffufions,and re of eyes. 4
roco ic. An ointment made of Saffron; alfo,tbe
dep Songe of 5 Not

Crocqué. # Croqué.

apes sp |

rocquer lapie. To wet the whiftle, or weafon
rence drimke bard, sais ™

Crocqueter. as Croqueter.

Crocute. The Corcute ; a monfler begot of a Lyoneffe by
the Hyena. :

Croie.as Croye; Chalke.

ier. as Croyer: ?

Croire. To beleeue,or thinke affuredly; to truft,bane con-
fidecein,giue credit unto;al/o,to lend,put m truft with,
a into the hands of; alfo, as Croyer; and
thence;


will not (chalke,or) beleene bim,bleach him. -
Et pour le faire croire. And to make it be beleened.
: S'en faire croire. To ouerrule,preuaile in,miake bim-
pe 3 abfolutely, or at bis ovwne pleafüre to dif
3
asin


alfo,to winne, gaine,or bane, credit by; ec ;
Sim'en croyez. Ifyou credit yelie on, or will be ru.

© Led by, me. : |
Ne croire à Dieu que fur bons ou àbonnes
les. To truff uo man firther than bee fees bim ;
= 3 no promife, nor proteftation before tbe deed


Folnecroit iufques à tant qu il reçoit: Prov. The
foole beleeues not till be do receine (the whole fruit of
‘bis owne hopes,or of otber mens promifés.)

Pour neant demande confeil quine le veut croi-
=: Prov..Jn vaine be craues aduice that will not fol
ite \ * , 12
2 femme croit,& afne meine, fon ne fera
ia fans peine: Pro. He that trufis a woman,and leads
an Affe,is neuer without one trouble or other, A


. Cro, 5
Croifadeur:m.4 ; sbe that croffes or fets,or-makes


the figne of the Croffe on bimfélfe,or otbers, ci >


Originalfram


THE OHIO STAPE-UNIVERSITY


CRO

Croifé : m.ée: £ croffeds layed acroffe, or onerthwart ;
alfo,that bath taken on him the croffe,or undertaken to
Sight againft Fafidels,

Les brascroifez. dy, floathfiully, laxilys carelef-

4; alfo, mournefilly, wofuly, dolefully, with heanie

cheere. = - :

Croix croifée. A crofft croffet (in Blazon.)

Paroles mal croifées.1ll cooched,or fet together,
Croifeau: m. A Srockdoue, Queelt, Culuer. :
Croilée: fi. The croffe-barre of a window; alfà, a win.

dow fa croff?-barred; alfo, the {pace that is betweene

the fhoulders on the top of the backe ; and (generally)
any croffe,or croffe-like proportion,or thing thats made
crofe-wift, or fet acrofte: alfo, the bearbe Crofewort

Gentian; ora kind of fimall Gentian, that beares red

flowers, and bath a white,longyand moft bitter root, [o-

ner aigne agninfl bellie-wormes, the plague,the flinging

of Serpents, cc, and vicered throat.wennes, or the

Kings Euill, |

Les croifées d'un'efpée, The croffé-barres, or bilts,

of a ford. ;

Demy croifée. A window that hath but one barre,

om fide thet

A lacroilée. (roffe-wift,orecrofe,or one onerthwart

another,

Croifer. To croffe; to figne,or marke witha croffes to fet
croffewife; to lay ouerthwart, or one orecrope another ;
alfo,to cut,or diuide in forme of a croffe-like x; alfo,to
cancell or croffe,a writing ; alfo, (at Tennis) the ball to

\ eroffe,or to take a touch of the fide-wall before it touch

the wall at tb'end,

Se croifer. To croffe himfelfe, or make the figne of the

Croft on himfelfe ; alfo,to take on him the croffe,or vn-

dertake, with others, a boly iourney, or watre againft

mifcreants,and Fnfidels. ASE

*Croifet: m. 4 (uet,(ruriblé,or little earthen pot, fuch

as Goldfinithes melt their gold in ; alfo, a greene

Frog. à | di x)

Croisette:f. 4 little crofe 5 aljo, the hearbe Croffe:

wort Gentian; or as Croilée. } on

Croifeur : m. One that fers, makes, or fampes a croffe.
on any thing, |

nue as Croifeau, . Pak Mel
toilie :f. À crofe,a croffing,amarking with a crofe,

Croifillons. Tefal croffe barres of a window. |

Croiffance: f. Groweth,increafe,a growing augmenta-
tion eeking.

Croiffant :m. The balf--Moone ; in Blazon, a Cref-


Sant. ACTE
Lecroiffant du jour. 15 about nine a clocke in the
morning. | à me 1
Ordre du Croiffant.SeekeOrdre.
Croiffant: m.ante:£ Growing , increafing, waxing
bigger and bigger. eo fot vot)
Croifset : m2 A greene Prog. ore,
iflette. as 197 2 9 SOTO
| Croiffir. Tocracke, or crafh, or crackle, as wood thats
he sy fabri ye
: roi{t :m. A groweth,increafe thriving. 7
~ Bail de beftes à croift. A leafe made of beafts (with
| referuation of their propertie) for part of whatfoener
profit fhall bemade of them, mau
Croiftte. To incres/2, grow, thrine, wax bigger , aug-
meat; (well, or rife in height, fhoot vp; come. on a-
pace.


a
¢


. Ge
4
‘


3 Len arc sai uietl ivallemes,
* might hane vets ~ euenged,or Pr y ape


conte ed dl TON SPL VS UE PIN NON : TR


SR Oo


Such a one,be will carrie coales; or he is an Affe whom
Any man may ride,

Mauvaife herbe croift toufiours: Prov, Anill weed
growes apace,

Croifitre : f. A croffea croffing,the forme of a crofee; or,
a making of the of a crofje,or e of a croffe.
La Croifure des efpaules. The breadth of, or pace
betmeene,the fhoulders ; the top or part, of the backe,
which is betweene the fhoulders.

a if. A crofe ; alfo,the figae,badge,or forme, of the
croffe.

Lacroix du cerf, The bone thats found ix the heart of
a Stag. : ,

Lacroix de par Dieu, The Chriffs-croffe-row; or, the
bornebooke wherein a child learnef it.

Exaltation Sainte croix. Holy-rood-day; (the foure-
teenth of September.)

Invention Sain&e croix, Thinuention of the Holy
Croffe; aboly-day kept by the Church of Rome on the
third of May; alfo,a {bift,inuention, or deutce for the
getting of money,

Croizer. See Croifer.

Crolant. # Croulane; whence; Bois crolant d'un la-
dre, A Laxers clacke,or clicker.

Cronique. See Chronique.

Crope: f. The top,or knap of abill ; See Croupe.

Cropion im. The rumpe,or crupper; a little ching like
4 baileor Cuckoes beak,compofed of foure {mall bones,
and banging at th'end of the Os Satré,

Le cropion du becquefigue. The haunch, or flanke,
of a Gnat-fnapper.

Le mal de cropion. The Rumpe-enill, or Crupper-e-
Hill; a difeafe wherewith {mall (cage) birds are often
troubled.

Croppe :f. as Crope. A

Croppiere. as Croupiere ; À Crupper.

Bonnet à croppiere..4 /quare cap.
Croqué: m. ée: f. Creaked, cracked ,crackled,crafbed;
,eaten, or (natchtupat a bit ; fwallowed, or let

_ downe at a gulpe ; difpatched on à fudden,in a trice.

Croque-jarret.A Baker-legd fellow;one whofe hammes
are Si a goes in with the bammes.

Croque-lardon :m. 4/mell-féafl, a lickorous flow;
a wallfull glutton,a greedie cater ; and (moft properly)
one that pickes the lard eut of meat as it roafls,

toque-motiche im. A fle-catcher ; an idle gaping
idon,

Croque-noifette. A nutacracker.
oque-notaire :m, À Pregnotarie, or Pronotarie;a

word deuifed by Rabelais i derifion of Prothono-
taire.

se re agee He whof wife beats him with a

iflaffe : € Ke

Croquer. Tocroake,creake,cracke, crafh, cracklesas a |.
bone which a dog breakes ; alfo, to eat, or. cham; to
catch,or fnatch at a bit ; alfo, to gulpe,as aman that
drinkes haflily. )

= Croquerla pie. SeekePie, FIO
roquetcr. To eat lickoroufly,to picke out the daintieft
moi fells; todenaur,or feed greedily, tolls

Croqueterie: f. Lickorous feeding or , gourmandi=
RMB NAS NX . 2 50%) 2

Croqueteur:m. 4x eatnell ; a greedie, and lickorous

eder. ra |

Cros : m. Derpe holes digged into the earth to preferue
cornein,

EE £: The foells which Pilgrims weare about

Croflé:


Po er ee Se : à


>
2


hi ie See és. 2. : 22 -


Cc RO


CRO


Croflé: m. ée:f Shaken, wagged, faft moned.
Crofler. To fhake,wag tremble ; quauer,moue faft; qui-
her, Quake. i
Croflir: mere: f. Shaking,wag ging, quaking, trem-
i
Crofliere :£. A quagmire, bog ; or peece of looffe, and
Soft Aa pr vx under the fect,


Crofse : £. 4 Crofier,-or Bifhops flaffe; alfa, a Cricket. |


flaffe ; ov , the crooked laffe wherewith boyes play at
Cricket.
Donner la Mitre, & la crofle à. To authorife, or
beare out, by the priuiledge of a religious function ; to
couer with the fpecinus cloake of Religion.
Evefque d’or crolle de bois, crofle d'or Evefque
de bois: Prov. “The Leffe a Bifhops faffe, the more his
verte, fhines ; pompe firft coirupted Prelacie.
Croffer. To play at Cricket.
Aller ou envoyer croffer.To fend one packing,to bid
him goe {hake bis eares.
Croffette:£ A flip of a tree,or plant ; See Crocette.
Croffir. as Grincer.
Croftes. as Crottes.
Crot :m. A bole,denne,caue,grot : €Parifien. j
Crotaphique : com. Belongiag,or ncere vnto,the Cro-
taphiques,
aoe crotaphique. 4 great finew neerevunto the
temples.
Ecopspeicaes. The two muskles of the temples:
Croté. as Croué.
Crotenotaire. 2s Croquenotaire,
Crotes. as Crottes. y
Crotefque: £Rude countrey painting or caraing,wher-
in a things are confiftdiy reprefemted 5 See Gro-
tefques. wf
Croton: m, asCrotton; and (more particularly) the
dungeon of a prifon. :
Crotpefcheret. 4 tind of blacke Ofprey: (Bourg.
Crotte. See Crottes. j
Crotté:m.ée:£ Bedagled ; bemired, berayed, with
durt.
Crotté en Archediacre. Dagged vp to thé bard
beeles, extreamly vay Sr allto be dabled ; (Belike


when this phrafe came firftinvfe,Archdeacons trudged
“ vp and downe on oe LG Sens
Crotter.To dig,or make bolesinthe carth,or inoldwals;

alfo,to daggle,bedurtie,bemire, : ; 112
Crottes :£. Durt, filth, mire; dagling fluffe ; alfo, the

dung,excrements, or ordure of Sheepe, Goats, Conies,
 Haresyot. 3 ~ |
Crotton:m. A deepe hole,a filthie dungeon.
Croüacement. as Crouas,


Croiias:m. The croaking,ov crie of Rauens,

Croiiaffer. To croake or crie like a Rawen, or Crow.

Crouë d’un preflouër. as Efcrouë ; or the uppermoft
| boord, and the hole thereof, wheremto the Vice-prane


enters.» |
Crouiller: m, The latchofadoore, ou
Croulant : m,ante:f. Shaking, ag ging ymonineg,tvem-


Crotr. a Crolerstof ie
Bi vois i waggingstrembling,quag-
oo, : as ee


re. .
near idan Maesteg place die


-


Seed gle


Croupeton. vn lievre eftantà croupeton. That fits


Croupie. chaffer à la cro


Croufteau :m..4 great cruft; or great fcab.


iuers. W-foaking.
Croulier : mere :f. (prez crouliers. which tremble,


Eaucroupante ; paddle waicr.

as Crope; the top or knap of a bill ; alfo,the
rumpe,or crupper peece. *
La croupe du dos. The ridge of the backe.
Vachien afsis fur la croupe. 4 dog fitting om bis
taile,or buttocks. hs
Porteren croupe. To carrie behind on borfebacke.


upon ber buitocks (as fhe doth often while fhe is at ve-

liefé)and raifes ber fei fe thereon,to lifien pre wag

of a feather.

oupi : mie: f as Croupy.

Eau Croupie.Standing water which bath no courfe,

as that of lakes, puddles ec.

c upic. To find a Hare atre-

liefe, and then courfe her with Greybounds.
roupiere de cheval. 4 hor/é-crupper,

Croupir. To crooch, bow, floope, grow or goe double ;
“ff, toreft, or grow idle ; fland, or abide long in a
place. 6

Croupiffant. eau croupiflante. 4 Standing puddle,a
dead water. res

Crouppe: f. Thetop,or knap, of a bill.

fet : ore f rer croocbing;inclined,cro0-

, Rooping ,bowing;al/o,reftine, landing being idle,
Croufille : f The fheil-fifh,called a tag ' À
uffiller entreles dents. To crafh, or crackle be.
tmeene the teeth,as a nut fhell, crc.

Croufte :£ A crnft; a feab,or hard feurfe.

( s de paftez valent bien pain: Pro.Piecraft
is alwayes worth a peece of bread ; or may well ferue in
Gead-of bread:


au de cire.A wax comb wherein bees make,
or lay up,their bonie.
Croustelévé: Scuruie,be[cabbed ; full of the pocks.
Crouftcleveure : £.Scaruine (fe, (cabbinelfe.pockineffe.
Croufteleux. Cruflie; as Croufteux. .
Crouttelles; ou Crouftellettes. Little crufis,or fcabs.
Croufter. Te crujt,or feab; 10 bring a eruf.or fcab vp-


on, :
Croufteux : m. eufe:f. Cruflie, befcabbed; bard, and
rugged,like a wall that is pargetted,
Croutons sm. Sharpe flintie fiones.
Croute:f. Abole,grot,caue denne,
Croutelevé. 4s Crouftelevé : qRab.
able: com. Credible, beleeuable;to be trufled un-


re ge i
Chofe aifée croyable: Prov. That which is eafily
» done is foone beleeued.

‘ Jement, credibly.
Croyance :f. Beliefe,beleewing,credit given vuto.
Croye:f Chalke.

Croye pour nettoyer saps: Fullers earth.

Croye rouge. Kuddleyred Lead,red Oaker.

pr teindte de pourpre. Checke vernifhred pain
Croye verde. as Verd deterre. ;
dye: m.ge:f, Chalked;marked ov whited with chalk.

er. To chalke ; to marke, or white, with chalke.

Cro’ :ineufe: E Chalke, fill of chalke.
Cru: m. À groweth , growing; increafe 5 67 increa-


ae à cru. In compleat armour , all-ouer ar-

‘me ?

+ Cela n’eft pas de fon cru. That was none of bis
owne fetting,or planting ; that 15 nene of bis owne in-
wention,or loing, | Cru


OriginaLfron
THE OHIOISTATE:UNIVERSITY
‘


t


—_” bePRT da!


| Cru: m, ué:£ crude,raw,vnripe,ouer-new ; imperfect,


croffé.
Crucifix :m. A Crucifix.


; | Cryfolite. 4 pretious flone 345 Chryfolite.


De dt te lta) | he 24: pee ei oe ee ee 4 A,


fh:


eR:


<unpiepared ; alfo,vnfanorie. ;
Cruauté: f.crueltie,iabumanitie, fiercene[fe.tyrannie,
vigour, bloudthirftine[fe.
Cruche : f.4n earthen pot,pitcheror fleane ; alfo(in old
French)a fable,

Telle terre relle cruche: Pro.Such fluffe, fuch work;
Sich wit, fuch words; fuch affection, fuch actions; fich
diféretion, fuch directions, sa

uché: m, cé :f. Hollow, or hollowed as a pitcher ;
made like a pitcher.

Crucher. (quafile mefine que,jucher ; or)-Tocrouch;

alfo,to make bollow like a pitcher:

Crucheter. as Chucheter.
Cruchette. A little pitcher.
Crucial: m, ale:f. Croffe-wift,croffe-like.

Sande: m.¢e:f. Tormented; vexed, grieued, afflic-
“ted.

Crucier. To torture, torment ; vex,griene, afi. _

rucifié: m.ée:f. Crucified,nailed onthe croffe.

Crucifiement: m.4 crucifjing,or nailing on the croffe.
Crucifier. To crucifie; to naile, or put to death on a


Mangeur de crucifix. 42 hypocrite.

cifix :m. ixe: f. Crucified, put to death on the
croffe. . : ,
Crucigeres : m. Croffä-bearers ; or, an Order of Fryers

which weare croffes ot their babits.

rd. as Cru. Crude,raw,unripe ; vaprepared.
Crudicé: f. cruditie ; ravwneffe, unripeneffe; indige/-
- twa, .
Crué. as Creué,


:m. elle:f. cruel, fll €, fierce; tyran-
nous rigorons, vamercafüll $ esbloudthirflie,blou-


Cruelifé : m.ée :f. Vfed,or handled cruelly.’

Cruellement. cruelly, fiercely, bloudily, felly,rigorous-
lysunmer cifally. +

Cruément. kawly,barely,nakedly ; alfo, vafbly.

Cruente. le Aux cr. The blondie flix,

Crujon : m. Any rowad thing, as a mans skull,or braine


panne.

Cruon. The ue braine panne ;or,asCrujon.

Crural: m. ale: Offor belonging to the thighes.
Mufcle crural. as Cuifsier.
Veine crurale. 4 branch of the defendest trunke of
the hollow veine; diuided into foure branches.

Crufol. as Cruzcul.

Cruzeul. 4 Fouaders mould, wherinto the melied met-
tall x conueyed. i à: “ \

Cry. The motto,or denice ofan Embleme.

Cry. à cor & a cry. By proclamation ; or, bybue and
‘cre, We D4 Fisch ee ere

Cryptoportique. 4 fécret wale, t under
ae in Eye place; a clofe low gallerie for
-coolenelfe in Summer. RS à


Cryftal : m. Cryflall,
Cryftalin. as Cryftals : Te
n: m.ine: f. Cryflaline,of Cryfall.


afeau :m. The little Sea-nettle: qBourdelois.
be: m.4 Cube ; or; figure of Geometrie, foure fquare


De ‘ if. Cubebs; an Aromaticall,and Indian fruit.
laire: m. 4 Groome ef the Chamber,


HG gle
re, à” = a Y


Cubique: com, Squareur made fquare.


Cucube. Herbe cuc. Garden Nighifbade.
Cucurbite : f. 4 gourd.
Cucurbitin: m, ine: f. Ofjor belonging to,eourds, {
Cucuye. Anadmirable birdin Hifpaniola (ro bigeei


Cueillement : m. A gathering, reaping, picking vp ; «

~ culling; colleéting, choice,or chufing out. À
Gueiller:m. An oare. +.
Cucillette:f 4 collection , a reaping , or gathering |


Cueilleure: f. 4 gathering ; reaping ; picking, culling,
Cueilli: m. ie :£ Gathered, reaped, picked vp ; chofen,


Cueillier. The fowle tearmed a Shoueler; alfo,as Cuil-


Cueillir. To gather; to reapes to picke up; to cull,colleét,


Cuens. An Earlesor Count, (v.m.)
Cueur:m.The heart; See Coeur. >
Cueurs. The beart-refembling (berries , called French


Cueux de plomb. A Sow of Lead. |
Cufe


gamme, oe
Cuict: m.icte: f.Sodden ; baked ; concocted difeefied,


_ Matiere cuiGte. (Sometimes vféd for ) Matiere fe- |


Cuidance : f. Thought, wecning imagination, fuppofiti-.. ah
|. Prov. Looke Semblance. vis a
Cuidant. Thinking,weening, fuppofing, imagining, dec.
Gate ie rome
pro Pick Bhs De LE - ; LME ?

: 0.4 bt,conceit,gheffe weeni ina~
a rate à


~ ~ a tt #
Le UE OUT Z , we -


CV. E


ital: m.ale :f, Cubitall ; of, or belonging to the Cu


e.
Artere cubitale. Seee Artere.


PRET


than agthombe) bauing two eyes in her bead, and ir:
under her wings(which ave double,a greater and fm: !
ler paire) fo fhining.in the night(wherein only [be fes) |
that fine * fix of them tied together.gine as much light
as a torch.


together. : ee

Bonne cueillette. Plentie of corne, and of all other
fruits ; a plentifall Autumne;or Harucf.

ueilleur:m. 4 gatberer; areaper apicker, chufer,
or culler.

Misen cuilleur depommes, Turned into the habit
of an Apple/quire. e


or chufing out.
culled, colle Ged out,


lier,a (poone ; and hence the Prouerbe ; -

Entre la bouche & la cueillier fouvent advient
grand deftourbier. Much may happen berweene ‘the
cup and the lip.


or chufé ont,


Cherries,or Spanifh Cherrie.
ueut : £4 whetfione,


tin: m...4 running at the Nofé got by a Horfe
after an ouer-long courfè , ov gallop , whereby the
Veines of bis Braine ave opened fo wide, that
they are bardly , or not in a finall time , clofid a-


ripe yous fit tobe eaten.


Bois cuict. Charcoale.


with,honie.


Micl cuiét. A kind of pancake: made of , ov feafaned:
Teftemal cuict. An-unffaied,or greene,bead, |


on,prefismption. ; |
Orne ferblante monitre folle cuidance: |:


Cuid f n'eft pas iufte mefure: Prov. Imagination


"To thinke,weene deeme, imagine, fuppafe 4
: an ma |


7


C vi


Cela cuide avenir à.That bad like to baue bappened
at.


Cuidereau:m. A Braggadochio; a pretie bardie fel-
low ; one that thinks well of bimfelfe ; one that is bold
or fo.

Cuideur : m. A thinker , weener | deemer, fuppofér ;
imaginer ; prefumer.

Cuideur de vendenge. One that is deceined in that
be thinkelb; and, more particularly, one that farts in
Syrrope ; or, meaning but to fartymars all.

Cuideurs font en vendenge : Prov. Vpon a merrie
Harueft many ground fond bopes,

Cuidrelles. see Cuydrelles.

Cuigner. To wedge,or bold open with wedges.

Cuignet : m. A litle corner ; alfoya little wedge,

Cuilier :f. A fpoone; See Cuillier,

ee : f. A ladle,

uillerée :£, À fpoone-füll of.

Cuillier :f. 4 fpoone. .

Cuillier de mer. The Sea-fpoone ; a kind of long
Cockle.

Herbe aux cuilliers. Spoonewort,Scuruie-graffe.
De vieilles maifons bruflées il fçait tirer des

liers neufues. (Said of a skilfull,ep thrifiie boufe-kee.
Per ;) be can extract new fpoones from old burnt bou-


es.
Entre la bouche & le cuillier fouvent advient
grand deftourbier: Pro.Difturbance oft fleps in twixt
cup, and lip. :
Cuillier. boyau cuil, The arfe-gut; See Boyau.
in: m. A wedge,
wae :m. The skin; alfo,askin, fell, bide; alfo, lea-
ther, Nw
Coupeur de cuir. A cut-purfe.
Le cuir luy tient. He & clungd,or bide-bound.
Faire d'autruy cuir large courroye. To fend freely
on another mans purfe; to cut a large thong out of ano~
ther mans leather,
Il feiettefur rout cuir. He deales with every thing;
all is fifh that comes to bis net, all good prife that comes
in bis way , bee greedily falls aboord onany trafh, or
ull. |


trull.

Ons’eft ioué de fon cuir. His skin bath beene plaid

sii paine ; (aid of onethat bath been through-

ly whipped. eus Ja ;

Tremelane entre cuir & chair.Trembling inwardly,

cxireamiel, throughly,or(aswee fay) at the the verie
art,


Qui cuir voit tailler courroyeendemande: Prov,

Hee that fees Leather cut requires a thong of it.
Cuirace. as Cuirafle. Me
Cuirain : m. Leatherne fluffe ; prouifion , ot marchan-

difepf leather. rad
Cuiraffe : £ 4 Cuirats; armour for the breaft , and


cue. :m.ée: f. Armed with a (uirats.
‘ Lievres cuiraffez,ou morionnez. Sillie,or coward-
die Artificers watching in armor; the ordinavie watch-
_ men good tones, F ae à
Ctra : Dre :£ Leatherie,of a bide ; or thicke
Cirle pere] Ofjor belonging to, feruing for, a
Kivats, | ? | h
Cuiraffine : f,. A fleight Cuirats for a light Horfe-
i . Ti : 5" H
Te h prie pris make ripe, or rea-
Cela me cuiét. That vexeth, fretteth, flingeth, or


C
Cuif:
Cuifi


CVI


grieueth me. :
Trop grater cuict,trop parler nuit:Prov. Too mach
Seratching paines, too much talking plagues.

uirie : f A leathernie Ferkin ; (an old word.)

uillant :m, ante: f. Smarting, itching netling, fling-


ing.

Cutital zm. ale: f. Ofjor belonging to,a Kjtchin.
Livrecuifinal. A booke of Cookerie.

ine: f. A Kitchin; (and fometimes) alfo, meat;

whence;
Leur cuifine ordinaire. Their ordinarie diet, or pro»
portion of viétua Us.
Harpye de cuifine. Arauenous,or moft greedie de-
uourer ; a beafilie fecder;one that eats extveamly much,
and (poyles the reft which be cannot eat.
Latin de cuifine. Groffe Latine,
Faire la cuifine. To play the Cooké , to dreffe
meat,
Se ruer tresbien en cuifine. To fall cagarly to bis
vittualls to be a verie good trencher-man.
Grafle cuifine maigre teftament : Prov. Great
boufé-kcepers leaue poore executors ; The like is ;
De grafle cuifine povreté s’avoifine : Prov.
Mauvais chien ne veut iamais compagnon en
cuifine: Prov. A churle cannot endure a compani-
on in his gainfull imploiments.

Cuifinement : m.4 dreffing of meat,a cooking,or play-
ing of the Cooke.

Cuifiner. Tocooke, play the Cooke, dreffe meat as a


>
Cuifineux: m.eufe: £, Fit for Cookerie, belonging to
the Kitchin.
Cuifinier : m. 4 Cooke.
Cuifiniere: f. A woman Cooke.
al ; or , Cuiffaux. Cuifes ; Armour for the
thighes. ?
Cuisse : f. The thigh.
Vne cuiffe d'ail, A cloue of Garlicke.
uifledaine: f. The name of akind of peare.
Cuiffelette :f. À ltttle thigh,
Cuiffe-né. Br etre (an Epithete of Bacchus.)
if. as
Cuiffier. Ofor belonging to, the thigh,
Matcher a the foure principall muscles
whereby the thigh is bent,or firetched out.
iffin : m. A cufhion.
uiffinet : m.A little cufhion.
li «bag th why Soft as a cufhion; fit fora
KL 3 holding of the cufhion ; full of cufbions.
LR £..A feething ; tea finarting ain, “s
of Nettles.
uiflots: m. Tales; armour for the thighes.
Cuit. as Cuid. es 4 ee
Cuite: f, A feething ; baking, batch ; ao, digefi.
on.
Cuivre : m. Copper.
Cuivreux : m. eufe : £. Full of Copper.
Cul:m. 4» arf, bumme , tayle, nockandroe , finda-


ment. :
Cul d'afné. as Cubafeau. The finall Sea-nettle.
Cul blanc. The bird called a whittaile,
Cul de cheval. A fmall,and ouglie fifhor excrefcence
of the Sea,refembling a mans bung-bole,and called, the
LeCul a efguille. Th f dle
“Le un ’efguille, The eye ofa needle,
Culd'un’efpingle. The bead of a pin.
Cul defoffe, 4 dungeon. À
Cul de four. The bottome of an uen. ©" Ci


Original trom
THE OHIO STATE, UNIVERSITY


- mm? + |


Cul de lampe. See Lampe, | .
noiié. The name of a certaine fhort-tailed Apple.

Cul de poule, A certaine bard,and eminent fivelling

on the Orifice,or edge of a Fiftula; alfo, a bringing, or

Setting all the tops of the fingers clofe together.

Cul far pointe. Topfie turuie , arfie-varfie, vplide-


owne.

Cul rouge. The bird called a Specht,or Speght.

Cullfar tefte, as Cul fur pointe.

Au cul du fac. At length; in th’end,or bottome; when

all is done and gone. :

De cul & de tefte. Furioufly, fiercely,on all bands,on

euer ie fide enerie.vway.

Afsis entre deux {elles le cul à terre. Betweene two

ftooles the breech goes to the ground. :

Gratrancle cul au foleil, Idlely, floathfiilly, flouenty;

asone that lies clawing bis breech,or bleaking himfelfe,

in the Sunne. 3 ;

leur fitleuer le cul à Dreux, He raifd their fiegesor

made them rife, fram before Dreux.

Iouér à pique en cul. To thruft out the barlot,or drine

out one naile with another.

? . Vn Mangeur de culs de poules, A nickname for a

fouldior.

Mettre de cul. Tofêt on bis arfe;to ouercome, con-
und,ouerturne ouerthrow,
orcher à autruy le cul defa chemife, Todoe aman

apleafire, but(which be could baue done bim{tlfe)on-

ly by bis owne meanes ; Looke Chemife.

“A cul de foirard toufours abonde merde: Prov.

Afhitten tale bath euer flore of ordure ; a fhitten fel-

low is flored with filthie bumours , or fcuruie fol~

ers $ is

* Ieft mal caché à qui le cul paroift : Prov. Hee’s
but ill bid that fhevoes bis taile; be is but a {hallow dif:
Sembler that fuffers the world to take notice of bis
worft humors, ©! an ">

Culace: f.\as Culaffe. i

Culaçon. The breech ofa peece of Ordnance, .

Culant. Setting on bis taile,gining an arfè-poffe unto,

Culaffe : f. The Counter (in the Poope) of a Ship; alfo,

_ the breech of a Gunne;alfo,a foule-great, or full-grown

… adfesor breech ; alfoya lumpe of gold or filuer melted in
a crurible @rc and fill retaining the forme of the bot-
tome thereof . ?
Qui ne éhaftie culot, nechaftie culaffe : Prov. He
that correëts not youth, controuls net age; he that nips
not vicein the bud, fisffersitja branch. ;

aflé: m.cé :f. Foyled, ouerthrowne, fet on the taile;
that bath receiued an > or fall on the
fe. k . * F


Culaffeur :m. One that fiylés, or fats another on bis


taile, Vaste
Culbute:f. 4-tumbling; a turning, or toffin
dove ; See Culebute. 5% Adee
Faire la culbute. To play the tumbler ; or , to turne
25.4 tumbley,top oner taile, ie
Culbuté :mée : f Tumbled,throvme topfie turuie 3 0
uerturned,turned top aa oa =e fie
Culbuter. To tumble, throw turuie, v
odlowne ; alfo,to ouerturne, Ke the taile oe one


her. |
ut bidet de culebute, The finewie iafirument


LL ONE


AE) LS] be pl J


="


4


oir in 5 Tey ee pe


CV L


Culeter.70 wag,or flirre the buttockes up and downe;to
moue the taile in a wanton time,oi with the taile keep
time unto a wanton muficke. ;


: m.4s Culetage,
Culette : £. 2s Culaçon.
r:m.ere:f. Ofor belonging to the taile, arfe,or
lament. ;
oyau culier. The arf See Boyau.
Culière :£ 4 crupper for a borfe.
Culinaire : com. Ofor belonging to,a kitchin,
Cul-leve, louérà cul-leve. To play at lcuell-coyle.
Cullot. as Culot; .4//0,a cufhion(made)to ride poft on.
Cullottes. as Culottes. aR; |
Culot:m, 4 little arfe,a fmall taile; (and by metapbor,
4 lad,or yong bodie ;) alfo, as Quiocul; and,the lag,or
laft of a companie ; alfoasCullor. .
ot de bronze.A hollow barre,or wedge of. braffe.
Culot de fondeur. The mould wherein a Bell-foun-
der,erc,cafis bis mettall,
Marcher comme culots. To come bebind, or, ix the
rereward of the veft. ‘
Qui ne chaftie culot ne chaftie culafle: Proy, Hee
that correéts not finall faults, will not controll great
ones; or, bethat corrects not a knaue while hee is
Joss will not bee able to controll him when bee is
ola,


Culottes: f. Armour for the binder parts, or taile peece,
ofa horfé; alfa, (a fafbion of) clofe breeches.

Culpe d'un artichaud. (Perhaps miflaken for Pulpe; )
The pulp, pith, or fubfiance of an Artichocke.

-pelé: m. ée: f. Bawld-arft , bare-taild , pild»

breecht.

Culrage. as Curage.

Culte : m. Re/peét,worfhip, bononr ginen , feruice done


one,
Cultellaire: com. Of a knife,or knife-like,
Cautere aire. See Cautere.
Cultivage: m. Tillage.
‘Cultivant. Tiling busbanding,dreffing,labouring.
Cultivation: f. A tilling,or tillage.
Cultivé: m. ée: £ Tilled, wrought, laboured , busban-
ded ; improued by plowing, bettered by tillage,
tivernent:m.4 tilling busbanding,labouring.plow-
ing ; culture,or improuing by culture.
Cultiver. To labour,till, plow; improue by culture better


Culture :£.culture,tillage, busbandrie,
Cumané. Of the spbill Cumana : qRab.


Cume de preflouér. (Belike miflaken for Cuve;) the


vat , or trough which receines the liquor expreffed.


Cumin : m. The bearbe,or feed,Cummin,
Cumin fauvage. Wild
three kinds; the ordinatie;the codded, and the borned


Cismalaniversicia. Leeged les by Teepe


Cumulé:m.ée:£ Heaped, accumulated, filled vp ; ga


thered by beaps.


Cumuler. To beape,accumulate, fill vp ; toaugment, or |


ther together, by heaps.
Cindatien: Coat ervance dy abiding


-gering prolonging of the time,  :
Stan L Cuneiforme. Wedge-refembling wedge-lite, ofthe fic
Cu nem, The hinder part of the butteckes ofa |. fi 5x

+: mi Buttocke 5 Rae Cuniculeux:m.eufe : £ Full ofiaward boles, or by-


corners, .


ZH Cunilage.


; Original from
THE:OHIO"STATE UNIVERSES


by plowing. f ,
Cultiveur :m. busbandman ; à labourer, or tiller of


Cummin;, whercof there are


Fs
4


| Curial:m. ale: f, ofthe mre


CVR CvY


nelle ;afeélation, 1
Curoir :m, as Curert ri 1 fee ).
Curtille :£. 4 little gd vermine,that gnawes a-
i= the roots of plants,
Cue m.(The name of )averie fweet,and long-lafting


Cr. as Cufcouil: €Rab,
Culçouil. well banged, welll foned.
Cufcute. 4 kind of worme ; alfo, the weed Dodder.
comes im, whurtle-berries,or Winberries.
onné: m. éc:f. Worme-eaten.
Cuftode: m. A Gardian, warden, keeper, ouerfeer.
Cuftode (de H@.) A Curtaine ( for a bed.)
utané : m. ce: £Skinnie,or of the skin.
uticulaire ; peau cuticulaire. Full of Pores, or of
holes, for fiveat to come out at.
Cuve :f. An open tub; a fat,or vat.
A fonds de cuve. "Largely, throughly, fully.
Foflé fait à fonds de cuve. Hawimg a bottome like a
for, flat-bottomed , ee ight fided,
Poe ta a e on emplit la cuve : Prov. By
op the the fats filled ; See Goutte.
ive: Chr: f. Put into, or Jeafoned ina great vat,or


Cave: :m. A little fat or tub.
Cuvée : f. A tub-full of.
Cecy eft d’un’autre cuvée. This is of another vef:
fell, jpg edition; of another fort , of another


Cuvelicr: m. A vat-maker,or tub-maker.
ver. To tunae, or putinto a fat, or tub; tofeafon,let
worke,or fland in,a vat,or tub,
Cuver fon vin. To difgeft bis liquor ; to euacuate or!
pare oner,the fismes thereof by a good nap, or any other


Cunilage. Sauorie winter Sauorie; alfow. baftard
pre ire (foe alfo call Fleabane,C bee)

Cunoct, 4 Keanet (apple.)

Cupide: com. Coueious , greedie , defirous of, lufling


after.
Gipidique Embloquer 4 la Cupidique; autant
ue,befongner,
Cu idité : f. Cupiditie ; luft ; conetoufnelfe ; wanton af
a difboneft loue ; vniufl, or ill- feafined , defi-


Cie) f. The little cup,or fell, of an Acorne.

Curage:f. Thebearbewater-pepper,Arfe far! Kil
ridge,or Culerage,

Curage rouge. Water Dragon,or Marfh Dragon.

Curaillés de maifon :f. The duf, filth, fweepings, or
cleanfing,of boufes.

Curatelle :£. #ardfhip ; the office of a Gardian, or Tum
tor; a frneying,an ouerfeeing.

Curateur: m. À Gardian in Socage ; a Tutor,an ouer-
feer; a Surueyor,érc.

Curation: € 4 cure ; curing beating.

Curé ; m.The Curate,or Parfon of a Church; be that bath
the {pirituall charge ofa Parifh.

Bourfe de curé.The bearb Toywort,Pickepurfe,Coofe-
weed,Shepheards-pouch,or purfe,poore-mans Parma
cetie,

Cure: f. Care,beed,efpeét, regard ; carke,thought,pen-
fueneffe ; alfo,a Cure,or charge of Souls; a Parfonage,
or Vicarage;alfoa cure bealingsreforing to health;al~
fo,a Hawkes cafting. *

Heft cour prefché qui n'a cure de bien faire: Pro,
_ He that will not be fauedneedsno preaching ; aduice
eco not with Justes are careleffe vg their owne


ood,

Curé: m, eé:f. Cleanfed, purged, purified, cleered,voi-
ded of ordure ; picked,pruned; alfo, bealed, cured,re=
couered,

Cure-dent:m. A tooth-picke.

Curée: f. 4 (do pons the bounds Sia or part in,
the game they. we
La curée d'un foffé. The cleanfing,or of 4
ditch ; the mud, flime,or durt thats taken or:

Cure-oreille. A eare-picker. * *

Curer. To cleanfe,cleere;purifies purge, wid fade
‘ieke,prame gaa i ah et 5 alfosto caft,as
4H

Cureftable: :m, A flable-cleanfer san ofr tye.

on ,01 RE ce tn a ae
urette: f..4 Chirurgtons Proo , or Probe; ir:
ment wherewith he founds the bladder, &
gether fuch grauell, congealed blond, or other filth, a
remaines init, after a sn taken out an eare-
picker; alfo, a Plough-faffesor
the (ulter is cleanfèd.) es

Cureures de maifon. 2 Cubitless ate


(4
Cuvette : f, A little fat,or tub.
Cuve de Venus. The Teaxell , or Fullers Thif-


Cuviel: m, 4 bathing tub.
Ge nous Alfo,a Dying fat,or lead.


Cuviere: prota £0 wafh, or coole
6 : a,


i es sf io iin mr Gila
lifts foie Caine fo


a cope,
reux:m. eufe:f. Full of copper.
benne ofa Saint ; whence;
beniftde las. Cy. Wine,good liquor, Nippitatie.
Cy. Here, in this place bither,in this matter ; Looke


Cy devant. Heretofore.

yané:m.ée: f. Axure,bright, blew of colour.
Cyathe:m. 4finall cup,or meafure among —,

nids, containing about foure [pooneflls 3 am

mé pe Dre D lé


C: os Cp de be ae


ende aos


hearbe Hogs-bread , Sowes-bread,
ZA ee pr Nate ee Brioni, ow
Se Ni
+ Der verge
Le; cartons oneeyedslf-blind cruel,
| Cycogne. A Storke; Looke Cicogne. ghee
cheat RE sean


CHAT wind: qRab, ve.


Original from
THE OHIO"STATEUNIVERSITY


LL dan 19 es


4


Cayce


Cone ; :
gneur : m. A Swan-keeper ; (a word fometimes v-
fed in derifion of Seigneur.)
Cylindre :m. 4 rowler; the woodden inftrument wher-
with clods are broken,and allies plained.
Cymace:£. A ledge, or outward member in Architec-
ture, falbioned fomevobat like a Roman S,and tearmed
Cc a rae Ogee. :
on, A finall Waue,or Ogee.
Cymaife. as Cymace. -
as. The rs din
Ymat. A finall waue,or Ogee(in building.
Crmbale-k A (ymball #0 om. =
louër des cymbales.autant que paillarder: qRab.
sers as Cymace; alfo,asCime,
ymettes :f. The fhoots, ar tender budsyeelded by the
Jlaulks of Coleworts , after the greater leaues baue
beene cropped off.
mier :m, as Cimier ; .4/0,a (reft, Cognifaunce, or
. GE Ra 5 on the top of pat ÿ rae
Cyinitiere..4 (hurchy#rd ; Looke Cimiticre.
Cmabre. Cynoper; a kind of Vermilion; Looke Cinna-
+ -br


ce.

Sonore An Arabian bird, that vféth to fucke

itches.

Cynanthropie. 4 frenxie, which maketh a man hauat
Pie places,with a conceit, that beeis turned
into a dog.

cn i =~ ique:f. Dogged, cinicall, doggifh, currifh,
churlifh,

Cyniphe. À gnat,midge,or dog-flie.

Cy tebe males f. Dogged.

nana :m, A Baboone.

TM Looke Cintre. ;
yon : m. A Whirlewind; or,the boiflereus incounter of

tro flrong winds(at Sea.) i

re :m. Cyperus,or Cypreffe, Galingale, (akind of
reed,

C “ : m, The Cyprus tree ; or Cyprus wood,

rés de Candie. The Candian Cyprus tree;(is low-

er,and fimaller, and fpreads it boughes in a rounder
fèrme;than the ordinarie one.)
Cyprés de lardin. Lawender Cotton; or, garden (y-


MS. y
Cyprés fauvage. Female Soothermwood.
Le menu,ou petit Cyprés. The fame, or fiveet Soo-
Droiét de branche de Cyprés. A duetie yeelded in
old time by Englifhme a Bourdeaux, as a


.


CPE :mere: f Of belonging to, Opens.
in: m.ine: f.0for b i ; 1 5
DRE ter fee yan oo


Torche os flame oflouc. ~
frog R


we Looké ;

ron: m. A band-worme; Lorke Ciron,

ernie: A feare-cloth; cre; as Ceroefne.

Cyfimbre : m. water-Mint, fifh-Mint, brooke-Mint,
“and borfe- Mint. =

C ique. Artere- cys. A braunch of the Arterie

Coëliaque; which Shain eats 5

yftique. veine cy{tique. A certaine little veine if

¢ fF me vante of the Port veine, and thence
nting tothe bladder of the gall; before it comes at


C im. A som take Cigne. Cytharifer. To fing,or whixxe as the wind.
Cénean: manne: f. Like a hu: of, or belonging | Cytife. The fhrubbie plant Citifus, fhrub-Trefyle,Her- :


D /A °C


bariftand Tetrifolie ; fome allo call it,milke Trefle;
 becaufe itiacreafes milke in the cattell that feed on


tte
Cyvade. 4 Shrimpe,or Prawne,
ge, D.
D° for dea. An Interieétion, confirming the word


whereto it is ioyned: as ouy AA, yes verilysnon-
da,no in truth,or. jo forfoath. a i
Dabblée. see Dabléc.
Drabbordée. At firftyat firfl fight, at their arriuall, as


foone as they touched , as foone as they came toge-


ther,

Dablée: f 4 crop of corne,érc ; corne growing or flan-

' dingson the ground ; alfo, Haruef, + the ae of

Corne, crt.

Daces:f, Tolles.

Dacier :m. A toll-gatherer.

Dacque. A certaine weed like unto our Docke,

Dacte: m. 4 Date,

Dactier. The Palme,or Date tree. -
Daétier d'Inde. Th'Indian Datetree.

Daétilaire : com.Ofor belonging to,a Date; alfo,Date-
like.
Cautere daétilaire. See Cautere.

Dadiliomantie: f Finger-Magicke.

Dactyle: m. Ibe Date-grape,or Finger-grape ; alfo,tbe
hearbe Dogges-tooth; alfo,akind of long fhell-fifh; al-
fo, a long precious flone found in Candia ; alfo(in verfi-

ring) g foot of three fiables, whereof the firf is long,
the two other {hort.

Daétylogie: & Finger-talke ; beech made with the


fingers.
| Dada.4borfe; (Cbildifhly.)

Dadée: £ Childifh toying, fpecch,or dalliance; whence;

= Souffrit à vn enfant toutes fes dadées. To coc-
ker , or cokes it; tomakea feddle, or wanton of it.

Dadvyantage. Moreouer; firthermore; ouer-and be»
“fides; alfo,better then; as,i} eftoit monté d'advan-
tage, Hee was better mounted than the reft ; (in
which fence it muft euer bee written with an Apofiro-


phe.)
Daemon : m. 4 dixell, fpirit, foule.
Dagard: m. A Brocket, Spitter ; Pricket; a young
male Deere that but begins to put forth abead,
Dagafle : f. Agreat dagger.
Dagobert. The name of a certaine ruddie,e> very good


peare.
Dagorie :f. The name of a faire yellow apple. -

| Dagorne: f. 4 decrepite, and oie bed
Dague: f. A dagger ; alfo,tbe bead of the young Deere,
- called a Spitter,or Pricket:


ae & bafton. Large meafure, heaped meafure, °


eafure with aduantage. 4
Dague Aroélles, A Scottifh dagger; or Dudgeon haft
1. rs

Sertance faidte à la dague. A footbiag wench,a col-

quis m. A ile (prckepdager

enet: m. « é .
Desuer. To spa with ae”

tte:f. Alittle :


-Deigning,veuchfafing. |
Ban: To deigne ; vou , thinke wortbie


zig Dai:


tr


OriginaLfrom


THE.OHIO: STATE-UNIVERSERY


Al 4 = ge
- » tn. TES
Le ep Re ee Fe


3
À
2


ee hs) …


ee


tas oie


VIE Tr HP eee ae


A ad ch
» Ae. Æù 4


.


Dail: m. A fithe to mow with.

Daille: £.-4 kind of long {hell-fifb, thats couered,or ar-
med with two fhells,

Daim: m, A fallow Deere.
ain : m, as Daim.

Dain: m.Daine: f Daintie, fine quaintcurions ; (an
old word,

Daincean. as Dainteau.

Daine :f. The Sea-fifh called otherwife,Maigre,
aing: m. as Daine.

Dainteau: m, A yong fallow Deere. |
ainticrs : m. The Doucets, tenderings, or flones of a
Deere.

Dais,or Daiz.A cloth of Eflate,Canopie,er Heanen,that
flands ouer the beads of Princes thrones;al{o,the whole
State,or feat of Eflate ; alfo, the boords of a beds tea-
fer whereat the valances be banged.

Daiflellé: m. ée: F. Made of, ov couered with,boords,

Dalader. 4 kiad offruitleffe,and barren Priuet.

Daldre. 4 Flemifh coine worth about isi.s.

Dale. as Daldre ; Al/i,a flice.

Dalle : m. A /ewer,or pit whereinto the wafhings, di
water,and other fuch ordure of boufesyare conueyed,

Dalle: f. as Dale; alfà,as Daille.

Daller : m. The coine called,a Doller.

Dalmatique :£, (4 féfhion of) a long white gowne, or
Veflment([potted;or tufied all ouer with purple)at firft
brought vp by the Dalmatian, or Sclauonian Priefis ;


a dé


pe Deacons during the celebration of folemme daies
Mafes. put
Dam. Sir; (an addition,or title of re[peët,and honour, gi.
uen, in courtefie, unto a Gentleman, ov Knight: This
in old time; and yet the Gouernors of the Charterboufe
Monks are filed Dams.) à
am :m. Dammage,loffe,binderance harme.
Damage. as Dam: Pic. Loffe,dammage,hurt.
Damaifine: € A Damafcene, or Damfen plum.
amas :m, Damaske. .
Eau de Danas. Damaske,or fweet, water (difilled
from alt forts of odoriferous bears.) x
uile de Damas. Oyle Damafeene. Zone € À


unto Damaske. \ re Pi
Rofe Damafquine. The white Muske Rofe.
Damafquinage : m. Damaske worke,


Damalquine:t. Damaskinger Damaske worke.


amafquiné. as Damaflé. pik
Darnalquiner 7» Dewoske dal orke Damaske work,
À __ to, flourifhcarue,or ingrane ske-wife,
; Ramla 1afquineure : f. as Damafceure.
| Dar


massé : m.ée : f. Damasked; of Damaske; wrought
or flowrifhed, like Damaske, à 41 27
| Da er: 4s Damafquiner. ue
| Damattic: m. À kind like unto Damasking,
1 atepic, (In old time this wort
tbat ich Monks o Seigneur doth
La pu ent AN teat
du milieu. À ceWaine thicke skin , or filme,
ea Virgine is made a woman.
Belle Dame. Seeke Beat


.- dagbters, ,


alfo,awide-fleeued Veflment or Surplus wornesat this |


=, Harueft lafls, all fellowes.


Damer. To make a Queene at Chefts; to double aman,


| outfide of a paire of Tables called Draughts,


‘Damier: m, 4
D


_ Mes Dames, The ble end ile of the French kings


Noftre Dame. Our Ladie; the virgine Marie, the
bleffed virgine. x +
L’ affumption noftre Dame. Our Ladie day in Har-
ue


Chardon de noftre Dame. The white Thiflle, milke
Thifle our Ladies Thifile. :
La conception noftre Dame. The conception of -our
Ladie ; the cighth of December , kept holyday by the
Church of Rome. <

Les cing doigts noftre Dame. Five leaued graffe.

— enoftre Dame. The flender threads of (ob-

webs. ;

Herbe de noftre Dame.The hearbe Clarie; focalled

in Languedoc.

Lai& de noftre Dame. a Chardon de noftré

Dame.

Mente de noftre Damme. Speare-mint,Baulme-mint,

Browne-mint,Macrell-mint,out Ladies Mint,common

Garden Mint, . Ÿ (

La Nativité de noftre Dame. A folemne holy-day

kept by the Church of Rome on the eighth of September,

Poire de noftre Dame. A vèrie good peare, called

Maries Peare,orjour LadiesPeare,

La prefentation noftre Daine. The Preféntation of

our Ladie; aboly-day kept by the Church of Rome on

the 21 of Nouember.

Rofe de noftre Darne. Peoxie, Pionie, Kings Bloome,

Rofe of the Mount ; alfo, the flrub called Rofe of Hic-

*ufalem, Rofe of Ferico,our Ladies Rofe,e> beath Roft.

Seau de noftre Daine. Our Ladies Seale, black Bri-

onie, wild Vine ;(an hcarbe.) :

La Vifitation noftre Dame. The Vifitation of our

Ladie; a holy-day kept by the Church of Rome, on the
Second of Iuly,

* Damme qui trop fe mire peu file : Prov. She that
heeds her beautie much, tends ber benefit but little 34
proud ,and a good,bulwift are incompatible,

En moiflons Dames chainbrieres font: Prowhile
Pour! amour du Chevalier pale la yo PEC
er: Prov. The Ladie kiffes her man for bis Ma-
fen a excelfe of ber loue which verie well might


Quand 12 Mette fut chantée,G fur la Dame parée:
* Prov. By thattime Prayers were done her ticrs were


SOM :
Vuides chambres font les Dames folles : Pro. The
= roome once voided, farewell modefiie.. 1
Damé: me :f. Made a Queene,as a Pawne at chefs;
doubled at Draughts. .


or make a king, at Draughts.

Ie datneray cefte-cy. 1 will requite, or fecond this
tale ; 1 will tell another vpon the necke. of it; (a Mes.
taphor from the making of a King, by doubling of a
man, atdraughts.)

ameret:.m. An effeminate fondling, or fond carpet
Knight ; one that (pends his whole time in the intertai-
ning, or courting, of women.


Dgsiesetb Persie Dame: il(0,) the play on the


es rabbatués, To leacher it.
bord; or, paire of Tables.

:com. Dampable,condemnable;blameable,
wifittobe allowed, ASE
Damnation :f Damnation; adamning,a condemning.
amné: m. ée: f. Damned ,condemned,adindged un-


to death, yee
Damner.


aux


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY,


DA N


Damner. Todamne,condemne,zive iudgement againft,
adiudge unto death. —__

Damoifeau. as Damoifel; and as Damoifelet; 4/0,
a neat fellow,fpruce yonker, effeminate youth.
amoifel: m.4 young gentleman proféffing Armes,and
not yet knigbted. :

Damoifel d'un tel lieu. The Lord of fuch a place (an
ancient forme of fpeech.)

Damoifélet: m. ette : £ Gentlewoman-like; or, wai-
ting on a Gentlewoman. e
Teinét damoifelet. Ax effeminate complexion ; a
face of hue more womantlie then manlike.

Damoifelette: £ 4 little Gentlewoman ; a Gentle-
woman of meane eftate, or of low degree.

Damoifelle: f. A Gentlewoman ; any one, under the

_ degree of a Ladie, that weares, or may weare, a Vel-
uet hood,

Damoifelle d'attour. The Gentlewoman,or waiting
woman that ufes to dreffe,and make readie,her Ladie,
or Mifirelfe.
Mes damnoifelles. ‘The title, and flile of the French
Kings younger brothers daughters,
amp chevalier, Thox fir Knight; or,as, Dam.
son A The name of a certaine apple,that yeelds very
cleere Cydar.
Banché, indented 3 or (as intermes of blaxon) dancy.
in:m. A meacocke, noddie, ninnie ; a hoydon, fot,
lobcocke ; one that kaows not bow to looke , and gapes
at enery thing be knowes not. }

Dandiner. To goe gaping slfauoredly, looking vnflead-
dily; to gape, and looke, like an Affe, Noddie, Nin-


nie.
| Dandrilles : f Hangars, Dantrils; Looke Dendrille.
il get: m. Danger, persll, ieopardie, baxard.
“Les dangers des bois. The amerciaments, and con-


woods, and forrefts. | | |
Droiétde tiers, & danger. A third and tenth (as of
xxx pound xiy) payed unto the King out of the price
of euery Wood/ale made in the vooods and forrefts of bis,
or other lords demaynes ( efpecially within Norman-
die) wherein he hath thofe rights.

-Fiefde danger. Looke Fief,

Ilya danger que. It is to be feared leaf,

“A grand danger grand courage: Prov. Great cou-
rage is in greateft dangers tryed ; or asin Courage.


raged) is mof} dangerous, = =

angereufement. Dangeroufly, perilou{ly with much

icopardie, with great hazard. 0 :

Dan : m.eufe: f Daungerous, perilous , ieo-
pardous, full of hazard 0
Sergens dangereux. Certaine Officers, that lenied,

vato the Kings ufé, les dangers des bois, & ledroiét

de tiers & danger , untill the yeare 1563, when they

were called by les the ninth. =

: | Dans, ai Dedans: In,within: | a

: Danfe: f 4 daunce;or dauncing.

. La Danfe des crapaux. as in Crapaud.

- Danfe du loup la queué entre les jambes. Leche-

© tie

: + Danfe Macabré. Death ; (a daunce wherein there ik

; Duck of age,degree,worth,or dignitie:).

‘Trevifanne: Lecherie. © trek
Elle fçair affez de la vicille danfe. She knowes well


ffeations adiudged vnto the King by the Officers of |


mens Sans evilain: (Pro. A clowne(in- |


DAR


rieft when their bellies are fulleft; ov when the bellie is |
© full the breech would be fig ging; (for by this Danke is |
any luffüll, or fenficall, motion under ftood.) .
Danfé. Daunced ; bopped, skipped.
-Danfement. 4 dauncing ; bopping,skipping ; a motion
direëted by time, and harmonie.
Danfer im. Todaunces,alfo, to hep, skip,or leape (for


joy.)  :
Danferen bille. To daunce very lively.
. Danfer la grue. To bop,leape, skip, daunce often 3 or
- batupon one leg.
Une feait fur quel pied danfer. Hee is at bis wits
end, be knowes not what in the earth to doe.
Amour apprend lés afnes àdan{er:Pro. Lone makes
_ thecokes turne courtier, ;
Chafcun n'eft pas aife qui danfe: Prov. Exerie one |
4s not merrie that daunces ; of fuch a one wee fay, bis
heart is not [à light as bus beeles. ,
erefle: f, A womandauncer.
Danferie : f. Adauncing,e>c 548 Danfemene.
Danfeur: m, A dauncer hopper, skipper.
Jamais danfeur ne fut bon clerc : Prov. Newer w
dauncer good [tholler. da
Danfpied. The hollow part of the fole of the foot.
ante. 4 certaine hard-skind Indian beaft,rcfembling
a Mule,
Daphnomantie. Diuination by a Lawrell, or Bay
tree. ‘ .
Dapifer. The great Mafler, or Steward of the Kings
houfe ; (tearmed {0 in old time.)
Darceau. A certaine fib; as Derceau.
Dard: m. ADart, a laueline,a Gleaue ; alfo, a kind of
Sogo nae ferpent,which from high trees throweth it
eife-at paffengers ; alfo,a Dace,or Dare fifh.
Dardanaire: m. 4 Regralor, Ingrater, or Ingroffer ; :
one that buyes,and boords up corner other prouifion, :
_— 4 purpofe to fell it againe when tis growne
eere, : |
Dardanier. #5 Dardanaire.
Darde:£. 4 play, wherein boyes hauing layed a beape of :
points under a flone , and made a circle about them,
dart at them with arod, and win as many asthey driue |
out of that circle ; ( Our boyes laying their points ina '
heape of duft, and throwing at them witha flone, call '
tna pl of theirs,Duft-peint.) i
Dardé: m. ée:f. Darted; flung,burled,caft,throwne,
pe adart; alfo, bit, burt, firucken, wunded with a


rt.
Darder. To dart ; to fling,burle,caf,or throw a dartsat |
foto bit,wound,pierce,or burt with a dart, : À
Dar e: £, A woman that caftéth a dart. à
Darde-tonneré. Thunder-burling thunder-[hooting,
eur: m. À darter, or thrower of adart.. 1" j
Dardiller. To fhake,or wauer, like adart caft with vio-
lence. : Ae
Dardoifes fourmis. Beafts among the Dardes (in the
“North part of India) coloured like cats, and as big as
Eqpanedes 3 they dig gold oare, ‘as Moles earth,
and keepe it carefully, till creeping, in extreame heat,
into caues, they are coufèned thereof by the counirey
le UE ES


/


peop à sn Sh Se
. À buge big bellie ; alfi,Dole. ;
Davies: 4 Stl pis fled ith fel bear and


ari
fpices. minced together. -
Dariolette : f..4 bawd,or carrier of loue-meffages.


| Darne:m. A flice; a broad, and thin peece, or partiti-


NT Re
Dartre: £.4 Tettar,or Ring-vorme,


“Original from tS


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSEEIS "Ss


D


Daffez. Fully,enough.

Dataire: m. A dater of writings; and (more particu-
larly) the dater,or difpatcher of the Popes Bulls;an or-
dinarie Officer in the Court of Rome.

Date: m. Piffe,vrine,lant.

Date de lettres: f. The date of Letters,or Euidences.
Misen date. Brought into date, or into reckoning;
‘come in requeft.

Mis en date de. Set in the ranke,or number of.
é: m.ée: £ Dated as a letter ec.
ater. To date a writing; alfo to piffe. ¢Normand.)
| Datif: m.iue: £ Datine; giuing ; of power to gine.
int datif. See Quint.
atil. À Date,

Dation: f. A gifi,or giuing.

Datte. as Dadte. A Date.

Dattier: m. The Palme,or Date tree.

Davantage. See Dadvantage.

Davanture. Peraduenture,by chance,perbaps.
aubé.as Dobé.

Dauber. To beat, fivindge, lamme, canuaffe through-
4


Ys
Davefnes. Horfè-plums. ,
Daugier. Droié de tiers, & daugier. Looke Dan-


A V


er,
Davier de barbier. The Pinfer wherewith he drawes,
or puls out,teeth. ” 4
Davier d'un pelican: m. A certaine infirument to
picke a locke withall ; an yron hooke, or crampiron for
* that perp +
Daulphin. 4 Dauphin, 4 Dolphin.
Daulphin de France. The Dalphin,or eldeft fonne of
France; called fo of Daulphiné,a Prouince giuen, or
(as fome report it) fold,in the yeare 1349,by Humbert
Earle thereof to Philippe de Valois; partly om condi-
tion, that for ewer the French Kings eldeft fonne
Should hold it (during bis fathers fe) of the Em-
ire


pire.
Davoines. 4 kind of Plummes ; or,as Davefnes.
Deepal: m. The fifh called, a Dolphin; Looke Daul-
» 2 phin, ‘


Es comme yn dauphin en terre: Prov. <Moft


weake, mofi feeble, without force ; (for a Dolphin.


as foone as be is out of the wai


réc.
Daurée. as Dorée.
Daufle dail. A cloue of Garlicke.


“or clones,as a head of Garlicke.


like a bead of Garlicke.
Dayinon. Looke Demon.

av: m.# Ders.
Dé: m. A Dye.

Dé à couldre. Athimbles =

Les dez luy difent fort bien. The dice are verie fa-
* wonrable to bim ; or, bee hath paffing good lucke at
- dice. Ps TE St eye ie

Ledé foitierté. Put the matter in baxard ; fit allon

fix and feuen; it can be but an ill caf; whatfoener it

be let's venture on it. Te
. Les dez font defa iettez. The worft is paft ; or,
the ation is alreadie begun, the matter alreadie de-
ps 5 We muft now fland to it,or abide the brunt
of it. :
Les deznemeveulent, The dicecroffeme.or runne
not as Irvould Ph Me = j


Digftized by Go. gle


ter. ae *
i rir f. The fifh tearmed a Cnilt-bead ao, as


Dauflé:m. ée : £. cloued ; diuided into fenerall parts, !
SeDauflet. To be diuided in fiwerall parts, or clones,


Chi cun eftant aupres du Ja


D'E B.


Sans flatter le dé. Roundly, plainly, truly without (oo-
bot {moothing, or making things ass then pl
they be.


Les graces du Lombard font trois dez fur table:
D Pro. See A 7 rf

€. Sometimes fignifies,of,(the note of the Genitine cafe

#,Le chappeau de Iaques;le chaulme de hé
Sometimes (a Prepofition) it fignifies from; as, le viens
‘de Paris; Sometumes,in,or at; as demon temps,de
ce t@nps 13; and fometimes,by ; as,Nulfibeau don
fut peemies donné de prince; la fentence,ou iuge-
ment donné de nous, &c.

De. Sometimes giues Nownes an Aduerbiall fig-
nification ; as; Il vit de reigle ; Il court de vis-
tefle,&c; He lives regularly, runnes fwifily.
D'icy à vn an, Till this time tweluemonth ; alfo, a
se hence. j

par Dieu foit. In the name of God be it ; God
pue itor fend it well to fpeed.

par bey pos Ds In the name of God ; or, for

Gods fake. @Lymofin,
De par moy ; &,De par le Roy. Looke Par.
De partied partie, Betweene partie and partie,

+ An Interiettion, as, Di ; ouy dea; Yes truely,
verily, without doubt ; alfo,a tearme of expoflulation;
as, dea, qui vous mouvoit? Why, er, good God,
what reafon bad you? or, what aGods name mooued


you ?

Dealbatoire : com. Whiting , whitening , making
white.

Deambulatif. as Ambulatif.


eambulatoire: com.0/? remouing ever going,neuer
refting ; or, remooneable, or changeable from place to


place. ‘
~ Infticé deambulatoire. Iuflice adminifired ia cir
cus. :
Debaccher. To rane,rage,rayle,take on like a drunken
man,
Debagoulé:m éc: fas Desbagoulé; al/o,mumbled,
or muttered. ng
Deba er. #5 Desbagouler ; 4/9, to mumble, or
dam A4 Gardien, Tutor, Gouernour ; as
the busband is (or flould be) of bis wife. € Boul.
Jenois.
.as Debaccher.
deur: m. A Ligbter-man ; à Porter that
belongs to a Ship, or Lighter, for the vnlading there-


É: m. ce: f. Disintangled, rid from.
ebarrafler. To loofén,disintangle,rid from.
Debafté. Vafidled , rid of bis pack-fadle, as an Affe
after bis worke done.
Ony va comme afnes debaftez. Looke Afne.
Debafter. To take off the Pack-faddie from an


Alle, Oc. ‘ :
Debat: m. Srrifé, debate, variance, conteation, diffe-.
r agreement; carving, altercation,
trouerfie,brabling,wrangling,


I able ohetedel ar SUEDE lens,


i ae ;
dle: com. Difputeable, debateable, fubiec to


oppofition.
De goers m.A debating; or,as Debattement.
ste s re m. A debater, arguer, diffuter , conten
Debatis : m. The bating, or unquiet fluttering ofa |
Hauke, she D : ‘
c-


\
Originalsfrom


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


> 2
D E B

Debatre. To debate, argue, difcuffe , examine, difpute
of; to wrangle, cauill,iarre, brable ; to ftriue,conterd,
bicker, differ about; in law to demurre upon. à
Nous dcbatons de la chappe al Abbé.we ffriue for
that whereto neyther of vs bath right ; or that we fhall
both go without ; for that which belongs or is due to a-
nother; or, we brable about bad I A ; caflles ~ a
aire ;moonefhinein the water. (The leffe properly,
SeDebatre, & demener. To befirre bimfel fe bard,
or apace. :

~ Par trop debatre la verité fe perd : Prov. By too
much arguing truth is loft,

Debattement des flancs. 4 panting in the flancke.

Debatu: m. ué:£ Debated, argued ; difputed on;
brabled about. '
Au temps que cela n’ eftoit debatu aux ieunes
honumes ; Wben that was notrefüféd, or denyed yong
men;when there was no difficultie made of admitting
yong menvnto it,

Debauchement.Looke,Desbauchement.

Debaucher. Looke Baucher.

Debellé:m. ée:f. Conquered , vanquifhed, fubdued,
owercome in warre,

Debeller. Tofubdue,vanquifhsouercome by warre.

} Debendade:f. 4 fiddaine disbanding of a companie

one from another ; an unbending ; a violent loofing, ot

* letting go, as of an arrow out of a bow.

‘Ala debendade. Coafifedly ; without order or at -

ray; alfo, violently, or firioufly. !

ebexiller. To crufh, or breake a[under, to beate unto

peeces, ;

ebiffé. Raxed, or fevaped out ; allo, ragged, tattered;

rent in peeces, torne afunder ; alfo, out of order, much

out of tune ; looking forrily as one that is not well ; ala

decayed, fbrewdly fhaken, as one


[D


Le


that is but ecouerd of agreat s 5 of who
compared to that be bath bin pi hens TE] if as aus
terabnoft fèraped out,which hardly fbews what it was,


or teare in peeces,

Se Debifter. To /plit, or fly afinder ; as boords that

vine, or cleane in afhip, or other building, for want of

due ‘me or clofe ioyning together.

Debile : com. Debile, weake, feeble faint, infirme.
Au plus debile la chandelle en la main : @Pro.“He
that worft may the candle holdeth ; or ; let bim that is
the weakeft bold the candle, , : ;

Debilitation. 4 Debilitation, weakening, enfeebling,


Debliestionde cg ca of fight weaknes
L 6 BR, : Me EN SEE s nl
Debi iliti poeakeneffiminelesfecblenefe,

in, , dec Fans Sk |
Debilité. Debiltated weakened enf aS


iliter. Todebilitate, weaken, en sm

Debiller. To valoofé the rope of a boate faftened:
the peece of wood which runs orecroffe the bamn
boate-baling horfes,

Debit : m. as Debite. -

Bei oe: m. Retaylage. Riek '

1 Debite:f. 4 diftribution, or fale of any thing by pare

telsyutterance of commodities in retaile ey upon truft


> se


3G |


Debiffer.70 raxe,or ferape outyas a etter ; alfo,torend, |.


1!


Te ae LU és Mot


D iE °B


nant to be beld of him by vents, or fernices,or both.

Debittment: m. _4 diffributing; a felling, vttering,
paffing away by retayle, or in parcels, and (moft proper-
D) upon truft.

Debiter. To difiribute or doe away things, one by one ;
to fell, or utter by parcels,to paffe away by retayle(and |
mo property upon truf};) alfo,to rid much wor ke dif:
patch bufinelfe a pace.

Debiter vn arbre qui eft abatu. To peecemeale it,to
cut it into manie feuerall peeces, or parcels.

Debiteur. Adiftributersor feller by retayle; aretayler,

upon truft;alfo, as Debreur. à

Debitis. Lettres,ou mandementde debitis. 4 gene-
vall, and saintes writ,graunted out of the Chaun-
cerie, or by fome of the chiefe 1uflices,to compel a deb-

© tor, by the fèifure, and fale of ibis goods > And impri-
Jonment.of bis perfon (if be be bound.or fübieët thereto)
to fatisfie bis creditor, that procured it.

Debitoribus. il eft rout deb.tourné à gauche: he is
cleane {poyled,ouerthrovene borfe and foot, vtterlyvn-
done; or be dares not loooke by creditor in the face.

Deblée. as Desblée. ; :

Debleure: £. (orne flanding; or banging by the roots,
eboire: m.: Aa after tafte,ill fmacke,or hvang which
an vnfauorie thing leaues bebind in the mouth.

Deboité. Looke Desboité.

Debonnaire : com. Debonnaire , courteous , affable ;
gentle mild ; of a fweet, or friendlie conuer{ation,

Debonnaire Mire fait playe puante: Prov, a ten-
der-harted Surgeon makes a wound to flinke.
Oifeau debonnaire de luy mefmefe fait: Pro. The
entle bauke (half) mannes herfelfe.

Debonnairement. Debonnairely,courteoufly affably;

ently, mildly. ;

Det nahn : Ak raft > fis es 2
courtefie, friendlines affabilitie; gentlene(fe,mildneffe
faire ibe bebaniour. roe meee
Grand’ ones a maintes hommes grevé: |
Prov. Much courtefie bath ruined many.

Debofquer. To rufh, or iffue out of a wood ; 10 rufh,or
arife from an Ambuftadoe (in a wood.)
eboucler. as Desboucler.

Depourre * Dettes ot :

ut. 7p, Pending, upright, boult-vpright,

* Bois debputsrbe (RES wine,that (when all the
reff are cut off as Juperfluous) is left growing for the
next yeares increafe. cat

Debouté: m. ée:f. Debouted;put,or thruft fram ; dri-

~ uen fro; depriued, or turned out, of ;depofed; expel-
led, excluded ; alfo, repulfed,reiecied, utterly refufed;

alfo, denyed , or difimiffed with a fharpe, a t

see ocan y nah rm. A depofing, patting or thrifting,

om; a depriving , or turning out, of; an expelling, ©
red, arepulfe;an abfolute refifall,or pere
torie denyall, of; a fhort and fharpe difimifions

weakeneffe, imbecilitie, infirmitie, =" "1

bouter. To deboute; to put, thru, or diine from;

to depofè, depriue, or turne out, of ; toexpell, repulfe,
exclude,reie : reffeabjalateh,or peremptariy alle

iffe with a fhort, and fharpe anfwer ; to fend
away witha flea im the eare. - “Sd


10 di


5 r RTE ER
| % D . S | Deboutonne:m. ée:f. Vnbuttoned;vnbraced,
~ ts bleds n'ontaucune debite.This corn is not fale- | Manger à ventre utonne, To eat while }
“À will take no mony,yeelds no commodious returne. | skin 3 0r,till bis bellie crackedgaine ~~.
wr n.€e:f Diftibuted, vttered, rereyled a |1 pes r.To vabutton, Re ast d igi
aes | 2 by parcels : 1 5 SAR OS ied SON ee Sh PP lip, a button. 207€ bikes i .
= * L Terres d bitée re bpexaitoannth D "3 m. ée.f, Viarmed,or mens seo :
4 > à + c - \ ; : er;


| Orginakfrom® | RS
THE OHD-STATÉ-UNIVERSENESS


et A 0 © Le Lans D


Pe
ed


=
2e


_fage de bois, pour pafcage, panage, ou autrement,
P me ¢ vol Tr e to be due ; to be bound nto,
| Ieluy 9 celadexeour’ 1am beholden to bim,or,1
 ambo i : \


ek ALLÉS RAA",
‘


DE B


Sunder ; without an arme, wanting an arme. (Rab.

Debraguetter: m. Anuatying of the codpeece.

Elle ne vault pas le debraguetter. She is but a
bomelie peece of fluffe; fhe is not worth the paines one
Should take with ber.

Debraguetter. To untythe codpeece.

Debranchi: m. ie: f. Lepped,unbranched.

Debranchir. To lop a tree; to cut,or pull off the bran-
ches thereof.

Debrigandé: m. ée: f. Tattered, vagged,or fiript na-
ked, as one that bath paft through the bands of needie
theenes.

Debris: m. 4 wvracke; a breaking,or {plitting afunder,
rd of ‘ Ship againft a rocke; alfo, any rupture, or

reach.


Debrifèr. To breake,burft,or (lit afunder ; alfo,to foot
4 fon? in dauncing. p
ebrifer la voix. To diuide,or velifh cunningly.
Debriflure.as Debris. :
Debrouillé: m.ée : f. Disintangled unpeftered,
Deb rouiller. To vmpefter, disintangle, rid from trou-
Il


le,
Debte:f. A debt ; a dutie, or thing due.

Debtes adtives. Debts owing,or due, by others un-

to vs.

Debtes Hypothecaires. Looke Hypothecaire,

Debtes patfives. Debts which pp or due by

us unto others. ,

Debtes perfonnelles. Perfonall debts ; thofè that

grow due vpoa a bare promife; or appeare Lo bc due by

aScedile,or Scroll.

Te ven feray la debte bonne. Iwill warrant it;un-

dertake for it,make it good. +

Il ne laiffe dormir la debte furlefoleil. He isa ex-

cellent quicke paymaler. ‘

Vicilles debtes duifent: Pro. Looke Duire.
Debteur: m.A debtor.
Debvoir: m. Datie,deuoire, indeuour ; a feruice, good

office obligation; alfo,a Haukes pu part,of the

game fhe hath taken. Te Z

Debvoirs. The aët of fu mil AE Rene
À ment of dutie,unto a landlord,expreffed by the tenants

, mouth,bandsand oath of fealtie. :
Debvoir des Deli@s. 4 bufhell à we payed unto
the Lord of the Borough of Pont Niufillac(in Britain)
‘by euerie boufeholder of auncient tenure, that keepes
Due ae the sr ge ee

cbvoir de Ligence; Seeke Li ve
Devon de noue À certaine roles ted upon
euerie load of wood-thats brought into Rennes.
oir de luets, as Debyoir des!
i rege The fee. ‘oll thats due,for
i ES: $ ca ing;unto the Miller,ot Lord of the Mill.
3 ee oir de Pafques. A Lambe at Eafler, duevnto
… fome Curates,by ewerie one that keepes Sheepe within


r Parifhes.


oirs.Ce font les charges que doivent
ù AGDE Irc sation, fost +-


cles


/


Lo requi that


Le temps le debvoit. The
ooued,it.


| REA


1


4


Digitizedyay Go gle Se


Debrifé: m.ée: £ Burfl, broken, split afunder ; ao; | ther thois cant, but dy where thou fhouldf ; yong men
nimbly footed (in dauncing.) may trauell,but the old muft refi at bome.
Debrifément: m. as Debris. Debufquer. as Desbufquer.


Ghee teed apd
eça. On this fide ; hence ; bether.
Decacheté: m. é¢: f Vnfealed,as a letter oc.
| Decacheter vne lettre. To unfeale aletter.


tenne.
Decadennites, To vndoe a padlocke; aljo, to refolue a
Riddle.
Decadence: f. Decay,ruine ; declining, falling away.
Decal d'argent. Want of alloy in filuer. fine
Decaller. To flacken,or grow fofi; to become leffe firme,


Decalogue. The tenne Commaundements.


Decapiter, To decapitate,or bebead. :
Decaptivé: m. ée: f, Vcaptinated, delinered from


Decaptiver. To vncaptinate; free from captinitie, fet


Decarteler. To


wrayed. . à
Derclement: m..Adeteélion, difélofing, difcouering,
Deceler. To difcouer , detect, difclofe, lay open, be-

wray.

Deceleur: m. LA detetter, difclofer, difcouerer, be-
wrayer of. -
Decemment. as Decentement. Decently, feemely,


Decempedal:m.ale: £ Of tenne foot,or tenne foot


Decence: £ Decencie, feemelinefe, comelineffe,pand-


DEC


Ceux qui nous doibyent nous demandent: Pro.

Our debtors ave as bold with vs as if they were our

creditors ; (applyable vato thofe that hauing receiued

great fauours, are not fatssfied, but either impudently

demand more,or ungratefilly complaine they baue not

bad enough,

Faisce que tu doys advienne ce que pourra: Pro.

Doe thou thy pers what hap may.

Il fied mal à qui doibt de parler plus haut qu'il ne
oibt: Prov. It il becomes bim that owes to fpeake

dovwder then hee ought ; (viz: to fiand on prowd

tearmes.)

In'eft pas quite qui doibt derefte: Pro. He is not

out of debt that is to pay ought.

Va ou tu peux, meurs ou tudoys: Pro. Gee whe-


e. A Decade; the tearme, or number of tenne
yeares, or moneths ; alfo, a tenth, or, the number of


hard,ar flrong then before.


ecapité: m. ée: f. Decapitated bebeaded.


Captinitie.


at libertie.
ecartelé: m. ée: f. Quartered.


quarter.
sm, Dept i
> ife.
ec we ée:£.9 a diftouered, difclofed, be-


comelily. °


long dre.
ean decempedale. ‘The fhadow of a Dyall fal-
ling upon the point of tenne.


fomenelfe.
Decent. Decent, feemelie, bandfème, comelie,gracefill,
en eee
t


Decentement. Decently, comelily,handfemely grace- :
befeemingly; aptly, fitly, conuenienty.
n.iue: f ci 3


fb crafiie, full of fubtilti.
eception : £ Deception, deceit fallacie,craft fubtit-
LL tiescouenage. : fig,
: m.ée: f Vncireled ; fquared asa circle; | ~

taken


Original-from


JHE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


DEC


taken out of a circle. rés

Decercler. To vncirele ; fquare a circle ; take out of a
circle. ;

Decerné : m. ée: f, Decreed, fentenced,adiudgedor-
dered ; determined, concluded; appointed by iudge-


ment.

Decerner. To decree,determine,fentence,order,indge ;
conclude appoint in Court.
eceu:m, eué: f Decciued, beguiled, gulled, coufe-
ned, circumuented , ouer-rangbt ; difappointed ; be-
trayed,
Il cfttoit deceu qui mal ne penfe: Prov. He that
thinkes no burt is foone deceiued ; the barmele[[e man
is quickly ouer-raught.

Decevable: com. Deceiueable; deceitfull, apt to be-
guile,coufen,gull.
ecevance: f. as Deception. ,

Decevant. Deceiuing , beguiling, guiling , coufe-
ning.
ccm m. A deceiner,beguiler,guller,coufener;im-
pofter,cheater,connycatcher,

Decevoir. Todeceiue,beguile,gull,con{en,circumuent,

ouer-reach; mocke ; difappoint ; betray.

ecez.: m.A decease or deceafing,death,or a departure

out of this life.

chalandé: m. ée:£ Out of trade, without cuflo-


mers. :
Dechaffé: m.ée : f. Expelled, cietted,drinen,or cha-
Sed away. ne
Dechaffement : m. A drining, expelling, or chafing a-
way; an expulfion erection abdication.
afler. To chaft,or drive away, from, or out of; to
abdicate,expell ciedt,thruft out.

t:m. ante: f. Falling away from ; alfo, de-
| caying waflin leffening imimfbine.
Decheoir. To fall away from ; alfo,to minifh, leffen ; de-
- cay,wwafl,fall to want.

Decheoir de claim; To relinquifh, or giue ouer,bis
' clayme ; or,to be nonfuited. :
Decheoir du droiét de. To loofe, or forfeit his right


in.
Dechet: m. 4 fall from former worth, or goodnelfe ; a
decay,waft, leffening, minifbing, in gold, filuer, wine,


Ce

Dec u:m.eué: f. Fallen away (from;) minifhed,le/-

ened; wafted,decayed ; (Looke Dechcoir.)

Dechiffrer. To decypbor.

Dechiqueté. Looke Defchiqueté.”

Gelée dechiquetée. (ut Dyamond-wife.

Dechiqueter. as Defchiqueter.

Dears m, éc:f, Tome, rent, mangled, difinem-

red. L

Dechirer. To vend,teare,mangle,difmember,

Decidé: m. ée: £. Decided, determined,compounded,

| __ ended; alfo,cut off,cut fhorter. . PAS oor
Decider. To decide, determine,compound,bring a mat-

ter to end ; alfo,to cat off or cut fhorter. ve,

| Decidu :m. ué: f. Fa fallen off; banging,or fal-

ling downe. . :

Decimable: com. Tytheable. me

Decimal: m. ale: £ Tything, or belonging to tythe ;


rence ; |
raids decimaux. Tythe-fruits.
Decime: £. The tythe,or tenth of.
D m. Ce: f Tythed ; payed as, or, put unto,
Re phere aurée tic ni à
Armée . Whereof euerie ten is
culled out, and put to death for an offence commit-


D gitizad by Go. gle.


‘Declaveter. To unbonlt,unpinne,unpeg ; loofe from.


DE C


ted by them all.
Decimer.as Difmer. To pay,or take tythe.
cimeftre. Of tenne moneths.
Decicif:m. iue: f. Decifiue deciding determining fit,
or able,to end a controuer fie.
aes f, A decifion, determination, end of a con-
trouerfie.

Decifoire: com. Deciforiedeciding ; fit,vfed,or able,
to decide controuerfies.

Declamateur: m. A declamor; alfo, an outcryer.

Declamation : f. Adeclamation ; an Oration made of
a funed fubieët, or onely for exercifè ; alfo, a crying out


Declamatoire : com. Declamatoïie,declayming.
Declamer. To declaime ; to make Orations of fained
fo or onely for exercife ; al, to cry out a-


Declarant. Declaring,telling,relating publifhing,mani-
Sefting; fignifying; expreffing, explaning, “rar 2
denouncing.

Declaration. A declaration ; a relation; an interpreta-.
tion, explication, expofition ; a fhewing, fienifying,de-
nouncing ; a [uruey of land, or Inuentorie of goods,
couched in writing.

Declaré. Declared, told, related ; publifhed,denoun-
ced, Let 3 Jignified ; exprefjed, explaned, ex-

anded.

Declarer. To declare, tell, relate; fignifie, teflifie; de-
nounce, publif, pronounce; open, cleere, manifeft, ex-
preffe,expound, explane.

se ind m. €e:f. Unpegged, vnboulted , unpin-
ned.


eclin: m. A fall,declining,defcent,or bending dowme-
wards;alfo,an e(chewing waiuing, fwaruing,winding,
or bending from: alfo,a wayning,decaying,decreafing,
or,as in Declinement. ;

Declinatoire:f. .4n exception taken againfi a ludge,
or to the Iurifdittion of a Court of lufice ; the difa-
bling, or avefifall of either of them,in a tryall.

Dedclinatoire: com. Difabling, excepting again{t, or
refufing to be tryed by,a Fudge, or Court of Ins-
tice.

Fin declinatoire. Looke Fin. |

Declinant. Declining, downe-falling ; alfo, eftbewine,
wayuing auoiding,bending from.

Decliné. Declined, bent,or lien downewards; alfo,de.
clined, e{chewed,wayned anoided, fivarued, wound,or
turned away from. wt

clinement. as Declin; le declinement du jour.
The later part of the day. ee

Decliner. To decline,bend,or fall downewards; alfa, to.

efchew, decline, bend from,wayueauoid.fwarue,turne


amarpalley. -

Decliner la Iurifdi@tion . To except againfl, or re-

re to be tryed by, a Court, as of iafufficient Iurif- |:
os. rif


Decliquer. To iert, clacke, or clatter out ; rafhly to |

blab,or bable ; tp let fly,let goc,rap out. *

Dede; com. Steepe,deepe,banging;or bending down-
ward, :

Declos. Difparked, wide open ; See Defclos. é

Decoétion: f,  boyling,or feething ; alfo,a decoftion;
or the liquor wherin things baue been fodden,

Decognoifire: as Descognoiftre ; To unknow,or ot
to


«as Defcoler 3 To unglue,
A bebeading.


Ofiginal from 7
THE.-OHIOSSTATE UNIVERSE
A J, Pme MR PART SOEs.


= ee ae


DEC


hi; Ph qe Sain& Ican. An bolyday kept the 29 of
D” i Augufi.
Decombres:f, Looke Defcombres.
Decompter. See Defcomprer. j
Deconte, A prepofierons numbringsor reckoning back-
wards ; Tooke Defcomprt.
Decoration: f.4 decoration, beantifjing bedeckinga-
dorning,garnifbing,trimming,gracing.
ccoré :m.éc:f. Decked, adorned, graced,trimmed,
beautified,
: Decore: com. Hand/ome,comelie, gracefull, feemelie,
: beautifiell,with a good Decorum.
Decorement. as Decoration.
Decorer., To decorate, gamifh, adorne, trimme, grace,
beautifiemake gorgeous, fet forth unto the eye.
Decoucher. See Defcoucher.

Decoulé: m. ée: f. Flowed,runne,glid,or fallen(gent-
| b)dovwneward; flipped away; alfo,faded wafled,con-
fumed,comewnio nothing. sy

, Decoulement:m.4 flowing,running or falling down-
2 ward ; 4 fadine,confiuming melting away.


7 Decouler. ro flow, ruane, or fall (gently) dowmward;


os to glide, or flip away; to fade, confume, comevato
nothing.

Detcoulouré: m.éc:f Difcoloured; pale,bleake,wan,
lew,

Decoulourcment. 4 flaining,diftolouring,or loofing
of colour. 3P

Decoulourcr. To ftaine, diftolour, take away theco-


lour of.


away ; flit.fliced.
Decouper. To cutdowne, or cut off; to pare, or cut a-
way ; to flice 5 to flit. ?
ecoupure: f, A cutting,paving ; [licing ; [litting.
Par decoupures. Peccemeale,in flices,by flits.
Decourir. To runnedowne ; to baft,or hy apace ; alfo,to
purge downewards. é


re ,


* Decouronné: m. ée: f Uacrowned; bereaued of a


_ Crowne.

Decouronner. To uncrowne ; or depriye of a Crowne.

Decours : m. A courfe,s fireame, a running ;a
ours the ine «man hc ren te of his
courfe, SE ey ANT

: Decours dela Lune. ‘The wayne, decreafe, or later
age of the Moone. .

| Decouru: m. ué: f. Ruane dovne; hafted,hyed ; alfa,

|: purged downewards. r= ae


| Decouftemens : m. Cas,and charges.

. ner. Té vnbooke,une fhe, }

ae mates ttm bios PR
Ve . To cleanfe, or rid fro


pite + com, Decre i i woh candle
) Lt aa ener


“ts abnoft burnt out ; that hath one foot
“up. MORTE


CF


Decoupé: m.ée:£ Cut die, cut off; pared,or cut”


and is obeyed as,a Decree. are
ecretant: m. The creditor, at whofe fuit a debtors
goods are decreed to be fold.

Decretant. Ordering,ordaining,decrecing.

Decretation: f. 4 Order paffed in Court for the fale
ofa debtors goods ; or,a proceeding thereby,

Décreté:m. ‘The debior whefe goods, after a publicke
Stifuve,are ordered to be fold.

reté: m.€e: f£.Decreed,enatled, ordered, ordained,

_ awarded,appointed,

Decreter. To order,ordaine,decree, enaët, efablifh,a~
ward,appoint ; alfo, to giue aindgement, peffe an or-
devin Court. for the fale of a debtors gcods.
ecroire. To unbeleeue; or, not to belecue; te difiruft,
or thinke otherwife ef then be hath donc.

Decroiffant. Decreafng wayning,leffening.

Decroiftre. To leffen,decreafe wayne;weare awey. |
ecroter; Decrotoire. See Detcroter,&c.

Decruftation: f. A decruflation,or vncrufling; a pa-
‘ving away of the vppermoft part,or outmofl rind.
ecrufté: m. ée: £Vinerufiedsbared of cruft,or whofe
cruft is pared away.

Destufer. : cs to pare off the uppermoft part,

cruft of:

Decufane Boyling,or feething very much.

Decuit: m. itte: f. Vnfodden; made raw againe ; al

So,boyled,or fodden,very much.

Deculpé: m.ée:f. Excuftd, purged, iuflified,deline-
red from imputation, difcharged of blame.

Deculper. Toexcufe; purge ; deliner from imputation,
or discharge of blame.

PRES Large, mightie, buge, as big as tenne.
Rab,

Porte Decumane. The chiefeft gate of the Romane
campe.

Decuplé: com. Tenne times as much.

Decurie: f 4 band of tenne, Senatours , or Soul

diors ; (a dtuifion of much vfé among the awicient

Romanes.)


edalé. Intricate , perplexed; Dedalian , Maze-


dans eno! hg kd yt dl


f e dedans. To be drunken,to be in drinke.
D: ‘ D inland.
Dodanstere Vpland,or


ai
Dedicace: fA dédication,a confecration ; a gining for


Cher. .
Dedicaffe,& Dedication. as Dedicace.

lig: m. ée:£. Dedighled , deioted , confècré-
tea.


fl +,
eee To dedicate denote,or gine for exer.


edoré: m.ée: f, Vngilt.
Dedorer. To vagild. a
me f, sde i, rimes) abatement, :
withdrawing, deduéting ; alfa guiding. =
Deduire. To deduéf, abate, plucke backe ; diminifh


à flanme 10 drare ou, or withdras ; af, to


ight in.
Deduifant. Deduding abating; inteating; dion ng


M of. ‘ ral
— m. Delettation, port, paffime,folace,pleafure,
eugpt. | ;
Deduite : f. A ‘Deduétion, Diminution , Abate-


ment. SAE on he
Deeffe:


os


. Original from
3 eee THE OHIO STATE, UNIVERSITY


eee” ae | | D > * Ep PTS


DEF


Se Defferrer l'un l’autre. To ruime one another;See

Defpoune Aifidenty draft.
ic ane Mifirufifülly ri

Deffance: f. Difirufi,d yi iffidence 2

PRE To a mifcahs (Looke Desfier;) aise defeat;al-
0 as D

Deffilé:m. ch £. Vatwifted,rauelled; alfo,difordered;
Seeke Desfilé.

Deffiler. To vatwift,unipinne,looffe,rauell ; alfo,to put
out of bis vanke,or file ; alfo,to take off a file.

effileure : f. An uatwifling, rauelling; difordering ; 5

difplacing.

Deffleurer.To rafefcotchor fératch; LookeDesfleurer,
or Defleurer.

Defformité. as Difformité.

Deffortune: m. Misfortune milthance.

Deffortuné: m.ée: f. Vnfortunate.

Deftouir. Te dig vp, to unearth, to take out of the
earth,

Deffrayer. as Defrayer.

Deffriché, as Defriché ; Grubd up,crc.


Deftroncer. To vnfrounce;umwrinckle,vnerumple.
Deffrongner. The fame; and(as the fame) to fmooth the
forebead or leaue frowning,
Dethoqueé: m.ée: f Sri Ya, |, unclothed.
Deffuler as Defeubler,or Desfuler,
Defi: m. A challenge,defÿ,prouocation,defiance.
Defiance: f. A defying,or defiance.
Defiché: m. ée: f, Vatfixed,looffed unfaflened.
Deficher. To looffe,unfix,unfaflen.
psi Defyed, prouoked, or challenged to fight,or con-
ter
Defiement:m. A'defjing,or challenging to fight.
Defier. To defie,challenge,pronoke,or call unto fight or


A ui be: Diyeré, a à, wife
É e m. €e: f. Disfigured, defirmed, mifhapen,
Di 3 whofe fafhion s marred. ;


rement: m. 4 disfiguring, diferacing mifba-
De a marring of the frfhien

Defigurer. To disfigure,deforme, deface, difgrace; te

ionymarre the figure of.

Defilé : m.ée: f. Rauelled.

Se Defiler. To rauell,as clotb,fiuffe fle linen dtl 5

> after it is cut.
Defilocher. as Defiler. To ranell.

 Defiloter. The fame.

Pre
ù ings in inely benumming.

Define : + :f Wafled, =
away ; dé 2h ah aes to nothing; alfo,
taken.

Definement:m. 4 pining, wafling, confuming,wea-
ring,or falling away. (Le Definement du monde.
The later end of the world; ) alfo, a | > ta
king, fuddaine benumming, or putvefattion of a mem-


Ace. To pine, Sd a mors al
ec arg


Do. To defin


away,al-.


ie taba seat filly ly i deere, tb ae


pénis zm, jue: :f “Defiitine; which
ven


deiermines ily bic make


Adin 3 exact a et Lipa
a defining ; apt
deferibing. |


Deflurioty £a


| lurcher.
pad ni. be: £ Defranded, beguiled.


‘| Deftayer. To defray; 10 difébarge ; to firnifh,or beare, |


DEF


pore Definitinely; deter minately expreffe-
pel precifely, fully .
si m. ée: £ Whofe flame is extinguifhed,or put


Dele, i quench,extinguifh ; put out,or take away,

the flam

Defleuré: m. ée : f. oy 9 diftained ; defiled,vi-
olated ; whofe a TR be cropped,or fhed.

Defleurer. 70 loure ; to ey "qi 3 to crop the flower of;
to diftaine, violate blemi iflsdiminifh the chiefifl grace,
and beautie of a thing.

Se defleurer. as Defleurir.

Defleurir. To shed, or let fall it flowers ; hence, to looft
the beautie,or grace, which eïft it bad; or, it former
beautie to fade, faile,or fall away,

Se Deflicher. To plucke an arrow,or arrowes out of bis
(owne)bodie.

Defloration. A deflowring; the change frem a fleurifh-

ing colour to the contrarie.

se eflorer.«s Defleurir.

Ye to runne, as water, or a fore.

ewme,(atarrbe.
Defoncé. as Desoncé Knockt out, as the bead of a
wine-ve fell,

Detorcé: m. Les f. Dispoffel[ed,diffeifed.

Dre To diffeife,dispoffef, violently take, forcibly |


Déformation A deforming, disfiguring, defacing ;


Dem: m. ée : Dore, defaced, disfigured,
made ouglie ; diféraced.
rmer. To ioe, disfigure,defice, make ouglie ;
pe
efortifié : m. ée: f. Vnfortified ; rafed.
Deore: To unfortifie; torafe a fortification.
ulé:m. ce: f. Troden,trampled on; alfo,taunted,
_ rebuked,reproched.
efouletnent. 4 send or trampling on ; alfo, a
taunting, rebuking reproching.
er. To tread, or honte 1 3 alfo, to rebuke, re-
proch, taunt, or take vp
audateur. A defrander , deceiner , beguiler


:m. A defranding, deceining, begui-


uder. To defiaud, beguile, coufen, deceine, im-
brea or take away the profit belonging to ano-


Detiayé: m. ¢e: f, Defrayed ; difchargeds acqui-


all the charges of.
ayeur: m. 4 Cater,or Steward; one that in a iour-
ney fürnifhes, and defrayes the prouifi on, and expence
_ of the whole companie.
De :m.€e: f. Torne, ragged,tattered ; that
bath not a whole clout on bim.
er. Te teare into rags,make tatters of.
e: m. The fhrubbing,or grubbing up of yong
rs; ss any [uc preparation, or worke, fit-
ced bdd of b dcbind b
G d S,r00!S, ering the
Plog 3 prepared, or firft brokenvp for tillage ; made


a a m. À grubbi ie
ground from bufbes, and thereby to make it ar


Preparationsor breaking vp for tillage, D
IC


Orig


inaltrom


THE-OHIO STATE*UNIVERSITY


DEG


| Defticher. To grub, flrub, rid a ground from rootes,
bufhes, leg rary to make it arable ; to pre-

\_ pare,or breake up land for tillage.

Deftichis : m. Grabbings ; bufhes,rootes, thifiles,ec,
pluckt out of the ground.

Se Deftiper. To rub, or ferub with the fhoulders, after
the fafbion of lowfie bedge-creepers.

Defroiflé: m.ée: f. Crufhed in peeces.
efroifler. To crufh in peeces. y

Defroque:f. Spoyle, bootie, pillage, got by firipping of
poore men,

Defroqué: m. ée: f. Strippeduncletbed,despoyled,or
depriued of garments. x

Defroquer. To firip,uncloth,difpoyle ,deprine of bis ba-
billements, : ;

Deftoy: m, A defraying; a bearing of other mens char-

5


ges.

Defueillé: m. ée:f. Vnleaned; bared, or bereft of
leanes.

Defueiller. To vnleane,to plucke the leaues from,to de-
priue of leaues.

Defunct. Vn defunét. Adeceafed or dead perfènsone
that is departed thus life.

Defunétoirement. By difcent, or fucceffion after the
deceafe of another.

Degaerie : f. An-under Bayliwicke; the Office, Author.
tre,Precinét or Circuit of aDegan.

icd. Waxen poore,undone, downe the weather.


Ic,
Degan: m. A certaine infériour Officer, or under Bay-
| 4ffe, chofen euerie May day within the feuerall mem-
bers,or Hamlets of the Iarifdiétion of La Solle ; (hee
cannot arrefl a Gentleman ; and deales moft in perfo-
Dégaisuille” arble hand confifedy
egafouiller. To fing,or war ‘confifedly;as
op of. final birds met, and fet dovne in a ‘ret,
bufh,or bedge,together. : "
D cu af, loffe, fpoyle ,rauage ranfacke, ruiné,
ejiruction,
ru : m. e: f. wafed,fpoyled,ranfacked,rauaged,
fhined.
Degaftement: m. A wafling, poyling,ramaging, ran-
time defroin densa |
Degaftement de maifons. The rafing,or ruining of


boufes. .

Dates To waf,fpoyle;ranfäcke, rauage, deualt, de-
oy Thine,

Degafteur: 1. A wafler, fpoyler, ranfacker, rauager,
eftroyer.

Degel: m. A thawe,or thawing weather.

Degeler. To thawe the ice; to refolue,

Degeneré: m.ée:f. Degencrated,

Degenerer. To degenerate,grow out of kind,be unlike
A


auaceftors. | :
Deglouti: m.ie: f. Deuoured.fivalowed dovene.
Degloutir. as tir, To deuomresor farallow vp.
Deglution: f 4 ing, or fa downe ; alfa,
the paffage,or defcending of meat and drinke from the
Raa aot mache. ERY :
odalie. Skittifh,iadifh. (Rab,
Doi: m. tee rd chirped.
> iggy aan. Le
er. To chirpe,or warble(as a finging bir
ift off the bind, tig


PAL"
We


zm. ée:f. Lift


: Degroumeler. To refôlue,or vnclot a thing thats clut- |


 cesymade into a hachey


DEG


Degourt. Blithe jocond,luflie,frolicke. €Rab.

Degouft. as Degout.

Degout: m. 4 drop,or dropping.

= degout duroft. The grauie,
from meat as it rofis.
¢gouttant. Dropping,diflilling.
cgoutte: m. ce: £. Dropped,diftilled.

Degouttement. 4 difiling, or dropping.

Degoutter. To drop ; diftill; full downe by little and

ttle, :

Degracié:m.ée: f Vnacceptable,(and therefore) un-
succeffiue ; whence;

Saifon degraçiée. 47 ns wnluckie,feafon,
eg t.Degrading; deprining of office,degree,erc;
a sleeping, fing, making nue :

Degradation : f. 4 degradationsa degrading,or depri-

ning x office,eftate,benefice,;dhgnitie,or degree.

Degradé: m.ée: f. Degraded, depriued of bis degree;
alfo,wafled, fpoyled ; defaced.

Degradement. as Degradation ; al/o,waft Soyle, or
burt done, and committed in otber mens boufès, gar-
dens xvoods, crc. )

Degrader.To degrade,or deprine of degree,office
or digaitie ; alfo, to fpoyle, or waft; or make eg
hauocke of: aie
Degrader vne foreft. To bagge,or fellit all downe.
egrafter, as Defgrafer.

Degravé. Vngrauelled, fet afloat ; alfe, taken out of; or,
plucked fromthe ground.

Degraver. To ungrauell, or fet afloat a fhip that flucke

fin the fand ; alfo,to take out of the ground; alfo, to
plucke up by the roots.
egre: m. A flaire,flep,greefe; alfo,a degree,ranke,or
haath of bonour ; alfo,an occafion, meane,or way vaio
a thing.
Deux tetradiques. Looke Tetradique: :
De degré endegré. By degrecs, by leifure,by little
- ittle; faire and foftly ; alfo,in order, one afier a-
nother. <


or fat that drops


Degreffeur:m. 4 skowrer of. greafie things.

Destofh: m. ie: f. Refined; ciuilized.

Desgtoflir. To refine; t0 ciuilixe. :
egroumelé: m. ée: f. Refolued, vnclotted vaclut-
tered.


tered,congealed,or curded together. ?
ag erage oars Tovnfheath, or draw outof | —
the fheath. GRab, , DS
Deguerpi: m. ie: £ Quit, left, abandoned, forfaken,
+ A pr away,yeeldedvp,giuen ouer.
Deguerpir. To quit, leane, abandon, forgoe, forfake,
| yeeld up, gine ouer ; to throw away, as wee doe |
rae which we care not for, or will not keepe,in our
Deguerpiflement: m. 4 quitting, leauing, abando-
ning, forgoing, forfaking, giuing ouer, yeelding up of a
; a throwing out,or awa fe


Deguetpiffeur. 4 quitter, Teas Sirgoer, abando-


ner,
uerpy: m.ie: f. Seeke erpy.
De elie mn. €e:é whence; Femme degueftrée,
‘fut,or flattern;one thats unband/ome in ber clothes,
or weares them molt vabandfomely.
Any one; Gafc. (Rab. K |
:m. ée: £ Hacked,bewed,cut into fall pee- |’:


a Or cab in final peeces; to make a


44 ee


> A
Oridiñal-fron
HERS


FHE-OHIO: SPATE UNIVE


ARE ES “PE car


DEL
Dehait : m, itte: f Merrie,pleafant jocond,blithe,lus-
tie, frolicke. : i
Dehaité. as Deshairé. Il at eafè. ;
;mvce: f. Leanemeagar,skraggie disfigured,
Rs illfauoured,by extreame leanenelfe.
e


out of tune,illat eafe.  * |
er. .To Hisiafl,or loath meat ; to be out of tune,
ih at cafe. -
chinch. Away hence; Allem. €Rab.
5 pts éc: f. Shameleffe, impudent, brafen-fa-
| _ ced.
Dehors. without abroad,out of,on the outfide of.
| .-Dedehors. From abroad, from forraine places.
Dedans,ou dehors: Fajt,or loofé (a Iuglers tearme.)
Pardehors. Outward,without,on the out fide.
Dehotté: m. ée : f, Drawne out of the mire.
Dehotter. To draw (as a fafi-flicking coach érc) out of
the mire. .
Dehoufé : m. ée : f: Difpatched,rid out of the way;al-
fo,unbooted or whofe boats are pulled off.
Dehonffé: m. ée: £ nfootclotbed ; vncouered ; alfo,
varngged;or made tow napped, as new cloth, with the
1 Teaxell.
Deiect: m. ieéte: f. a Deie&é.
Deicété: m.ée : f Deieéted, abafed,brought low, caft
downe ; alfo,repelled,reieéted, thruft from with contu-
melie or contempt.
Deicétement : m. À deieéting,abiecting bringing low;
alfo,a contemptible reièétion,contumehous repulfe.
Deiecter.To deiedt Dore ET Ee low ,throw
dovne ; alfo, to repell, reiect, foake off, thruft fro, put
from with contumelie,or contempt.
SeDejecter. To ftand on tearmes; or, proudly to be-
irre bimfelfe.. €Nicot.
Deification: f. A deifjing. 1%
Deifié: m. ée: f. Deifiedymade a god:
Deifier. To deifie,to makew god of. .
Deillavier. To fiarue,to bereaue of life.
ejoindre. as Desjoindre. - ste
Deité: f. The deitiesor godbead. i


» fides,eucrve way. a
a cfeus,& par dela. Twentie crownes and better;
and more; andaboues 9) mm)
“1 Delabré: m: ée:f Vabraced,vnloofed,untruffed; al-
| foyragged,torne,tattered. es) cS
lacher: ws Deflacher. To laoffe,diftharge,let goe,let
Delai..zDelay. 2°. TEST?
Delaiffé: m.ée: € Forfaken,ab, ( wrest of
relinquifbed,or ginen ouer; alfo, Ci, ed,
negleéied,or left out,when good was t'haue bene done;
+ ag left alone; alfo,denoid of, or
> defiveithout. SAN SAR ROT i
Toutes autres chofes delaiffées. All other things
| layed apart,or fet afide. "5 TT
Delaiffement:m, 4 ing, abandoning,lea


- Declaiffement de raifon. A deféélion,declining;ve-
Delai


te: m, ce: f Diftafled,or loathed as meatzalfo,


‘Delavé: m. ée: f. Wafhed away.


ie 2 pawft, linger wiredr
Dela. Beyond, ouer on the further or other, of 50%. Pot
dega,& par delà. ftir eis | Del '

cs RES


DEL


, moltingsor fwaruing,fiom reafon. |
fler. To forfake, abandon, leaue,or cafi of; relin-
quifh,or giue ouer; to deflitutc,leaue alone,or without;
alfo, to oucr flip, ouerpalfe, negleét, or leaue out (when
. good may be done;) alfo, to fwarue, renolt, or decline,
mh


om.

Delateur: m. 4 Promooter Infir mer Complainer,Pick-
thanke,Tell-tale,or Tale-bearer; (properly fuch a one,

 sas-eitber in louevnto luftice and the State, or in bope

of reward or gaine , profecutes offendors,or publifhes
Concealements,at bis owne charge.)

Delation: f.42 Information ; or bill of Complaint exbi-
bited,and followed by an Informer ; alfo, a prinateac-
cufation,or tale framed agaimft. 4


Delay: m. A delay; fiay lingering,protra€lion,terginer-
ation, deferring, or drining off ; a paufe,a pace an in-
termiffion; aifo (in Law) a day giuen, for apparance;
rd for the bringing in, or amending of, a Plea,érc; and

ence;
Delay peremptoire. A peremptorie day the laft of
#


és,
lepine de delay. Awiong fo hainous,that a fuddaine
renenge will not ferue,but opportunitie muftbe waited
. forthe quitting of itin a more cruell manner.
Paroles de delay. (Of the fame fence;or)Reproches,or
. Slanders.in the bigbef degree; as the tearme of Tray-


_ tor, Murther er,Church-robber ; which to prooue, were
= enough ta rnine,ov for ener to difgrace,a man.


Delayant. Delaying, deferring ; alfo,allaying or mace-


rating.
Delayé m. e: f, Delayed,deferred fuSpended,prolon-


ged,protratted; drinen.fhifted,or put off; alfoallayed,
or foftened,by fieeping ; alfo,made thin. À

elayement: m. A delaying, deferring, protratting,

pawfing fuspending ; alfo,a macerating,or allaying.

Delayer. To delay,defèrre, procraffinate, protratt, fuf-

perd proleng; drive, put,or fhift off from day to day; to

ed gw it,or draw out in length; alfo,

to macerate,allay,o7 Soften, by fiecping, ec; alfo, to


+ MA delayer leferrer, protractor ,prolanger,

wiredrawer. jays AS Re $
electable: com. Deleétable; delightfull ; pleafant,
Drelctticinst Del aim delight; plenfiresoblettatid


| Deleéter:To delight;plea/e, toy; make fport, yeeld plea-


fitre,gine contentment,vato. ;
Delegation: f. 4 delegation; a chufing for or appoint-
ment vnto,a charge,crc.


| Delegué: m. ée : F. Delegated, appointed, affigned, or


? chofen,unto a charge, dc.
eleguer. To afigne,commit or appoint vnto an ge
charge,or commiffion; to chufe,or delegate vntoa
. nefle,or for a meffage.
Les Deleguez.. The Delegates; ludges appointed, or
~ chofen to decide,and determine of certaine matters.
Deleuce. in ftead of d’ellend. Of the colonr of an Elk.


Rab.
Delez. Hard by. (vieil mot) 2 | |
Deliberatif: m.iue: f, Deliberatine;determinatine,


Deliberation. deliberation,confultation;tbin km e;ad-

_ aifingsalfo a determination upon former adyifement.
eliberé: m.ée: f. Deliberated,co7 ted acduifed of

~ aforderermined,concluded, efolued on, alfo,refolut,
cour agi er full,in the middc(t of dangers;
bartie; merrte, of a pleafant bumor. ve 3


Deli-


Original from
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY :


‘D EL


Deliberer. To deliberate; aduifè, confult, thinke what
were befl to be done; alfo, to purpofe, refolue, deter-
mine.

Delicat: m. ate: f. Delicate ; daintie; pleafing, pret-
tie delicious; tender, nice; effeminate,of a weake com-
plexion.

Vn ouvrage delicat. An excellent,or prime,peece of


ining; ve-
of; velin-
rwithnts
out (when
or decline,


iner,Pick- worke.

fuch a one, Delicatement. Delicately, daintily ; delicioufly ; plea-

on in hope fantly, fivectly ; prettily, tenderly ; nicely, wantonly,

r publifhes weakely,effeminately, ;
ee Delicateffe: f. Delicacie,daintineffe; tenderneffe nice-

plaint exbi- ne[fe,wantonneffe,cffeminacie; fenfualitie.

prisateat | elicateté: f The (ame.


Delices: f. Deligbissdainties,pleafures,pleafant fanta-
fies; {horts,paflimes; prettie toyes.


eg Delicieufement. Delicioufly, delight{omely,delicately,
pace gn pleafantly, \ : :
apparue; elicieux: m. eufe : f. Delicious, delightfome, deli-
ea,crtand cate, pleafant.


Delict: m. A fault offence; mifdecd,omiffion of dutie; a


the lap of trespas ; alfo,a ee cleft in a ftone.


- Debvoir des deliéts. 4 bufhell of Rye payed unto the

a fuddaine Lord of the Borough of Pont Niufillac (in Britaine)
be waited by euery boufébolder of auncient tenure that keepes a
r, fre, and tillage within the Territorie thereof.

ocbes,ot fe “eh Se pierre set fe “secte
of Tray lone quickly vines, or eafity cleaues afunder.
wie rt m. ak f. Thin, flender , fine, fimall, (paving,
À cant. /
or mace- Deliément. Thin, finally, flenderly, finely, feantly.
À Delier. To make bee fus flender ; to leffen, ex-
d, prolon- __ tenuate,or minifh. '
allayed, Delineation. The delineation; firft dvaught,or portrai.

} ture of a thing. É

otrabtints clincature. The fame; or,a delineature. =:
eying. Deliniment: m, 4 finootbing, affuaging,appeafing,mi-
strat, f= tigation, qualification. :
y ody Delinquant: m. .4 delinquent, offendor, faultie, or


guiltie per(on. ;
Delinquer.To offend,mifdoe,commit a fault, faile in du-
tie.


Deliot. sodden pot-bearbes.
iré. Doated; raued.


rimes


nt Délire. To chufè,cull,fèle6t,gather,piche out.
per Does im. rauing ar dig
atid. elirer. To doat,raue,do things againft reafon,
nore Delitefcence: f. 4 lurking,or bing hidden.
Delivrance : f. A deliuerance,deliuerie delinering; a


 releafing, difébarging ; fetting at libertie; alfo, as Ar-


 appoi rierefaix. .
Delivre: f. The féconds,or after-birth ; the skin where-


pie


in a child is wrapped at it birth;(a Midwines tearme.)
fire Delivre de fa perfonne : com. 4#aétiue nimble wight ;
Lo an whofe ivints are not tyed with points;onethat can wield
vmod bis limmes at pleafure. hy!
pointé a + delivre. Loofely, freely, at full fcope, with good li
2 ertie.
Len Delivré: m. ée:f. Delinered,freed,loofed,releafed ; at.
fe Si rage from; alfo,delinered,or yeelded ouer
t 0. \ «
gg : m. Todeliuer, free, loofe, releafe; dispatch
ae sek 3 aff, to deliner, give, xsi ‘yeeld ouer
+ unto. ,
(nd À D A delinerer, prefèruer, looffer, aridder
roue OM, ee eae e 4
(a, rele Deloché: m.ge:£ Vnioynted,or put out of ioynt. |
of dees Delocher. To loofei,disioynt put ae of tne. itt


ba bi 2 x
À Digitized SO. gle :
ee OF À y


ty


qj


=e Sd nn


DEM


Beloit: à deloifir. At leifure , baning little to
oe


Deloüer. 4s Defloiier.
Deltoide. Mufcle d. 4 certaine Muftle, which drames
the arme vprards.
Deluge: m. A delyge,great floud,or inundation of wa-
ters.
Bois de deluge. Tymber a long time ouerwhelmed by
waters; Looke Bois,
clugé. Eaués delugées. waters broken out of their
* bankes, or ouer flowing their bounds; furrounding wa-
ters.
Delurer. To picke.
emachoiré:m. ée:f. Vaiawed ; whofe iaw is rent,
or cut from the cheeke.
emachoirer. To vaiaw ; to cut, or teare a iaw
Denial qué:m. ée:£. Unchawed pes oi
ué:m. ce: f. Unchawed ; put, (pit, or fbu-
ed out of the mouth ; alfo,loofedor Je à « me
Demacquer. To wxchew; to put, or (pit forth of the
mr 5 10 tell, or fpue out ; alfo,1o looffe, or let goe.
Pic.
Demain. To morrow ; (Looke Aujourd'huy.)
uand mes amis me prient ie n’ ay point de de-
inain.Wben my friends intreat me,I cannot delay thé,
I cannot pep them off to the next day.
Chafque demain apporte fon pain: Pro. (So mer-
cifelly doth God prousde for bis creatures.)
Ja ne vienne demain qu’il n'apporte fon pain:Pro.
Looke Pain.
Tels fonthuy qui demain ne verront pas: Prov.
Some are aline to day,that will be dead to morrow.
Demaine: m. 4 Demaine,érc ; as Domaine,
ainier:m.4# owner of a Demaine,or of lands ec.
in Demaine. #
ifonné: m.ée: f. Deprived, or turned out, of a


Demaifonner. To deprine > Or tnrne ont, of a
Demanché: m. ée: f. Vabafited ; bereft,er taken out
ofsit handle ; SeeDefimanché. -
Demandant. Asking demaunding,queftioning; veques-

ting,befeeching, fuing for.
emande: f ADemaund, or Queflion ; alfo, a re-
quefs Suit, Action ; Petition, Supplication ; alfo, a
Clayme. ‘
Beaucoup offrir à vn qui peu demande, ¢ eft | —
luy nier tout à plat fa demande: Prov. Looke
Bem :
emande: m. ee: f. Demaunded, asked, queftioned;
alfo,requef,required, fued for. es j
Detnander. To demaund,aske,propound a queftion vn-
10; alfo,to defire,woe,craue,beg,requeft,require,make
Siit,or bring an Aétion, for,
On luy demanda la chanfon ; They intreated him
to fing; (Spoken mockingly of one thats newly come out
of prifon, where bauing bene, as a birdin a cage, pent
up,be may,perbaps haue learnt to chaunt it.)
Se demander en yn lieu. To wifh bimfelfe in a


place. |
Aflez demande qui fe pleint: Pro. He begs enough
that playnes his wants.
Affez decadence: bien fert: Pro. Looke Aflez. |
Chafcun Les «opté F3 forte : Pro. Like will te like;

a Gil. :


a lacke lookes ‘ ’

SS: ae ne ee ce qu'ilne
jouldroit: Prov. at askes what he fhould not,
beares what be would not. ~~ amet Fat S
Aa


Riveter


i à -Origina
THE OH


_ Beaucoup offrir à vn qui peu demande,¢ eft luy
nier tout à plat fa demande: Pro. Aa offer of more
then is required imports a flat denyall.

… Ceux qui nous doibvent nous demandent: Prov.
Looke Debvoir.

_ Ib eft bien fol qui à fol fens demande: Prov. He is
a verie foole that lookes for wit from a foole.

11 n'aura ia bon marché qui ne le demande:
Pro. Let no man thinke to baue, that asks not,things
good cheape.

Demanderefle : . A demaundereffe; a woman that is
a Plaïntife; or Petitioner,

Demandeur. À demaunder; asker, begger, requefler ;
quellioner; alfo,a demaundant splaintife,complainant,

etitioner.
Fame demandeur bon refufeur : Prov. wee fay,
efull crauing muft baue a fhamefüll nay.

Démange Fle A em an itch on thé


Demangetnent: m. dn itching,or itch.

Se Demanger. To itch.

Demangerie. Anitch,an itching.

Demangéfon: € Anitch,or itching.
Demang¢fon de dents.The pamefiill itch thats fil
by children while their teeth are in breeding.

Demangeure: f, as Demangéfon.

Demantelé: m. ée: f. Dismanteled.

. Demanteler vne ville. To dismantle,or deface the wals
of a towne.

Demantellement: m. 4 dismantelling.

Demantibulé: m.ée: f. Vniawed, or, whofe iawes
are dafht in peeces. (Rab...

Demaquet. as Demacquer. |

Demarche:f. 4 gate, pace, going; the fetting of one
foot before the other ; or(moft properly)bebind anothers
the trauer fi ing of round ; alfo,ward, fence,or the lying
of the bodie in fencing ; and generally, the fetting,
paf, or carriage of the dede s ia any kind whatfve-


Brematche dé bourfe. Niue
naré: m.ée : f. Vnmoored,as a
Demarer, To vamoore; to loofena moral
ankored,and put out to fea.
emarrier. To onmarriesdiuorcesommoed.
emenice : f. Madneffe. *
| Demené: m. A praëhfe; or. oraeDementer
Demené: m.ée: f Stirred, dmc to
and froremooued often; carafe
and downe ; much TR A
:: Demené parmi tous les ou: A
common by-word; the fisbiect of compe ss 3a
‘SidbieELthroughly,or ordinarily,played om.
‘Le procés s cit ainfi demené iufe sie The
fait bath fo bene carried, or Bora na
Demenée: f.4 ftirre,iog,wag,onquiet motion, fr
remone;atuimble,toffe,canualfe, es Demeneent
alfo,a op pr: ee de do “yee
and fo ran Here ef
ning to oem sat t
canuaffing vp and di one; a frequent — or fe-
2 Pos FAR


ae + FA TER mourne
— fa seo


turne ouer or pafie away commodities.

Wpemnenes vn procts, To follow, purfue,or dealein,
pit.

‘at Dement. To complaine make mone bewayle bim-
G
Se Dementer de.To meddle with ; to bufieor intan-
gle himfelfe in.
ementi. 4s Defmenti.
ementir. Looke Defmentir.
Se Dementir.To faple ; proue nought or falfe;to bely,
or derogate from, bimfeife; 3 to diffemble, or force, bis
owne nature, or bumor.

Demerite: m. Defert, merite,deferuing ; alfa (the con-
trarie) adusferuice, demerite, mifdecd,ll carriage,ill
many" 3 (1a which fence it is moft commonly Me at


Demi. See Definefler; To disintangle.
Demefler vn fufeau avec. To haue to doe with in
amatter;to performe a bufineffe iointly with,

Demettre. To difmiffé,or let goe; See Defmettre.
eimeurance: m. 4 tar! ing, remaining,abi-
ding,continuing,dwelling.

Demeurant: m. A refidue, remnant yemainder, arre-
rage,velickes the reft of.

Au demeurant. Moreouer ; as touching, or for, the
res ; alfo,in other matters.
Tenez chaud le pied, & Ja tefte, au demeurant vi-
vez en befte: Pro. The foot and head kept warme,no
matter for the ref}.

Demeurant. (particip.) Abiding flaying, tarrying, re-
maining,continuiig,dwelling. :

Derneure : f. An abode,fiay, tarriance; delay; continu-
ance ; alfo,a fèat,manfion,habitation, boufe,dwelling,
lodging,place of abiding.

Longue demeure faiét changer amy : Prov, Long
abfence changes loue ; loofès friends ; alters affeétion.

Demeuré: m. éc: f. Lefi, remaining; behind ; flayed,
or continuing behind.

Il eft deincuré entre deux fell
two flooles bis tayle is come to gr

Demeurer. Té abide yremaine,barrie,flay ; linger fland
long on,continue, perfcuere ; to dwell, forourne, inba-
bite,feat,fettle,or. plant its ia a place; Looke De-
mourer.

* Deineurer court. To be graueld, plunged, put to f-
lence,er to a Nonplus.
Demeurer entre deux & as. Looke As.
. Ilnedemeure pas trop qui vient: Prov. He tarries
. not too long that comes at length.
- De ceque fol penfe fouvent en demeure : Prov. 4
_ foole comes often {hort of bis intentions.
emi: m. Demie: f. Halfé,de

Demi-arpent : m. The halfé Arpents the French half
aker ; containes 50 Perches,and sei Perch 20 foot.

Demi-boiffeau: m. A balfe Bufhell.

Demi-bofle. as Bafle-taille.

Demi-ceinét:m. 4 halfé-girdle ; or, a fafbion of w-

brel pes whofe forepart is of gold or filuer,and bin-


peiseceinichies. Amaker of fuch balfe-girdles.
Baie ap a anit
mi-crochué: f. A femquaner,in Muficke
Demi-dieu: m.4 demy god;one that is partly God,and
vt
L ca Mufcle dem. One of the two mufeles
that extend the flanke.
etni-veué. en dem. That one can fee but ee all
Demi-frere:m.4 half: brothersa brother of as walt
emi-


Aterre. Belweene


original from


THE OHIO are UNIVERSITY


DEM


Demigraine. # Migraine The Megrum.
Demi-lict :m. The balfe-bed ; brotherbood, or filer
bood,on th’ one fide onely.
Demi-membraneux : m. eufe: f Halfe-skinnie.
Denincé : m.ée: f Minced ; cut fall fhred.
Demi-nerveux: m.cufe :f. Halfe-fnewie, balfe a fi-
nw,
Mufcle demi-nerveux: Ove of the foure mujiles
which bow the thigh.
Demi-quart. as Demy-quart.
Demi-quarteron. The balfè of a Quarteron; Sce
Quarteron,
Deimiqueué: f. The name of a wine velfell much vfèd
in Orleans, Anjou, and Maine; it containes twen-


tie feuen Septiers, and eucrie Seprier eight of their


pintes. ;

Demifaut: m. A halfe-leape ; alfo, theroape-leape, or
Some mens laft-leape ; whence;
Fetes demifaut. Toleape fhort ; firetch arope ; be

anged.

Deuni-fene :f. 4 balfe-fifter ; a fifier omely by father, or
mother.

Demi-fextier. The quarter of a French pinte,& much
about our balfe pinte; (a meafure.)

Demiffion :£ 42 bumbling, cafting,or letting downe ;
alfo,a demife,letting,or demifing ; and bence
Demiffion de foy. 4 reféruation of fealtie made by
avaffallin th'alienation,ov letting out of bis eflate (in
part,or in whole)unto another.

Demifphere: f. 42 Hemifphere ; or balfe the compaffe


* ofthe vifible beauen.


i-taille : f. 2s Demi Relief: figure de demi-ta-
ree A reprefentation thats balfé carued , balfe imbof:


fed. .
Demi-vent. vn d. 4 fide-wind,or balfe-wind.
Democratie:f, 4 Democratie ; popular gouernment,
rule,or authoritie. | LAN 25 <
Democratique : com. Mocking, geering laugbine (as
old Democrates) at everie thing; alfü,popular.
Detnocratiquement. Valgarly, popularly, commonly;
alfo, fcoffingly. k
Demoli : m. ie : f..Demolifhed ; rafèd, ruined, fubuer-
ted, throwne,or pulled downe. x
Demolir. To demolifh, rafè, ruine; fubueït, ouerthrow,
pulldowne, a building, S
Demolition: f. .4 demolifhment ; the ruine, fubuerf-
on, ouerthrow;yafizg,ruining beating,or pulling down,
_ of buildings ec. - :
Demon :m, 4 diuell, fpirit, bobgeblin.. , 2
Demonachation. 42 ote or depriuing, of


Dee 2 with a fpivitsor divell,


emonique : com. Disellifh, be ST
Demonftrance : £ À demonfirance, or demonfiration ;
a plaine declaration, euident fhewing,apparant figni-
fication. : ee.
Demonftrateur: m. A demonfirator ; one that eni-
dently fhewes, plainely declares, per(picuoufly deliners
things.


Demonftratif: m. iue: £ Demonfratiue ; plainely


4 ing enidentl i *

an an 60 EO ed plainely,
declared euidently, fienified manifefly. . .

Demonttrer.0demonfivate, ly declare ma-


ier per{picuonfly, point to (as it were)with


at (OU Qle


2 paré” —
ER TS eke Bebe ns


À Demourer. To abide,fay, tarrie,éc 3 as Demeurer.


a Rs tas aca À k
. Deniersd'oêroy. The t0ls;érc;rhich upon fpeciall.

\ APA | fit made by citizens , the Prince allowes them tole-

3 To forgoe ; or gine 0 | “wie witbin their liberties x towards the repairingy
Stas cli ACUIT CL À EE UN lding of their walls,


DEM


\
Demoulé: m. ée: f. Vamoulded ; whoft mould is bro-
__ ken; forme fpoiled,frame defaced.
Demouler. Tovamould; breake the mould marre the
forme, {poyle the frame,of.
emourance.as Demeurance,
Demoute. as Demeure ; 47 abiding place crc.


Demourez. Rub(at bowles.)
Ne demourez pas. Bee mot fhort ; (a Bowlers
.. tearme.)
Demouflé: m.ée: £.Rid,or bared of moffe,fiom which
the mol bath beene pulled.
etnoufler. 10 rid,or bare of moffe ; to pull moffe from
plucke the moffe off: f ch vs 1 ces :
Demuffer. 70 vnbide » UMboodwinke , vacouer the


eyes. ;
Demy.Halfe, demie. su)
Demÿ-arpent. 4 quantitie of, or meafure for, land,
containing fiftie pearches, and euerie pearch twentie
foot in length; Or,the balfe Arpent what/oener.
Demy-ceinét. as Dunicei ts
Demyon. as Demifexticr: Rab. ,
cmy-quart. À kind of meafure ; See Quart; alfi,a
pecce of filuer money woïththe cighth part of a French
Crowne,or.ix.d, fterl; the balfe of a Tefton.
Demy-quarteron. The halfe of a Quarteron; See
Quarteron.
Demy-taille. a Demi-taille.
Demÿ-tefte. 4n yron feull,or ficele cap,
Denaire. The number of ten; or,a tenth.
Dendrille: & The rag,or clout wherewith a leaking inh
us flopped ; alfo,a mans prinities ; or that which bangs
… dangling betweene his legs.
Deéneanti:m.ie:f, Abafèd, made worthleffe, vile,
~ mot bafe. :
Deneantir. Toabafe; to make vvorthle{fe , wile, moft


daft.
oe f. Worthlefneffe vileneffesextreamse baft-
nelie, QE «
Denegation :f.4 denegation,denying difaduowing,ye-
Sifall, for faking.
Deneraux: m, Patternes whereby coyne is to be made,
or eucrie peece weighed, before it be coyned,
Denerée: f. Ware, marchandife ; as Denrée:
Denerver. To weaken; Sce Defnerver. :
Deni. 4 Nay, deniall ; refifall. ‘
Deniaifer. To make,or become, wit by cofllie experien-
ces; to teachone wit by often confening, or gulling of
bim. ; à RE 1
Denié : m.éc:f. Denied difaffirmed ; inficiated.
Deniement : m. A deniall,denying, inficiation, difaf-
firming, faying nay vito. © .
enier :m. A pennie, adeneere; a {mall copper coyne
valuedat the tenth part: of an Englifh penme; alfo, a
Rs or 24 graines; in weight ; alfo,the price
of a thing. ,
Deniers; (plural.) Money,coyne,treafure; a fumme,
or (tacke, of money.
Deniers communs. as Deniers patrimoniaux ; &
Deniers d’oétroy. RTA
Denier à dieu. An earnefi RRR ‘peece of filuer.
Deniers d' Eftat. Looke Ettat, _
= Denier de Marc. 4 pownie-weight; or twentie foure
acs


& Original (TON eee
go THEJOHIO, STATE UNIVER |


DEN


DEN


Seves,bridges ere,
enicrs patrimoniaux, The common flocke, reue-
nue,or treaficre of a towne;comming in by rent of lands,


boufès, lalls,and other commodities, or priuiledges,of


a long time belonging toit.
Denier de feruice.Peanie rent; a quit,or chiefé rent;
or,the referuation of a fingle pennie in lieu of all other
vents and feruices, (bomage excepted.)
Chambre aux deniers. Looke Chambre.
Droié du dixiefme denier. The tenth pennie,or pen-
aiworth of all Mines, minerals mettalls,e other fub-
frances got within ground (in whatfoeuer part of
France) due unto the King; alfo, tb Admiralls tenth
part, or {have in all Shipwracks, prizes conquefis,crc,
wade at Sea,
Droiét de tiers denier. The third pennie, or part of
the price ginen for an inheritance Roturier, or Bour-
delier, due,in fome places,vnto the Land-lord
Francs deniers. Looke Franc.
Au denier douze. After tweluc yeares purchace; &
(in matters of interefl) « pennie fr a yeares loane of
twelue pence which comes to eight pounds and a noble
ia the hundred, € 6
Venir entre la bourfe & les deniers. To preuent,
foreflall, come betweene and bome; a Law phrafe;
Looke Venir. y
Denier fur denier baftitla maifon : Prov.One pen-
nie after another builds the boufe; by little and little
reat matters are effected,great workes finifbed,
eniers avancent les bediers: Prov, Coine prefers
Coxcombes. ees Wa
Apres befongne repos,& denier : Prov. Eafe, an
senshi are dartmerds of labour;or,when a man bath
done bis worke,be loues to reft,and lookes to be paid.
Bonne la maille qui fauve le denier: Prov. well is
the money {pent that faues more than it felfe,
Denier. To denie, difaffirme , inficiate , fay nay un-
t


0,

Denigré: m.cé :£ Blackned, or fineared with blacke ;
sit defend » blemifhed in reputation; alfo, vn-

Dés <r. To blackemor fineare with blacke; alfo,to de
eniorer. To blac Ave Wi ; é
finer | blemifh the reputation of; alfo, as Denicher,
to unneftle,or plucke out of bis neft.

Denis. Dionifius,or Denis ; a proper name for a man;and
one of Bacchus his furnames.

Denoinbrement:m. 4 denumeration; a numbring,
reckoning, or telling ouer ; alfo, a frols or catalogue
of names ; alfo,an Inuentorie of goods; alfo,a firuey of
land,particularixing the quantitie,[eatvents, feruices,
and tenure thereof. ;

Denommé:m.ée:f. Denominated , nominated, na-


med,
Les denommez en cefte a within-na-
med, which ave appointed to undertake , or vndergoe


this charge. , -

. To denominate, nominate, name ; gine
aamesor titles unto, ven < ;
Set eh wale ja

3 proc 3 ; £
ion bd, amen or appeached of char
blamed v5 gaint, Pe
eee = me Mt:m.A denownc opined Die ing ; 4 fig-
nifying, ee he tifing of; alfo,a
È pie EURE fs charging with, or 7 2
Denoncer. Todenounces threaten; fummon; fignife,
+ declare; warne ; forefhew ; publifh, proclaime s all,


publickly to accufé, appeach of ; charge with,or blame
an offence ; to informe againft.

Denonciateur : m. 4 denouncer ; tbreatener; publi-
Sher, proclaimer ; alfo, an Infirmer, or publicke accu-
fer; 45 Delateur. =
enonciation : f. A denunciation ; or threatning
Summons ; a publication, declaration; publicke threa-
tening, fending of defiance. :

enonciation faitte en Iuftice. An information,
accufation,bill of complaint,
enoté : mée :f. Denoted ; fhewed, fignified.

Denoter. To denote; few, fignifie.

Denouér,& Denoüé. Looke Defnouër, & Defnoiié,

Denrée : f. ware, fluffe, marchandife; any ordinarie
chaffer that is retailed; alfo, a certaine meafie, or
proportion in buying and felling; as;

Vne denrée d'herbes &c. À pennie-worth ofbearbs


C«
Denfe : com, Thicke, compaét, bardclofed together.
Dent: f. 4 tooth; or fang; tuske,or tufh.
ents brifeufes. as Dents canines.
Dents canines, The tufhes,or tuskes.
ent au chien, Couch-grafft, Quitch-grafe,Dogges-
graffe ; alfo,(but leffe properly) Harts-borne Plantaine,
or Crow-féot Plantaine; ( Gerards Dens caninus,
or Dogs-tooth is a kind of Satyrion.)
Dent de chien. Couch-graffe,Dogs-graffe; al/o, Dan.
~delion,Priefis-crowne ; Piffeabed ; alfo,a grudge, repi-
ning, ill meaning.
Dents de chien, The tufhes.
Les dents d'une herfe. Harrow-teeth.
Dents incifiues, The foure fore-teeth.
Dents de lai&, Coults teeth, young teeth ; (illuy por-
ta vn dent delaiét ; be bore him a grudge, or (pleene.
ents longues. qui a lesdents bien longues.That
is Forowgbly a bungred,or moft {harpe fet.
Dent de lyon. The bearbe Dandelyon, Piffeabed,
Priefis-crovne, Swines-fnowt.
Dents mafchelieres, Loske Mafcheliere.
Dents mafchoires, The cheeke teeth,or grinders. - .
ents molares, The great Faw-teeth, or cye-teeth;
the gri or cheeke teeth, wherewith wee gently
breake,and grind our meat.
Dents oeillicres. The upper tufhes,or eye-teeth.
- Dents riantes, The fore-teeth ; (becaufe in laughing
they are commonly feene,)
Dents defens & de fageffle. The Jaw-teeth.
Dents tranchantes. as Incifiues.
Arracher les dents en dormant à. Locke Dormant.
Malaux dents. The tootb-ache; alfo extreame bun-
ger, or an bunger-flarued eflate ; whence; Qui amal
aux dents a mauvais parents : Prov.
Mauvaife dent. as Dent de chien.
Elle a les dents à mafchecoulis, le haut defendant
le bas. She bath athinne row of teeth, whofe flench,
and roltcnnelfe driue men from her trench.
Batrele tambour avec les dents, To didder,er chat.
ter,as an Ape that fayes bis Paternofler,
Cheoir à dents. To fall groueling,
Clerc infques aux dents.A good trencher febollerjan
excellent Clerke in a Cookes fhop.
Faire de l'argent avec les dents.To grow rich by ea-
ting little.
Nemarcher que fur les dents.Is ne marchent que
fur &c. They irre not a foot but for good cheere; they
are tne parafites, trencher-friends, (mell-feafts.
Mettre yn pot &ca dents. To turne it upfide-down,
to whauve it with the mouth downewards.
Mettre


Digitizeckby Go. gle


Original from
THE.OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


D'SE ENG

Mettre fur les dents. To toyle out, or to owertoyle ; to
take Hs much of; to (pend or fpoyle , by putting to too
muco, “ :


Monftrer la dent. To girne,or grinne at; looke threa-
Te grimly on; fall into anger,grov into choller
with,


Parler à vn des groffes dents. To checke, taunt, re-
' proue, take up, chide throughly, fpeake roughly to ; to
V2, talke to one as if be would eat bim.
Prendre le frein aux dents. To take the bit between
bis teeth ; to refift authoritie,as a ftubborne borfe doth
bis rider 5 or,objtinately to follow bis owne cour[e,or go
on with bis ovene proieét, whatfoener aduice, or com-
hd maund be given to the contrarie.
nah Peete la lune belles dents, To performe impoffi-
ae ilities, de,
Rire à groffesdents, To laugbonely from the teeth
outward, ;
Telle dent celte morfure: Prov. Looke Morfure.
Envneherfe bien dentée n’y faut. nulles dents :
Prov.A thing being once well done what need additi-
| ons ?
= Tel a du pain lors qu’'iln’ a plus de dents: Prov.
L Some baue great plentie when they can take no plea-
Fr fare int,
Vin trouble ne brife dents: Pro.Thicke wine breaks
20 teeth,
Dentade: £, A biting,or bit of the teeth; fuch a fnatch,
or pinch as a dog will fometimes gine on a fudden.
Dentaire: f. A kind of Sanicle ; alfà , Toothwort , or
| __ clownes Lungwort, y *
Dental: m.#Denté.
DR - oF Dentateur :m. 4 Tooth-drawer.
L Denté :m. Theruddie,and fpotted Sea-Breame,or Gol-
4 denie ; called {a for the tufhes that appeare out of bis
ie _ mouth ; whereas the other fifhes of that kind , either


: baue none,or none (o appearing. :
RL” Denté : m. ée: f.Toothed, fürnifhed with teeth; baning
many teeth ; alfo,indented,notched, iagged. …
En vne herfe bien dentée n'y faut nulles dents:
Prov. Looke Dent. +.
Dentée : f. as Dentade; or, a gafh made, or blow ginen,
q by the tufb of an angrie boare,erc.
4 Dentelé : m. A kind of mifcbieuous Dog-ffb,that doth
muchhurt with bis teeth.

Dentelé:m. ée: f. Toothed, toothie ; full of iags refem-
bling little tecth.
Rouér dentelé. A cog-wheele.

Dentclet:m. 4 little tooth ; (alfo,arepaft, or meale :


qBarrag.) =

Dentelez: m.Fowre mufèles (two little, jand two great
ones)belonging to the brea.

Denteliz : m.Teeth; or,a tooth-like notching,oriageing,
m Imagerie crc. Saas

Dentelle :f. Small edging (and indented) Bonelace , or
Needleworke. rh

Denteleure :f 4 tusking,or tootbing, or tooth-likeiag
ing,in Architeëture, a bisuss ’

Denticules: m, Tuskingsstooth-like iags,or caruing, Om
the chapters of pillers,or on any ledge,or edging.

tier: m. The part of an helmet that couers the teeth.
Dentir. To breed yong teeth.
Denudation:f..4 denudation,or denuding; a laying ,or


ting,bare.
Denué: m. ée:f. Denuded, bared ; fiript naked,
Denuete To denude, bare, ip naked; leaue,


bare.


ag Me Se


ewes
ot

RCE Ne ol ~ x


or lay, D


DEP


Deoppilatif: m.iue:£ Deoppilatiue ; opening, or vn-
fonprng obfiructions.

É:m.éc:f. Driven out of bis countrey; alfa,
grownecourtlie, or, that hath left the countrey fafhi-
on,

Depaïfer. To drive out of bis countrey,
Sehepaite. To grow courtlie, make it fine, leaue the
countrey fafhion, \ 4
Depaifer lebeftial. To change their foile , to fend
them out of the couatrey they were bred in,

Depaiftre.as Defpaiftre,

De + sn From; by the commanndement , or authoritie

of. pois ; ,


De-par vous. From you ; on your part ; in your name,
voome, ov place. .
Deparceler. as S'accorder. To agree, or come to an a-
DES dipreif, blame, defi ae
arler. To ai(pratfe, blame, fe.(v.m. ;
Deparqage m. éc:f Difparked,difinclofed, layed o-
_ pen; alfo, broken, or got out , of a Parke, or inclo-
lure, |
Se Deparquer. To breake out of a Parke, or inclofed
place; alfo, to goe out,or away from. hey
Depart: m. A departureor going from; alfosthe partin,
of mettalls ; and bence; , : Q
Eau de depart, A kind offirong water, ufedin the
parting of mettalls. .
eparteinent :m, A parting,or departing; alfo,a di-
uiding ; an alotting parting, or appointing out vntoe-
» serie one bispart ; and hence; a diuifion, or partition
of a countrey, as;
Chaque Gouverneur eft allé à fon departement.
vate the place of goucrnment allotted unio him,
arteur: m. A ditider,parter, diftributer,
epatteur d’or, & d'argent. One that parts met-
« .talls, or feuers the one from another. : y
weet és :m. ic : . Parted,gone, departed; alfo, diui.
d'ydifiributed,difpofèd, forted,or fet into parts;dlfo,
refifèd, venounced, quitted, left, defified from; alfo,
parted or feuered,asmettalls.
Departie: fas Depart, 4 parting,or departure.
Departiment: m, A dinifion, parting ; (quaring ; or
. Sorting out into fenerall paris, or for findrie purpo-


fs. Ee
Departir. Te part,depart,or go from ; alfo, te diuide;dif-
- tribute, fort or difpofe into feuerall parts; alfo,to part,
~ or pr mettalls per :
» Sedepartir de,&c. To refiife,quit, renounce; alfo, to
leaue,or defift from. . Edis ; 2
artir vn procez. When one Court is equally diui-


ded,to require th'opinion of the Fudges of anotbersthat }


making up one of twa of the three, iudgement may bee
thereon giuen. '


Departifsement. A parting, diniding,difiributionspat-


titionsa forting or fetting into parts; alfo,a leaning, de-
~ parting,or going from: > : fe
Depaffionner. To be angrie,or grow into choller.
Depecé.Difmembred; Looke Defpecé. 9

indt: m. Ste: £. Purtrayed,painted;linely drawn,
pre £ def 4 Euh

indre. To draw,paintspurtray ; deftribe liueb.
D ens depeindray de vos couleurs, 1 will fet you
forth in your colours.” SUR


Depdllé:m. ée :f, Pilled , skinned ; blanched; flayed;
ed,
epenaillé. as Defpenaillé. 22° tet
ce: f. A dependancie; waiting, relying on ;
anging of one thing vpon another. Dé


Original from


HIO. STATE UNIVER


THE


20 Sf
FES. TER ae -


ca Ares ie


D E P


DE P


Dependant . Depending , relying , banging, waiting


on,
Dependre. To depend,relie, bang on ; to reft, or confit
in; alfo, to unbang; or take dovene from the gal-


wes.

pe I huis, ou feneftresde la maifon,Leoke
uis,

ependu: m.uë :f. Vabanged ; or, taken downe from
the gallowes; alfo,(more generally unbung,or taken off
that whercon it bung.

Deperdition : £. Viter ruine,totall perdition.

Deperi:m. ie : f. Perifhed quite loft,


D


Deperir. To perifh; to be loft, to be ruined , or vtterly .


D ee

eperiflant : f. Perifhing.

Depefche. as Defpefche.

Depefché : m.ée:f. Difpatched.

Depefcher. To difpatch; Looke Defpefcher.

efcher quelqu'vn. To talke freely of ;to cenfure

at pleafure ,to rip vp a mans ations ; alfo, to ieaft
at.

Depeftrer. 2s Defpeftrer ; To vapefler.

Depié de fief. A di/membring ofan inbeticéses ite age
ning part thereof.

Depilatoire: m. .4 depilatorie ; any ointment, falue,
water coc, which takes away baire.

Depilé: m.éc:f. Bauld; bare,or bared of baire.

Depiteux. as Defpiteuxs -

Depitonné. See Defpitonné.

Deplanter. To difplant, or vnplant; to unfet, to ve
moue. |

Deplaftrer. To rege to pull the plaifter off; bence
alfè,to bare,or difcouer,

Jayé : m.ée : f. Extreamely wounded, fore burt,
Deplayer. To wound extreamely, burt verie fore.
Deplicer. To wnplait, or unfold ; to undoe the plaits, to

open the foulds, of.
Se Deplicer de. To rid bimfélfe of, to vnfould bim-
felfe out of; to difintangle bimfelfe.
Deplorant. Deploring,bewailing,lamenting.
Deploré:m.eé:f. Deplorcd,bemoaned,bewailed, la-
mented for ; alfo,defperate,remedileffe, paft belpc, out
“of hope; forfaken,or giuen ouer.
Deplorer. To deplore, bewaile, moane,bemoane,lament


lunation:f.4 deplumation,pluming on feathering;
ga an inflamed nr hard thickneffe of eye,
Lids with loffe of all their baive which once gone,either
cannot get through againe,or being got through, fafien
-Dépochéim e:t Full nie
oché:m.ée:f. Vapo
Depoche. To vapouch; to pull, or draw atbing, out of
a pocket, : ‘S53,
ulé:m. ée :f. Depopulated,umpeopled ; alfo,de-
royed,wafted,ravaged. Es
:Depopuler. To depopulate;unpeople, or difpeople; ao,
_towafrauage;ruine,defiroy. ae
:m. Difport,fport, palime,recreation; pleafure;
“aifè,tvo of the three parts of a Wards reuenew , due
re he fr faites
: port des benefices.' | fruits; or one yeres
‘venenue of vacant benefices (dne-tnto the Prince, Pas
tron,or Prelate,as the cufiome.or cafe is) +
- Sansaucun deport. without any let , flop;-er de-


Depotd:m cess Sram ip paps
im 5 Dy JT > €, 4
refrain led af ened


Deportemens :m. Deportments, demeanor,
Deporter. To beare, fuffer,indure ; alfo,to fpare, or xm
empt from ; alfo, to bani{h (into an 1fland,érc.)
Se rter, To ceafe, forbeare, leaue off, give oner, |
paufe on, quiet bimfelfe bold bis band ; aifo,to difport,
play,recreate rm paffe away the time.
edeporter de.Toomit, let alone, let ;abflaine
Girceal, frbeart bam: f des.
Se deporter fur quelqu'un (¢ vne chofe.)To relie,
or beare himfelfe dcagenbet upon one(in a matter ; ) to
referre,or commit it,wbolly unto bim, :
Deportet : m. A fporting bable ; a wenches ec.
Depoté 3 m.ée : f. Depofed, fivorne unto; aljo,depofed,
or put from.
Depofer. 0 depofe,to teflifie by oath ; alfo,to depofé,de-
priue of, or put from.
itaire: m. Hee vato whom a thing is layed in
sb or oie Sor {afer keeping;a Gardian,or feof-
upon truft.
Depofité :m. ée:£. Laied downe as a gage; commit-
ted unto the truftor keeping of.
Depofiter. To lay downe as a gage; to infeoffe vpon
trufi,to commit unto the kee ping,or truft of.
Depofition detefmoignes. The depofition, or teflimo-
nie of witnelfes( written downe


: mc: EDipofeyed, deprined,or diffeifed


of.
Depofleder. To difpoffeffe, deprine, diffeife of.
De :m.4 Pi ie tots thing Hs in,ov commit-
pin vito,anotber mans keeping,
epourprer. To unpurple,or make pale.
Deppié. Leake Depié,
raver. To depraue;marre, viciate, corrupt.
edé : m.ée :f. Rawaged,ranfacked,robbed,made
bootie of.
Bépegier To rauage ranfacke,rob make fpoyle, prey.or
ootie of. °
Deprefsoir de la membrane. An inflrument where-
with,afler trepaning, the membrane that comers the
braine is beld downe thereby to know if there bee any |
thing left betweeneit and the {cull,toburt, or annoy
it :


rim. 46 0
Depriant : m. The purchafer that agrees with the Lord
enfuel for his Lods and Ventes,or prays time for the
paiment of them.
Depriant. Earnefily praying ; bumbly befteching,
Deprier. Topray varncflly, requejt inflantly; befecch
‘bumbly ; alfoas Defprier; alfo,a purchafer to agree
before-hand with the Lord Cenfuel for bis Lods aad
Ventes ; or to bim the contrat of his purchafe,
and befeech bim to forbeare for a while bis cenfuall du
ties, that, if they be not paied in due time,be may incur
the leffe danger.
Deprimé :m.éc: £.Depreffedabafed brought low,kept


owne,
i. * apie low ; to keepe,bold,


: m. 4a agreement made by a purchafer with the
Di Centuel fin bis Lodsand Vers or op a
fignification of bis purchafeyand bumble requef, unto
bim,that be il ferbeare his duties;tbat, if they be not
paid in due,or th’ accuftomed time,there may be the le[fe
aduantage taken again{t him, 3

of ) YA Ul dut, ie .


D im, 4ki tt i tie, or
Doucelé EP


|, deflowred, Looke
Defpucelé. 1 d a
Depuceler. 16 depucelate, or deflower a ona


Or iginal from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


— > __


<
Br

ue
>
PL


»
ee


L
ET
:


Res,


=
\


ee
7


tes


EE i


| take ber maidenhead,


‘
on =


DER


Depucellé.asDepuccl& =,

Depuis. Since, or fithence.

By A depuration ; purging, purifying, or
[y 2


clarifying.

“Depuré. Purged , cleered , purified , clarified,

Depurer. To purge,cleere,purifieclarifie.

Depurgatoire : com, Depurgatorie ; purging.

Deputé : m. 4 Deputie ; (properly, one thats imployed
by fubiects unto their Prince,

Deere : m.¢e:f. Deputed, ordained, appointed, affig-


ned.

Deputer. To depute, appoint, ordaine, affigne.

Dequoy m, (Subjiantiuely) fuffe, fübflance, wbere-
withall,

Dequoy.(Adverb.) whereto, wherefore, to what end ;
as,Dequoy me fert cela?wberto doth thatferue me?
what op baue I of that ? ov what am I the better for
it ?
Ily a bien dequoy. There is good caufe for it.
erbro: m. 4 kind of finall mouthed,blew-backt,and
white-bellied Sea-fifh.

Derceau. A little Dace,or Dare-fifh : (Rab.
erechef. Againe, moreouers once, or ouer, againe.


. Deregler. Locke Se Defreigler.


Dereté. Difintangled, vnfuared, got out of the net.
eridé : m.ée : f.Smoothed,vmvrinkled, planed made
plaine; alfo,looffened, flackened, vnfliffencd.
crider. To finooth, plane, or make plaine a thing that
bad wriakles ; 07 2s in;


Derider les cordes,les voiles ; &c; To looffen, un-


Sfliffen,ox flacken the tackling, failes,erc.

pe, :m. A mocke, flout, gibe,derifion.

Derifion :f. Derifion, mockerie, flouting, (coffing.

Derivé : m.ée: £ Deriued, or drawne from; alfo,dray-
ned. - | :

Deriver. To derive ; or draw from; alfo, to draine, or
draw drie. : rr ¢

Denne: m. The (true) skin which couers the extreame
parts of the bodie. |

Derne :m. as Darne; A flice ; a broad and thin peece,

- or partition of,

Dernier: m.ere: f. The laf hindmoft ; uttermoft, far-
theft,or firthermoft ; alfo,the later,or fecond,in ranke,
or place.

Au dernier. Finally,at the laft caft.

Maudiffant le dernier. Curfing the laft ; viz. firiuing

to run (away) with the formoft.

Ledernier le loup le mange :Prov. The lag,(or la-

ziefl)of'a flacke is preyed on.

Le derniér venu eft le mieux aimé: Prov.He that

came laft is beft beloued; the newefl friend, arc, moft

trufted, beft ufed. AUS

Les derniers venus ferment les portes : Prov. ‘The

laft commer fhuts the doore; ftrikes up the bargaine;

ends the bufiaeffe.

Les derniers venus fontles Maiftres : Prov. The

oF Sg get the maifierie, overrule the ref, rule the

roajt, s

Vn iour iuge de I’ autre, &le dernier iuge de tous:
| à .One day rules another , but the ouerrules


Derierain :m. aine:£ Late,or lateward ; verie back-
ward ; which is long in comming, or late before it bee
ripe.


D .
Derochésym Geile fen, fom a raie; Lake


eroc
Defroché,


DER


| Derogant. Looke Derogeant.
ÉDéropation :f. A derogation; a difabling, or difpara-
= i, a diminution ; abrogation, or abolifbment of
| Deeitc : m.d derogatorie,or a6 of derogation,or
D 0 Lex cape tip
rogatoire : com. Derogatorie; difparaging,deroga-
pie 3 alfo,diminifbing ; abrogating, or Mb
part of.
Derogé:m.ée : £. Difparaged,or derogated fiom; dif:
ad ; alfo, one aboldbed ‘gear foes F
Derogeant. Derogating from ; difbaragine ; difabling;
impairing, abrogating,or abolifhing part of.
Deroger. To derogate fiom ; to difparage ; 10 difable, |
or impaire ; to abrogate a peece , aboli{h a partof..
Deroguer. as Deroger,
roinpement : m. 4 breaking,or burfling in peeces;
a rining afunder.
Derompement de maifons. A rafing ouerthrow-
ing, pulling,or breaking downe of boufes.
Derompre.To buift,or inves in peeces; to viue or teare
afunder ; to oueribrow,rafe ruine,breake downe.
rompu : m.uë : f. Burft, or broken,in peeces; rien,
or torne, afünder; full of breaches; broken done.
Deroute:f.4 rout,a defeature,or flight of men.
Derrain. as Deriner. The laft : €Pic.
Derrainier. The fame.
errée. as Denrée; Ware, crc.
Derrenier. See Dernier.
Derrider. To finooth , plane , vrwrinkle , firetch
out,
Derrider les voiles. To looffen,or flacken the (ayles; a
Mariners phrafe.
Derriere. (Subfiantinely; as) le derriere de. The bin-
der part, backe part,or backefide of. :

Courir fur lederriere. 4 borfé to gallop all vpom bis
hinder parts.

Derriere. (4a Aduerbe of Place ;) Behind, backward,
on the backe-fide,or backe-part of. ;
Au devant par derriere. The wrong way 10 the
wood; round about next way , and in at fir ther doute;
Looke Devant.

Gaigner le devant par derriere. See Devant ; or
Gaigner.

Cheval qui porte derriere.A double gelding,a borfe
that will carrie double,

Ders : m. A cloath of State, banging fill ouer, and fal-
Ling low bebind, a Soueraigne Princes chaire of E- -


late. \ :
Paget: m. A little fquare Canopie , or cloath of B=
te. '


Dertre. asDartre ; Atéfter,or ring-worme.

Des. From,euen from, fincè. :
Des à prefent. Forthwith , incontinently, from this
verie time forword. $i
Des que? auray difné ; As foone as ewer 1 haue di-

d


ned,

Defabillé: m. ée : f wncloathed , undreffed , vnar-
rayed.

Defabiller: m. A Ladies cufhion-cloth,

Defabiller. revncloath,undreffe, varay , put off babi-


lements.

Defabufé: m. ée : f.Difabufed; unblinded; delinered of |
errors,rid fromabufes.
Defabufer. Todifabufe,to rid from abufes.
Defaccointé: m. ée : f. Difacquainted ; growne ont

of acquaintance with ; made flrange unto.
Defaccointer. To difacquaint ; to breake, ras


2 PP ee —


we Lh.


5 rda ce: f, A Nerdy sr feecenig,
. ing , iarring , differing , variance , difagrec-


accordant. Diftordant; (quaring, iavring, difa-
,diférepant,rep unto.
il Din ,iarringout of tune ; aljo,dif-
accorded.
 Defaccorder. To difcord ov difaccord ; to iarve, differ,
difagree diffent, {quare,be repugnant.
Def ble: on np able unapproachable;
vacompanable, vnfüciable.
Defaccouplé:m.ée:f. Vacoupled ;vnyoaked.
Defaccoupler. To vncouple; vmyeke ; difioyne.
Defaccoustumance :f. A difife, vnwontedneffe, un-
accuftomedae(fe ;difcontinuance ; a leaning of a fafhi-
on,a forgoing of a ‘cisftome
Defaccouftunié. Difaccuflomed, ne di pra
ouer,worne out of vfe,grovne out of
Defaccouftumer. To diface: iff, br
fas 10 di ifcontinue the cufiome freee she ffion


Def roché: m.ée : f. Vnhoked.
crocher. To vnbooke.

Desacré: m.cé :  Vaelloed prophancd.
Defacrer. To propbane,to unball ow.

ifadjufté :m.ée: f. Difadiufled ; difapted; diforde-

red ;madeuneuen,or vrfieaddie.

Defadjufter. RAT Sa ga (difrder di ifapt make
9 cmt vafleadd! ie.
Defadmionefté:m.ée:f, Difadmonifhed, or diffua-

ded ;warned from,ov to the contrarieof.
Defadmonelter. To difadmonifh,or diffuade.

advenant. A portion of an inhevitance left a vaf-
‘Tih ies not fufficient for the homage due vaio the


fon


ventageufement. Di per AD
enture:f, Misfortune, mifaduentur
Detar m. A Diff, dipalffion, dfidefure,
1nberrt
efulveltir To diffeie,difudueff, dipagefe, difnhe.
Bree dde ime iid renouncing
À athing done at vnawares,or againft tbe will.


Defadvife : m.ce: f. Unaduifed, inconfiderate, fiolifh,


raf
Desadyoiié: m.ée: f.D aduowed, difelaimed rom,
“er 9 Het cle m, pr difaduarrings or difélaiming


Déladioe. To difaduom ; difuime 5 refuse, re-
À Defame: rm. éc:f. whofe bunger is flaked, or fâtif:
| penis. 7 To flake ti oc ee


Digitized, by Go: gle


intane of lf eo


pers) tie 27 tbirfl is quenched, flaked,al-


à out of tune


Ife difaffubla. He caft open bis gowne, or caffoc

wherewithbe bad pe À op face. eal te

Defagé : m.ée:f. Vader age, not of füllage, not yet of +
yeares ; alfo, decrepit, verie Evo: Dares à
need of tendin


£,
aon im. ée:f. Difadapted, difadiufied, difor~
Difagenceepcne m.A difadapting difadinfting difor-


Defase encer. To difadapt, difadiufl, difaccommodate,
portion, diforder ; to fet out of frame, put out of

a asbring out of the right into a wrong, place.
Ss pr m.ée : f, Rifen, or got up from knee-


Se Se Délagenouiler. To avife,or get vp from kneeling.
ps apes im. ée:f. Vnclafped, ungrapled, vnbaf=

Defi grafer. To vncla e,ungrapleunbafpe. '

Delareble com. rar or PEN
pleafm,

Detsjancer. as Defagencer.

Defaigri : m.ic :f. Sweetmed ; appeafèd.

Defaigrir. To fivectensor unfbarpen, to allay the fower-
ae of; alfo, to affuage, mitigate, pacific, appeafe.

D eter.To vntraffe,er vndoe points;alfo,to take
the points from,or deprive of points,

Defaimé: m.ée: f. Valoted ; fallen into the diflike


of.
Defaimer. To valoue ; defift from louing;loath what be-


loued; fall into diflike,or d
Der rota fone cod el an ayrie of


Dea: f by Sickneffe , a diftafe , a being ill at
Dei: m.éc: €. Difeafed, ficke, out of temper, ill at


Dasifiée. Looke Deffaifine.
cfalé : m.ée: f. Taught wit by experience,
the foole,that bath feene the Lyoas.
ier. ar Defic ; To unbind,


Defallé. as De


ged of


. To nench,all € thirft.
efter pad a a peek i
Defamafler. To vnbeape,vapile ; pull downe abcape;
fume ape.
De med a an anker ; let guesor looffed;«s a


bold.
Detaneter To weigh anker and be gone ; alfo, to looffe
> vi mée: f.Extirpated ;the race whereof is de-


Definer .asDefenger; To extirpate , or defiroy the |
race 0
Defanimé : m.ée :f. Deprived of fpirit pr lift.
Defaniner. Te deprineoflift,or (prit,
urat.Deflowredas a virgine “that hath leache-
red: @Langucd,
cm, ée :f. Difordered,ruffled, made vr-
Dhaparciller. ro To; mg diforder, make vnreadie, put
Def En, :m.4n vndreffer;a maker vnreadie;a
diforderer.


gr arié: me: f. Vamatched, unpaired, uncom
; whofe match, mate, or companion is ta


a t cfipa er.


Original from


TAE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


ae os ©
à


# DES
Defaparier. To unmatch,umpaire, uncouple ; to dinide,
Delipeais pi re opm , mage
tifSance: f. A diflaftor loathing of meats, .
Defapetifié: m. ée : f. Diftafted, loathed, as meat.
Defapetifler. To diflaft, marre the flomacke; take a-
way the appetite; to breed.a diflike , or loathing, of
eats s


meats.

Defapointé: m. ée: f Difappointed, frufirated; alfo,
remooued, or put from an office, eftate, er authoritie.

Defapointer. To diappoint, or fruftrate ; alfo, to re-
moue, or put from an que eflate; to deprine, or be-
veane of authoritie ;al/o, to wry the leuell, put by the


aime of.
Defappetit: m. want of appetite ; an ill,or no flomacke
_ VALO 4 thing ; a queafinel[e,or difeuft of flomacke.
Defapprendre. Tovnilearne, or learne anew, or other-
wise than before; alfo,to leaue a fifhion vfèd, or forget
what bath beene learned. a Ah
Defaprefent. Fom this verie inflant ; See Des.
Defarboré :m.ée:f. Let, or firucke downe; as the
malt of a fhip.
Defarborer, To let,or firike, downe the maf of a fhip.
Defarconné : m. éc : f. Difinounted, vnbeïfèd,caft out
of the faddle.
Desarçonner.To vnborfe,difinount; throw ouer,fet be-
ome out of the faddle.
Defarefter. 70 take the bones out of fr.
argenté: m.éc: fVrfiluered,without filuer, cleane
out of filuer.
efarmé. Difarmed, deprined of armes.
farmement: m.A difarming, a depriuing of Armes.
efariner. To difarme ; to deprive of armour, bereaue
of weapens. 4
Se denna: To unaime bimfelfe; to put off bis arms,
lay dovone bis weapons.
Defarnaché: m. ée:f. Vnbarnelfed ; whofe harneffe,
__ or fiernituve is ta hans :
Desarnacher vn cheval. To vabarneffe abor{e,to take
off bis harneffeor furniture. :
pees: m.ée:f. Difordered , unranked, difar-
rayed.
Desarrengement :m, An vnranking,difordering, dif:
arraying. 3 |
Defarrenger. Tounranke, diforder difarray.
Desantefer. To make fall a flanding yard ; to coole,or
e dovene the courage of.
Defarroy :m. Difarder, confufion,difarr ay ; fpoyle, ba-
_wocke, burly-burly;alfd,a rout,ouertbrow, diftomfiture,


as of an armie.
En defarroy.Pel-mell, confirfedly,out of array,cleane


without order ; alfo,in vont.

Defarroyé:m. = . Dif dees depirraged 3 put into
rout; confounde: ed. TES
Defarroyer. To diforder,difarray, confound, mare the

orden) fée fae difcomfit, ouerthrowsor put |
Lo rout,an armie,cec. | CE
Defaflemblé :m.ée:f. Diflfembled, difioyned, par-


ted, divided, feperated , difunited; difperfed, feat-


._ tered. :
Defaflembler. To difaffemble, difioyne , difunite,part,
later pei 3 to pe aoe > difperfe, dfaffo-


Cu ate ille defaffemble tiretire :
Prov.That which prowling gathers prodigalitie feat


ne.”


D m.ée :f. Di |; put in
ic sade ara nfieadie;
le to es sda ins SR


3 -Digitized-by Go gle


_Desbander. To tooffen,unbind wnbend; alfo, tocaffe,


DABS


Defaflisrer. To difaffure ; to put in fare, or bring into
doubt , one that a 7 fe 3 tomake boss
vnaÎured, unfeadie, what formerly was flayed.
lege: m.ce: f. Delinered from fiege.
Detatheger. To vaife a fiege ; to deliner from a fiege.
Defaflocié: m. ée:f.Difafjociated; Seperated, parted L
the companie of. ~
focier. To difaffaciate, breake companie, diffolye
fôcietie, feperate sor part, friends. ‘
Defaftre: m. 4 diflafter, misfortune, calamitie, mifad-
veñturt hard chance.
Defaftré : m.ée : f Difaflerous, unfortunate, vahap-


_ led,
Def


po


pie. |

Defatteler. as Defteler. ,

Defattifé : m. ée:f. Quenched, flaked, put out, as a
kindled firebrand.

DES To quench, put out,or flake a(kindled)fire,or
firebrand,

Defivancé: m.ée: f. Hindered,impeached, kept back,
drinen backeward, E

Defavancer.To hinder, caft backward, keepe or drine
backe ; impeach the proceedings of.

PE. m, Difaduantage , binderance , dam-
mage, loffe. ,
efavantagé : m. ée :£ Difuduantaged ; iacommodaa
ted,indammaged, bindered.

Defavantager. To difaduantage, hinder, difpleafure,

Incommodate indammage impeach,

Defaubé :m.ée :£. Off the hinges,out of reparations;
lornesyag ged, tattered,all in pecces : €Blefien,
efaventureux : m. eufe : £ Vabappie , unfirtu-
nate,

Defaugmenter. To difaugment, wane, diminifb, de-
crease,waf},grow leffe and leffe.
efavié : m. ée:£ Staiued; or bereft of lif,

Defavier. To bereane of life ; to flarue , murder,


Defavoiié: m. ée: f. Difaduowed,difallowed ; renoux


ced,difilaimed,refifèd.
efavouër. To difaduow, difällor ; refife, renounces
difclaime. :
er. To packe,or truffe up his bag and bagage. à
; Desbagoulé. crin desbagoulé.Rufled,ftaring,or dif: |
ordered haire.


Morceau desbagoulé.4 morfélt chawed,and put out
ef pe oon againe. : S ;
ouler.Toruffle,or diforder ; alfo, to fpue,or
out ihe mouth a psa balfe chawed. a P pe
esballé:m. 6e : f. Vnpacked ; vntruffed.
Desballer. Tosmpackesor vntruffe ; toundoe a packe,or


truffe.
DeBereladet.a disbanding;a caffing of whole troups,
or Companies of fouldiours ; alfo,as Debendade.
Desbandage : m. 4 disbanding ; an unbending.
Desbandé: m. ée: £. Disbanded; unbent ; unbound;


3 3 difperfed, {cattered.
LR ST
of order , out of array. 5


disband ; fcatter difper{e. =
-Se desbander. foe and; leaue bis ranke ; forfake
bis Companie,or Colours. à

De Ÿ arc ne guerift pas la playe: Prov.
The bowes vnbending beales no wound ea 3 the


dififing of a mifchienous infirument is no amends for
the burt it bath done. : . > lke
esbaraté : m.ce: f. Difordered, out of order.


bens


:m.ée:f, Cleanfed rid aa
RE ots |


Orig Inatstt }
|


THESENO STATE ENIVERSIS Nate


- aa >


| | =
DES DES. ag!
Desbarbouiller. 70 clame , make cleane, onfpot , or


cleere from (pots.

Desbardé:m. ée: f. Vnladen,as afhip; difarmed, as
a great horfe; unfadled as an af.

Deshatiien: To vnload a fhip;or boat ; to vnbeape, vn-
burthen,disburthen;al{o,to unbarbe,or difarme a borfe
of fernice ; to unfadle a Moyleyor Affe.

D eur : m, A Lyter-man,or Lighter-man; a Por-
ter that ufes to vaload fhips , or carrie wares out of


‘ea Sais on, :
Desbarger. ceft, abbatre la terre du chevalier de
cofté, & d'autre qui peut cheoir fur les plantes de
Vigne.

Desbarqué: m. ée: € Difimbarked, put a land, fet on


fhore.
Desbarquer. To difimbarke,put a land, fet on fhore.
Desbarré :m, ée: f. Vabarved, unbontted, 1
Desbarrer. To vabar,unboult ; open.

Desbafté : m.¢e: f, Vafadled ; or, whofe packefadle is


taken off.
Desbafter vn afne. To vafadle an Affe; to take off bis
ackefädle.
Desbatt :m.ie:£, Pulled downe,as a building.
Desbaftiment : m. 4 pulling downe of lang
Desbaftir.70 ruine, vabuild take downe,or pull downe
a building,
Desbaftonné :m.ée:f. Difarmed; deprined of wea-


way lets,remoue impediments. 4

Desblée:f. Hinderance, dammage, difiduantage by
Scarcitie ; alfo,corne ; or a crop of cornes alfoya facke,
or balfè-thraue, of corne. NE”

Desbléer. as Desblayer.

Desbleure.la desb: ou les desbleures. Hay,or fluble,
whether it be made in cockes, or lie unmade up on the


ground.
Desbleyer. as Desblayer.
louqué :m.éc:f.//nblocked; alfounbuckled.
esblouquer. Tovnblocke or open the (blockt-vp)paf=
Sages of; alfo go vnbuckle.

Desboeté : m. ée: £. Unboxed , taken ont of a box; put
out of ioint. ‘
esboeter. To vbox,or take out of a Lex ; alfo,toput
out of ioynt ; (in which fence it is vfed melt.)

Desboeture. A putting out of ioyat.

Desboire : m. Looke Deboire, '

Desboifté: m. ée: £. Vnboxed ; out of it right box; ef,
ov eee: ; heb of
es ement. The being ont of ioynt.

Desboité. as Desboifté. 4 ras

Desboiter.To vnbox,uniaynt take out of abox; put out


of ioynt.
Desbondé: m. ée: £. Vmbunged opened,unflopped.
Desbonder. To uabung,open, unflop ; to take out the
ne a out the ftople of.
-Sedesbonder. To gufh, rufh, or breake fivongly,
f = water thats let) out of a fpowt, fluce, or bung-
0.


¥
.


Ons.
Disbsitonbe Lo difarme,or deprine o re
Desbauche: f Incontinencie,diffolutene|fe lepdneffe,
riot, unvulineffe,diforder. :
Desbauché:m.ée: f Debofhed , lewd , incontinent,
ungracious,diffolute naught ; vatbriftie,riotaussunru-
he difordered ; alfo,depraucd, mifled, ill-aduifed, or
led by ill aduice. :
Desbauchement: m. 4 debofhement ; a corrupting,
marring ,deprauing viciating ; feducing,mifleading.
Des baucher. To debofh; maïre,corrupt, fpoyle,vicrate;
feduceymiflead ; make lewd, bring to diforder, draw
- from goodielfe. ’ :
Ife desbauche. He roames,digreffes, flies out,goes
from the purpofe,runs altogether fiom the matter.
es a: m.ie: f. Made fad, afhamed, =
Desbaudir. To make fad,or afhamed ; (old words.)
Desbaugé: m. cé: f Mauve ete eee
Swine) out of the durt wherein be ae
Desbauger vnfanglier. To raifé , or to roufe a wild
boare from the place be lies or wallows in; to vnflough


bim. seed
Desbellé: me: £. Subdued, vanquifhed, ouercome by


Desbondonner. as Desbonder.

Desbord: m,as Desbordement.

Desbordé: m.ée: £. Ouerflowne or broken(as water)
out of it bankes , or bounds; alfo, exceffine,profife dif:
ordered. ?

Desbordement: m. 42 onerflowing, furrounding, or
breaking ontyas of waters; alfo,riot, exceffe,diforder, -
Super fluitie, profufion.

Se Desborder. To ones flow, furround, runne ouerbis”
bankes, breakeout of bis bouads; exceed rule, order,
measure.


Desborné :m. ée:£ abounded ; whoft bounds are


demie rm. An unbounding , or lajing open


A


‘bounds. Bot
Desborner.To unbound , lay open the bounds ; plucke


ws downe the meeres of.
Dehors Desbordement.
Desboffué: m. é¢ :f Vrbunched; fmoothed, planed,
plained, lenelled , fallen , made flat, ov without bun-
_ ches


warre,Êrt.


Desbeller. To fabdue vanq we. | Desbofluér. 10 vrbunch, plane, leuell, make flat,
Desbaux : m. Agenerall de die: | plaine without bunches,or bunching, à
~ luteneffe. ° aah SIRE CT Desbouché :m. ce: f. Opened, vnfiapped ; alfo, dif-
Desbendade: f. # Debendades Anumbending, parked, difinclofed; al, vamuffled, unmasked whofe
“Ala desbendade. Swifily, violently ,fiwrionfly, ike | — mouth is uncouered.
in ont of a ee diforderly. re i Vn Fo see = ee of an unfetled
; ) .To un, loofèn;disband j 3 VADINA. mouth; alfo,not fitted by hisbit, x
ARBRE Es 2: ts ement:m,. 42 vaflopping; a difparking ,
“ss an, opening of inclofures. V0! dep


Desboucher. To vnftop, open, broach; to difparke, to
| breake downe hedges,or inclofures ; alfo, tovnmuffie,


= = unmaske,vnconer the mouth, ;
Desbouclé: m. ée: f. Vrbuckled , looffe , «nfafte-


ned, 1
Desboucler. To vnb open,to loofie. ‘
Desboucler re sie raifea i free itfrem
thofe that cked up. à
4 Desbour


L ~ ET (a) Originalsfrom
MES Re) Go gle THE -OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


DES


Desbourbé: m, ée sf. Drawae out of the mire. Defcacher.To vacouer,difelofé,open,reneale,difcouers :
| Desbourber. To pull out of a flough,or muddie puddle; : Defcacheté:m.ce:f.nfealed,or whofe feat is burft ope.
¥ to draw out of the mire. 6 Defcacheter lettres. To vnjeale,or breake open, letters.
_ 4 Desbourgeonner. To plucke,or nip off youg buds. Defeaille :m.ée:f. Vacurdedrefolued.
Desbourrer. Te rid of bourre ; Looke Bourre. Se Defcailler. To refolue,uncurd, fall afimder
‘ Ilcommenceà desbourrer. Said of a ftranger that eicalenge: m.ce:fVnarrefled;enapprebended non
“| beginstofpeaketollerable French; as alfo of one tbat | inuentus; alfo,difcharged ; or redeliuered afier a fei-
4 bauing beene kept under, and thereby lined barely ,be- ure, : ‘
3 gins alittle to flie out,and linesin.a better fafhion than | Defcampé: m. ée: £. Difcamped.
F3 be did before, ; D ampeinent: m. À difcamping ; araifing, or a re-
Desbours : m. A dishurfement of money. mouing of; a departing from,the camp. ,
Ys Desbourfé: m.de: £ Disburfed, laid out of a purfe. Defcamper.To difcamp;to raïfèsor to remoue a campsto
a Desbourfement : m. 4 disburfing; or laying out of | _ epart fromthe campe. :
i money, escapite: m.ée: f. Decapitated,bebeaded,
ig Desboufcher. Looke Desboucher. Defcapiter. To decapitate,bebead, firike off the head.
Desboutonné. Vubuttonued ;Looke Debouronné. | Defcapuchonné: m.ée:£ Vaboodedvncowled; vn-
esboutonnement :m,.4#vnbuttonaing. couered;bare beaded,
Desboutonner. To vabutton , or vndoe a butten ; See | Defcapuchonner.’fo unbeod vncemle,uncouer,
NP: Deboutonher. Defceinét : m, Cte: £ Vngirt, without a girdle.
LA Desbraguetter.To untie tbe codpeece point; Looke De- | Defceindre.Tovngird}vniooffe,or vndoe a girdle.
) braguetter, Sedefceindre,& ie&ter fa cein&ture à terre.A cere-
LR Desbraillé: m.ée:£. Vnbraced, vabuttonned, all open monie,by which (being done in Court) a debtor gines
t % D afore; unto bis creditors the pofjefion of his whole eftate; A
Le Desbrailler. To unbrgce,or unbutton bimfelfe. valfall alfo when be prepares bimfelfe to do bis bomage,
N Desbranchi : m.ie: f. Lopped,or topped ; whofe bran- or fealtie muft put off bis girdle,añd lay by the fword,or
à ches are cut,or pulled off. other weapon which he ufitally weaves.
\ ranchir. To topor lop the boughes ; tocutor pluck | Detceler. To diféouer,difélofe,dete£tbewray.
- off the branches of a tree. Defcendant. les defcendansde. The progenie, or of-
Ë | Desbraquer.To unplant,or difmount artilleriesto wry, | _ bring of.
| or difappoint the leuell thereof, Delogidant:e/? ending; alighting ; goiny downwards,
; Desbride : £, An eare-wires or, the wire that flayes the Qui va en defcendant. Steepe, declining, enclined,
¥ | flaps,or head-peece,of'aFrench-bood. ~ bowing ,bending,or banging downewards,
| esbridé : m.ée :f Vnbridled. Defcendement.as Defcente ; Or,a defcending,aligh-
Desbrider. ‘to vabridle. _ ting ; a going, falling lighting downe; alfo,a caftingta-
igandiner. To depriue of a Brigandine; to rip, | __ king,laying downe,
vader take, pull,or cut off a Brigandine. — Defcendre. To deféend, goe downe, come from, alight,
1 Desbris. as Debris. light off,or downe; alfo,to caft,bring,take,or lay down;


Desbrifé :m, ée: £.Rinen,clouen,torne, buift,or (plit a-~ as pare place vato a lower.
finder. <1 Defcendu: m.ué: £ Defended, deriued,come fromsal.
1 Desbrifement. À riving,cleauing,burfiing, or (plitting |  f0,caft,brought,let.laied,taken downe ; alfo,put ouer,as
afiunder. the meat a Hawke bath eaten,
À Desbrifer. fe desbrifer. Toriue, or cleane afunder, as | Defcendué:f. ADifeent, race, progenie, ofipring, li
*__ boord€ that gape ; See Debrifer. : mage, + ?
} Desbrodequiné : m. écsf#befe buskins are drawn, Defcenglé : me :f Vngirded,or vngirtbed,
. - | — or pulled of. cengler. To ungird,or ungirth, -
Desbrodequiner. To vabuskin; to plucke,or draw,off | Defcensoire : com. Deféenfue, deftending ; of power,
buskins. a | or propertte to defcend.


. \ k > 4 cure.
yy rouillant. Cleering; difineansting. | Defcente: £ 4 deftent ; fall ; ficepe fide of a bill,erc;
Eu Bobo m.ée: EDipntcnele Lonpefteredscleered, |. alj defcending declining, or going downe. ee:


esbrouillement: m.A di g;acleering, | Delceptré: mée:f Depofed, vnkinged,depriued of a

Desbrouiller. rent ur 7e Der (royallsor kinglie)Scepter. - : FRE
wind out of trouble ; alfü;to cleere, manifeft, lighten, Dek To depofe,or put fromsto bereaue,or deprive
expell the mift of. a0 Tee | of, a(kinglie) Scepter. :


Desbuiffonné: m.ée: E.Roufed, forcedsor drinen from ceu.à mon desceu. Vamitting tome, without my
a couert,or thicket. ere: ye knowledge. : aS)
| Desbuiffonnet. Toroufe , raife, drive, or force, ont | Defchainé: m.ée:f. Vnchained ; unfettered ; looffed,

4 of a couert or thicket. : | ordelinered from chaines ; fetters bondage. -
Desbufqué: m.ée:£ Parted, flit,gone roundly from; | C'eft vndiable defchainé. He # a verie firie an in-
petit away. à à LITE er sv age a man would’

esbufquer. To part,or depart, flit, flirre,goe round inke that belt's broke looffe where be 1.
~~ from, a fend panes ei e nt 7 Ror EUR looffe out of chaines ; to

sbut¢ : m. ée: f, Re; thruft backe; drinen or | __ deliuer from flaui a Fy a
on bis pate a intments, Defchalandé: made: f Out of trade, without cufiome,

i Desh orp bcd from bis pretence or cuftomers.
par Hip


€


ouered;uncouered,unbidden,re- Yefcha nbré: m. éc :f. Seperated, fea red, parted, |
PS pa dv A errata; ahr ecn à A owt.
Boy ae.


= Odette = |
THE.OHIO:STATE-UNIVÉRSHYE §


RAR: ob ioe ie T  NRR e 7 D OT 8 | pres
™ Lx eae j d


the marke be was, or aimed, at ; Defchalander. To drine away cuflomers 3 or deprine of | :


*


ofa lodeing or chamber. !
Defchambrer. To dinide, féperate, fatter » difperfe,
part a companie, that lined, or lay together in a cham-
ber; alfo, to ronfe, drine,er thruft ontof a lodging, or
b,


[4 .
Defchampé: mée:f. Vnféulded ; alfo, broken out of
Me


4 fould.

Defnarrge t.To unfould; alfo,to breake out of a fould,

unto Jhcepe . Disk

Dane Defcant (of Muficke ;) alfo,a Palinodie,
recantation,or contrarie fong to the former.
efchanté: m. ée : f. Defcanted; alforecanted.

Defthanter. To Defeant; alfo,to recant,or unfay what
one bath formerly deliuered,

Defchaperonné : mée: € Vnhooded; capped ; vaco-
uered,

Defchaperonner.0 vahood;to capsto pul off the hood,
or cowering of.

Defcharge:f. A difibarge; acquitance ; Quietus-eft,
Les descharges. Cofts,and charges(in a fuit.)
efchargé : m.ée: f. Difcharged,vnloadew, disburde-

d.


ned.
Defchargé de chair. A cleane timberd man, one
that bath not too much flefh on bis backe.
Couleur defchargée en bleu. Neeve unto a light
blerv,or of a light blew ; light , (& fo of other colours.)
Defchargement: m. 4 di/charging,vnloading, eafing,
disburdening ; a cleering or acquitin,
Defchargeoir : m. 4 luceor water-paffage of plankes
bored fill of holes, whereout the Sper fluous water of a
Mill damme difchargeth it felfe. ‘
Defcharger. Yo difcharge, disburden, exonerate, une
load ; cafe ; alfo, tocleere or acquit of, vid er deliney
from,a charge ; alfo, to purge, draine, euacuate, put
out,or take away, fuper fluities,
Se defcharger für vn autre. To lay the blame which
he bath due upon another; to charge with the
fault vobich be bath committed another 3 t0 excuse bim-
fe by accufing another,
a charges. les defCharges. Cofis and charges (in a
(14


uu,

Defcharmé : m.ée:£. Vacharmed. ) |
Dees nm pas Charme,
iffolue a {pe 4 Mi |

harné: m.ée:f. Lanke, aggie, flefhle A
Cie fi ea, ins se Lon a
shalt; at bath nought but skinne and bone left on
in. ‘ Je L
cfcharner. To take flefh from; to make leane.
lea eee les ae onions divide,
the flefh from the bones, TTA ae
Descharongné: m.ée:f Torne
carrion, or flefh, afüunder.
Defcharon
of. flefh into peeces.
arongher. To feare ia peeces, to rent afunder
b Feed from, got vad of;


| __ flefh, or carrion.
: . Looke Def
3 Bae) leere


dete? Es ‘te nap thee make


Te! e me pui defcharpir de luy. 1 cannot free my


Delchaud, Defchauk. serefir, and bare-leg-
_$° : va SENTE ‘


sor plucked, a |
gnement. A tearigg,rentingsor breaking | D


>


Tcannot rid my bands , 1 cannot get |


Defchauflé, as Defchaud; Alo, vncouered, or opened

as atree,at the root. 4
ement :m. 47 vrfbooing,

Defchauflement d'arbres. 4» opening, or baring


of trees at the root,
10 pull of fhopes ; aife,to vm.


chauffer. To vrfhooe,
bofè,or draw off bofen,

Defchaufler vn’arbre. To open,or bare a trec at the
root,


Defchauffer Bertrand, To be whitled, cup-hotten,


throughly drunken,

Defchauffer les dents. To bare their bottomes ; to

Cul, or diuide the gummes from about them,
Defchauffoir :m. À Fleame ; the toole wherewith Bar-


bers diuide the gum from the tooth ybich they would
draw out.


Defchaux. as Defchaud,
Ce: f. A decay diminution.wa ion:
ruine of. gs is etats,


Descheoir. as Decheoir 3 To minifblefen, decay; fall
away,
Descherpilleur.4 notable robber ,


or frecbeoter;a fa-
mous purfetaker.
eschet :m,as Defcheance ; or, Decher.
Descheu, Fallen away ec; asDechu,
Deschevalé:m, ée:f, Vahorfed, cafl,or tumbled fom
borfèbacke.
eschevaler. To vwborfe,to throw off borfiback.
eschevancé : m. ée:£ Ktbbed,defpoiled beggered.
Deschevancer. Ta rob ranfacke,begver deprinesor de.
fpoile of wealth,or Subfiance,
escheuauché : m. ée: f, as Defchevalé,
eschevaucher vn homme. To throw, or tumble a
man from his bore.
Defchevelé. yne femme toute deschevelée Difibe.
ueled, with all ber baire diforderly falling abeuthey


€ares.
Descheveler. Te diféheuell ;t0 looffe, diferder, féatter:
pull the baire about the eares .
eveftrém.ée:fnhaltered:lon tai intaneled.
-To vahalter,er take off the balter ‘from;


to unfetter, fer difiatangle vntie,vnlooffe,vndoe,
pba

Deschiffré : m. ée: f. Decyphered,

Defchiffrer.7o decypher; expound explane,explicate an


objcure sor myflerie,
Deschifieur: gr À decypherer; an expounder vnfout


der interpreter of cypherssof myftical,or dark writings.
Deschiqueté : m.¢e :f.cut, flit, fored,ia gged ; pinked,
or cut thicke, fnall,and necre together,
iquetement : m, À cutting, flittin 3 @iagein
a pre or fhredding into little ss abe
finall,and thicke cutting.
eschiqueter. To pinke, ov cut fill of (mall holes 3 to
ag, flit, mangle, flafb, or fhred into many fmall peeces
or parcels.


 Deschiquoter. as Efchiquoter.
nt. Rending, tearing difmembri: ing.
iré Renttorne,dimembred, mang in
peeces rafhed in two, ;
irement:m. 4 tearing, remting , difimembring,
 mangling,plucking in peecesrafhingintwo,
Dci To teare,difimember,mangle;rend,or plucke


_ inpeeces; torine afunder,to rafhin two,
irure:f. A teare,a rent, = violent rofl ,
ing vine ; alfo,a teaving,rem ing,vining. Fs
‘Bele ctr dure desc ] Prov, Streag |
ames by Rurdie bands are torn®Mfunder, =" |.
eee Defthute:


difinen-


) Iginaktrom
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


DEs ©


A ae. |
= aud; Alf, end yd


Defchute:f. 4 Es
Debipler, tage ear


im, At M7 . te
ent ares, Aes Defcitnenter. Cette Muraille fe defcimente. This
Wh, nko wall arowes vmmortered , or bath warne ent it mor-
| ti 3 ter, F
4 pull; chia D 3 Defcirer:&c; as re oni er
; eiclaveté : m. ée: f. Difmounted,valocked,or taken,
he garb a ea i me cannon from it carriage. ,
efclaueter vn Canon.7 0 difinount a cannon;(proper-
rad Tei api, pict valocke the carriage thereof.) ;
elcliquer. Tolet goe, let flye; rap out : See Decli-
dent, Ta hae ther bottes 1 por pa diene tty + ner
mes faba tem Delclorre. To difparke, vaclofe ; difinclofe,pull downe
Fleame; thetlebeewit tn. nr dus inclofures, :
on he ob sich th old € = 3 ofe: f. Difparked, wnclofed , layed open,
itaciojed.
| Fleur defclofe. 4 flower thats fpved, full blowen,fil-
dirais genoa, ly bloomed.
de mu } ;
Secret defclos. difclofed,renealed, wh than
Tonic efen, ds; fl cloüé: m. ée: f. Vanayled, vacloyed.
ait Deflouér. To vnnayle , or vncloy ;to looffe , pull off,
aber, or fectootarsf- drawe outa nayle.
efcoché: m. éc :f. Shet,looffed,or fent, as an arrow
y, Dechet, out of a Bow,
ecu, RES be fciche.To fhoote ; looffe, or fend an ar-
air tembled row from a bow,
Ludersidat Deleoefié: mé: € Paca, vnbonded, bef bead
j ts difarrayed,or uncouered. {
Pager. . Denes. ne ra to difarray, difattire;vnhood,
AP uncouer, the head.
serpent Defcogneu: m.euë: f. Vnknovone not kowne,forgot-
lé ten ; alfo, difaduowed, or denyed.
ow. GE à Defcognoiflance: f. A not knowing,or forgetting of;
? pie a Ri ag gs ; ie for
Le Die. éfcogñoiftre. To v or to not know ,te forget
pme what ote bat knorne ;alfo, todifaduow, deny ; take
no notice of. REA lie AS
is Defcoifter. To vacoife, or pull acoife off the bead ; or,
difader eater ng Derek ; ;
efcolé:m. ée:f. Vnglned. : 3
ded finan Defcoler. To vnglue,to looffe,or plucke afunder, things
ea * that are glued,
lati, vad, Defcollé: m. ée: f. Decapitated, bebeaded.


Defcoller. To decapitate; bebead, or cut the bead off.
Deicoloré: me: f.Diftoloured,or decayed in colour;
that hath loft colour ; alfo, pale,bleake,wanne,lew. —
Se Defcombatre de. To rid bis bands of, or deliner -
~bimfelfefiom. 2. + |
| Defcombré: m. ée: fDifincombred; vnpefieredsciee-
red of ;rid, or freed from; alfo, warranted (in law.)
Defcombrement:m.4 ingsor unpefier ing;
alo, a warrant (in law.) pe Se met +
Defcombrer. To difincomber, or vapefter ; t0 rid,free,
deliner fiom, cleere of incombrances ; alfato warrant
(in-law.) à té à


down fallen buildings; alfo,a cleering of a ground rc
from them. rete i
Defcompt: m. An accompt ginen for things veceaned;
a backe-reckoning.
Deftoinpter. To accompt (for the proffits of land dre
Yeceaucd,) to accompt backe, or make a backe recko-


To diftomfit, vanquifh, deféate ; ruine.
LE pates ture;

a ts
si cl ha


gall bis creditors,
Ds ee


Defcombres: f. Phe raines > dc ME ibe


THE-OHIO:STARE


DES


_ Payer par defconfiture. 4 debtor bankrupt, or de-
d, to pay bis creditors after fome fich [inall rate

as X¥ pence in the pound.
Defconfiz. Defeated , diftomfited, vanquifbed ; ouer-


throwne. :
Defconfort : m.Di{comfort; fadne[[e,penfueneffe,hea-.
winelfe of hart; griefe, that will not adwut ; or cannot


ae comfort.
el conforté: m. €e:f. Difcomfarted , difconfolated ;
moft beauie, fad, penfine ; much out of bart.
Defconforter.7 be difiomforted ; moft beauie,fad,
penfine;1o be much ont of bart.
cillé: m. ée: £Difcounfelled, diffuaded from,
aduifed to the contrarie of; alfo,vncounfilled, void of
counfell,wanting aduife.
Defconfeiller. To difcounfell, diffuade, debort, aduife
unto the contrary.
Defconfeilleur. 4 diffiader, deborter ; a counfèllor,
or aduifer,to the contrarie. ; ;
Defconlolé: m. ée:£. Comfortleffe,diftomforted.
Defconfoler. To difcomfort,fadden,grieue ;tomake or
leaue defolate. er. ai
Defcontenancé: m. ée:f.4balhed.put out ofcounte-
nance.
Geftes fols, & defcontenancez. Vacomelie, un-
graceful, ill-fauorcd, geflures.
Defconvenué: f. Griefe, forrow,trouble,difcomfort;
misfortune, inconuenience.
a= nt. Vatwifling , undoing, loafing a cord, or
ring. 4 ‘
Defcordelé. /ntwifted,untwined.
Defcordeler. To vatwifl a cord, or firing.
efcorder en chantant. # Defaccorder. To iarre.
Defcorder vne corde. To vndoe, or vntwifta cord.
Defcouché :m.ée:f. Gotten vp,rifen out of bed; al-
So, hen from; alfo, diflodged, or put from bis lodging.
uses To by from,alfo to diflodge ; to depriue of,
or put be i ing.
Se Dekeocher To get up, to rife out of bed.
udre. To unfowe, vndoe fitcbes, rip or breake e-
pen flitched things. _ )
Defcouler. To fide, or flip away , to glide along; See
Decouler. 2
Defcoulouré : m.ée: fDiféoslorcd,diflayned: grove
pale, manne, leme ; that bath loft it colour,or bue.
efcoulourement: m. 4 difcouloring, er diftayzing ;
a loofing, or faking Po of coulor. — À
Dctoutoii: To difeoutour, or diflaine ; tomake pale,
wanne, lew ; to take away the hue of. :
Defcoulpé :m. ée:f Difcharged; cleered.purgedrid
of an imputation, delinered from blame. AS
Defcoulper. To diftbarge,cleere, purgetid ef an impu-
tation, free from blame.
Defcoupé. Looke Decoupé. 4
Defcouple :m. The uncoupling of boundes, or Lofing
them after their game.
Defcouplé:m.ée:f. Vncoupled. = .
Defcoupler. Touncouple; to looffe or let goe,out of cow-
ples. tonne ESF ss
Defcourable : com. Slpperie, flitting ; eafely eftaping
from the place it was putin.
Defcouragé: m.ée:f. Difcouraged, amated, made
heartle(fe,indifpaire, ont of concert with bis own for-
Deleninazen TediGonrece,onbgrten, ere, fight
er. Todifcourage,unbarten,feare, frighten,
‘ apa puto doubi drive out of hart,bring out of cons
D Douanes fa >.
ouronne : mec :1,}7romne acrown, —
Bb iÿ 2e Defcou-


| ft


Origina


À
URHVERSYEY
=: A


HT © oan OP


| DES


ae ey a , vnerowne ; deprine of acrowne ;
dem.


Fy ‘coe £.Difcourte fie,want of courtefie, Looke


tm. A ripper, en ee of:
zm. ué: f. Ripped, unfowed; vndone.
- Effre rout deftoufutapres la colere.)To be as calme
as a( flanding)clocke ; 10 bawe no mettall, fpirit,vigor
ixbim ; to be as good as nobodie.
oufüre :f. 4 ripping vnfowing, undoing of.
couvert :m. erte : f. Diftouered ;uncoucred ; de-
teEted,difélofed ; expofèd unto the worlds view ; 3 open,
cuident manifefl,apparant, without any cloke,pretext,
or colour ; alfo,defcried or “difterned a farve off.
= defcouvert. manif pent, euidently, appa-
0 the view of all men,abroad in the ayer witb.
Fa oores,


Ua defcouvert le pafté, Looke Pafté.

Deftouverte : f. 4 difcouerie, detection, difélefüre,
denudation; a defcrying,difcerning,perceining, or fy-
ing out of.

Defcouvrement: m. A difcouering,encowering, detece
ting,d: ifclofing ; a defcrying,difcerning, or perc eiming

a farre 0
| Defcouvreur: ro. A difconerer ; detebtor difelofe a
fcout,an efpiall.

Defcouvrir. To difcouer ; to oncouer vabill, denude,lay.
naked make bare; to afi ‘lofe, detect, ma open,
day open,expofe vito the worlds view ; aff Adirie,

… difvcrné,perceige a farre off.
Defcouvrit la meiche. 70 vent(and ausid)a deadlie
mifchiefe ; Looke Mciche,
Defcouvrir Sain& Picrre pour couvrir. Saïnét
Paul. To rob,or borrow of, one, therewith to inrich,
or pay another.

Descraflé: m.ée: f. Cleanfed; made cleane, cleered,
of greafe, or greafineffe; vid from filthie, or ‘flouen-
= pes the thicke-growne durt whereof is gotten


“uenlic ordure.
or falfe, money; ad nai
Defcriement :m, 407; me bier
Bis, th a-
te coine 5 alfo,


Delevaifer. Tocleanfe, make cleane, wipe away grea-
Sie filth, get out st Ad durt , $ «à fm. “A
Defcri. as Defcrit.
Defcrié : m, eé :f. Cried d
ken, or crackt; openly defamed , ine dust swith he
publicke.’
downer align sai
ano oe diférediting,
np ier. To crie dovene,or callin, om
| Defcrier tah = . ni
race; to wih tbe fat felis, se tie e


axe the wants proclaime the Of.

? On rie comme la vieille Era He bath
-' | averie bad report among the pe 13 pe is whol
©) crack, fame bl
Defcript ce dom, or dede


ou be


© lpéiorer.1 To va itd; ; 10 take the gold off.


DES


Defcroire, To difcredit ; or,t0 gine no credit nto; not
10 beleeue,

Defcroifé : mde: f. Pnerofféd ; fet flraigbt.

Defcroifer. Tevncroffe; to open, divide, lay , er fet
Siraight a thing whic flands acroffe.
efcroiflement :m. A decreasing; minifbing ; leffe-


Delite’ To decreafe, diminifh, wane, wax leffe,
weave away.

Defcroté: m. ée :f. Rubbed off; fcowred out, wiped a- !
way,as durt, &c.

Descroter. 701ub off, ficwre ext, wife away,durt,
efcroteur :m.A rubber,or maker cleane of cloatkess
alfo,one that rubs on,or runnes ouer,things.

Descrotoire : f. 4 rubbing-brufh.
efcroulé : m. ée: f. Shaken afunder,

Defcrouler. To fhake afinder,

Defcroyant. Difirufling,misbelecuing not beleciing,
efcuire. To vnjeeth ; or leaue feething.

Defcuvé: mée:f. Tunned.or sa cut of a fat, or tab

Defcuver. To take out of a fat,or

ae com, PTE ti comtemptible, def.
pfeable.
“epi :m,€e: f Difdained, {corned centemned,
efpifed.

Des ignement : m.4 difdaining.depifng, (corning,
contemning.

Defdaigner. To difdaine, depife, contimne, fecrne,
loath pot to vouchfafe ;10 make vile account of,
efdaigneur :m.4 difdainer, feorner conten ner def


piftr.
Désdaigneufemenc Diflairfilly, fcernfi ly contemp-
3 proudly, coily, [qucamifhly.
aigneux :m. cuse :f. Difdainfi LL, fcorncfill, coy,
hnceih,
Defdaing:m. Difdaire, frovne, contempt; coineffe;
proudfqueamifhnelfe ; bautineffe ; deflight mocdi=


neffe,
Desdamer. To vnladie; todenieaLedieber due title,
on Pis de opbas or flile of Ladie; al
mes où Fa at Draugbts.
ne ebt sé aboord,
meg


ce m.icte: car ve, Fésked : c6n-
tra iddca,


digted ;.
ig eme: f ees Bene or denoted znto; D;
eférucd
diement :m. Ade latine deflining tn
PU gg ol
efdier.To Mende unto ; to defline,re-
Le purpofe for. |
SeDefdire. To unfa prea retraËt, reuoke ; ibid;
contradiét himfelfe, go from bis word,
Defdommage. # Defdommagement.
Defdcmmagé:m. ée:f. indemnified, aude
leffe ; diféharged.
De sdommagcment: m. An indemnitie, or indemni-
ing;a fauing harmeleffe ; an cmnds-making. © oo
imager. To etre faue bormeleffes dif-
ree; make an amerds unto,
é: :m, ée: f. angilt sor mhafegilding à werne


a;  ronfed,rai fleeping, =
1mies. Vnaflonied, untonemmed


pier TI ronfe,
jan à BEAN og
or-


Defdouni. Awa
aa ere


Original trom


FHE-OHIO*STATE UNIVERSITY


~ | Defembellir


DES


patos: nites D eq lynings are taken


Déloubler. To valyne,or take the lynings out of a gar-
Defdouloit. To leane off ‘forrow,to furceafe from mour-


Di: n m.iéte: f. Difcourfed,bandled,intreated,
dilated of.

Defduire vn poinét. To handle, intreat, dilate, or dif
courfe ofa point ; See Deduit.

Defduit : m. Sport,pajlime,recreation, delight.

Defduite:f. A Diféourfé; the handling of a mattersal-
fo,as Deduite.

| Defembarqué: m. 6e: f. Disimbarked.

embarquement: m, A disimbarking.

IDefembæquer. To disimbarke,or unload a fhip; alfo,

. |: toland,or goe afore out of a fhip,e>c.

| Defembarraffé: m.ée: f Disintangled, 57 ered.

| Defembatraffer. To vapefler,disintangle; rid from in-

tricatenelfe,or troubles.

. To disimbellifh, disfigure , impaire the


_ beautie f.
embroché: m.ée : f. Vabroached; unfpitted.
Defembrocher. To vnbroach, unspit; pull off the


Demers he.
:m. ¢e:f Rifen from an Ambufcadoe;
gone,or gotten from among bufhes.
pete er:m, The place, or part of a Thickes,
whereout wild beafis ufé to goe into the Plaines.
SeDefembutcher. To rift from an Ambufcadoe ; to
rufh up from among bufhes; to goc out of a sii ab que


ground.
Defemmuré: m. au af acre ead take e it


taken-dovwne. Da
Defemmurer. To taken 8 Soe en
was incloftd; alfo, to vmwall,or take-downe the walls


Dés m. ée: f Vapacked; taken out of a
Di packet.
ueter. To unpacke, to vnloefe a packe ; to
D per pute
De femparable a teseuerable fperable depriue-
able; cbandonable; diforderable.
Pera m. ée:£ Diffeifed, “deitined, difpoffeffed
Rose meee a aif, left,
andomed ; af diférdered
: ee oer
see; a > quite
loofing, or letting nr a
paris fiber eek 3 «hs


g of.
Defeinpares, To diffeife,depr:
feucr, diuide, part, put afi


+ ee are


ne


don
Se eke arer. To bof, leaue,or let goe the poffe/~
EE +4 4 a thing; ee be gone; to quity or abenion-n


| Defdormiffement: m. An awaking, row |
nati 4) fingsraifing De scher.To ) disimpeach,disincomber cléere,


| Defeinpefirer. To vmpefter, cleeresemtangle, free,deli


De Ipé: m.éc:f. Par, i or diftharged from


Defen geancer. Te rtine,or extieguifbthe race of.” 2:
Delong sin ée: 37 a Sennen Pre :


Maire ce root
or unfort what nc cc da lan qu ca.


Defen Doel 11. 4 fe Lb
Dalene, To deride fe i ie contra
De = orteur: mm. A deborter diffuaer.


‘DEES


combered.


npeftré: mée:f. clcered,frecd vnpeftered.
nb. ; svnpefered.dif= :


uer from intricacie.
Defempli: m, ie: € Emptied,or unfilled.
D li. To emptie,or vnfill ; 10 lade, or fbift, out of
one thing into another.
Defemplumé: m. ée: £ Plumed; whofe plumes are
plucked. feathers pulled. :
De aft To plume; to pull bis plumes,to plucke
thers off.
rifonné: m. ge: f. Dusimprifined ; freed fet
at libletie,delnered out of prifon. -
Se rifonner. To free, or deliner bimfelfe ; 10
Set bimfelfe at libertie, ov et bimfélfé out of prifin.
Defenchainé: :m.ée:f. Ep chayned, or looffed from
chaynes,
Defenchainer.To vnchayne,to: dof from chaynes.
De enchanté: m. ée: f. Disinchaunted.
Defenchanter, To disinchaunt;to rid from charmes.er
- inchauntments.
Defencloue: m. ée: f Vanayled; vncloyed. *
Defercloüer. To vnnayle; to vncloy; to take the nayles
out of : ah, ta cafe a horfe that bath beene prickt in


Del à Vacorded, unfirung.


me.
Defencoulper. To To difébarge from blame.
Defendetté: mn. ée: f. Rid unt of debt.
efendetter. To bring out of debt.
Defendorinir. # Defdormir.
Defendormiffement. as Defdormiflement,

Deis iduire. To 2ndawbe ; to bare; to pull the daw-

ig rae 10 difcouer whats under a dawbing.

Defen


se rt on Py

Defenfler. Tovnpell to affuage, fall,or wax leffe,
er (welling.

Defe orgé:m. Ce: £ Disinforged.


arin To draw,or takeout of an Ouen.
Se Uae cone locke cheerefilly,to leane frow- |


Defer agé: m.ée : £. Disingaged redeemed x
De efengager.’ To diingage;vut age redetme. RS
Diefeng cit: mi. ée: f. The race f 1s extin- |


guifhed. = =o


sto pluche up by the rootstedefivey |
aneuill impe, a: plant.
Defengignt: a e1£ Disinchanted, delinered from


Defengourdi: ni. ic: + £Pabeimmmed amakcyrefe-
‘red from fees ‘lum, eS: :
women to are. À
rté: m, éc:f Dehorted,di aa


Dr Palme, nb See a


Oxiginal¢rom


RHE OHIO STATE: UNIVERS fay


im, eg Vnfivelled ; whofe fwelling is a- |


Dee: m. ée:f. Drawne,or taken out of an |


HOTTE Ep


DES


beauine[fe,irkfomenelfe,carke,or care.
ne pr à wearineffe, or tedionfnelfe; to
drine away heauineffe, carke, or care.
Delenrouillé : m. ée:£. Skewred,firbufhed,or clean-
Sed from ruft.


Defenrouiller.. To skowre, furbufh, or take the ruft


‘om.
Defenroylé: mée : f, Caffed,put from bis wages rafed
a of the roule, or ft of ; alfo, umrouled , vnfoul-


ed,

Defenrouler, To unfold, or vmroule; as Defrouler;
"as to caffe, difébarge, put out of the rowle, or lift
0


Defenteigner. 70 unteach,or teach otberwifé then was
taught before.
Delenfeveli : m. ie : £. Vaburied, taken out of the
grane.
Defenfevelir. To vnburie,to take out of a graue.
Defenforcelé: m. ée : £ Vnbewitched exorcifed,
Defenforceler. To usbewitch,exorcife,yid from force-
rie, :
Defentaffé: m. éc:f. Unbeaped ; taken off a beape.
Defentafler. Tounheape, unload; take off a beape, or
load. ;
Defenterré : m.ée :f. Disiaterred unburied.
Delenterrer. To vnburie, to take out of the earth a-


gaine. L 2s
Defentortillé : m.ée:£. Untwifled, umeijthea,.
mouen,
: ga To turne,or wind off; to ta a-
ont. |
Defentraillé: m.ée: f. Paunched bowelled,
Dertrailer. To paunch, to bowell, or vnbowell ; to


à Taw.
Defenvelopper. as Defi ee
Defenyvré: m. ée:f, Made, or become fober, (after
drunkenne(fe.)
Defenyvrer. To rid from drunkenseffe, to male fober’
againe.
Defequé. as Defequé.
Dell a: apa, vhbrué li
4 __ted,or abandoned of inbabitants, = =
À Defert. as Deferté, GR EEE Et
Appel defert. .4n appeale made before the time,or
unfitly, and out of time; or, eale neither begun,
À _ nor followed, as it ought tobaucbeene, |
Deferte :£. Defert, merit; Sans deferte, Vadefer-


Deferté:m. de: 6 Forfakensdefolete, defart,- babi
Defer Site: era cs ae. of
" au inhabited place to make an nab ea wile


tage 4æ


ace
» neffe; alfoa


DES


Defervir fus table. To take away. See Deflervir.
Defefperable: com. Despaireable,onbopefiul
Detesperade: f. A kind of mournefilll ong.

louer à la c. To fet bis whole ref, or fet

all on fixes,and feuens ; to throw at all.
efefperance: f. De eratene]e,defpaire.
Defesperéinent. Desperatly,hopele(fely in defperatios,
without any bope of belpe,or of fuccejle,

Def . To despaire ; to be in tc paire gr without


bope.
Defefpoir: m, Defpaire desperation.
am ime: m.éc : £ Diftfleemed,neglefted fet naught |


Defeftimer. To difeftceme neglect contemne,fetnanght
by make no reckoning of.
SRouffe im. ée: £ Vafluffed, emptied, enacua-
ted.
Defeftouffer. To emptie,euacuate,vnfuffe,
prier :m.ie: € Vnamafédirecoucred ofroufed
om,aflonifhment. -
Defeftourdir. To receuer of, or to roufe from, an afto-


nifhment.


Desfacer. as Effacer.


Desfacher. Looke Desfafcher.
Desfacilé :m. ée : f. Put out ofioynt. Rab,
ict: m. Cte: £ Vadone; broken; defeated, dif.
comfited, onercome; ruined fe ftroyed,ouerthrowne.
Vn vifage desfaict. Growue very leane,pale,wan;or,
decayed tm feature,and colour, :

Desfaiéte : f. A defeat, or defiature; a diféomfiture,
or oncrtbrow; alfo,a fhiftexcuje, euafion, ausidance ;
(Laoke Defaitte) alfo, a riddance, dispatch, cleering

_ the bands of;putting off.

fçait fes desfaictes. He is a very cunning Atar-
 chañt,he will make pik for one.

Desfaire. To undoes reake;defeat difomfit ouercome ;

* ruine, defiroy,ouerthrow.

Desfaire vn cerf. To breake vpa red Deere.

Se Desfaire de. To rider detiner bimfèlfe from ; to

quit bin 0 difpatch,or cleere bis bands of.

Sec ire foymefme, To murther, or make away,

bimfelfe ; 10 Lay violent bands on bimfetfe.

LR que sen desfaiét: Prov. He does enohgh
that rids bimfelfe of (a whore.) ,

Desfait,& Desfaitte. a Destai®e>Desfaide.

Desfarouché: m. ée:f Reclaymed, made gentle,


_ tamed. RE. RELAX
‘ Desfaroucher. To make gentle,to reclayme or tame,


hé:m.ée:f. Appeafed,quicted,calmed ; eafed,


eee at the hart.
cher. To appeafé quiet; eafe,comfort lighten the


hart; to take away loathing,ov ivkfomeneffe,
veur. Disfauor; want,or loffe.of fauour. °
Desfavorifé: m. ée: f. Disfinoured, out of fauour
with. ss


Desfavorifer. Todisfanor,not to faueur ; to withdraw


ÉD ion ts tanith From bis finde.
f a oes E Plat lye penile ip


Désférmer . To vnflut, la) open, diff; die


ferre: £, Anold fuit of apparrell, caf clothes ; alfo,
as Disferre ; oan vs and unprofitable byfi-
307 it ge
* Ces gens font de fascheute desferre.The/e are vm
rulie, flubborne, bflinate, froward people ; they ave ill
to be gouerned, hard to be pleafed. ) i


Desferré. Vnfbed,or,haning caff bi: fLoves, asa git
a 3


Original from


THE OHIO: STATE-UNIVERSITY


D. E'S


al, weakened, or depriued of his beft belpes; of rich
become poore.
Desfetre-cheval. ‘rhe finall pul/e, or Hatchet Fetch,
pie Horfé- foe
esferrer vn cheval. To vnfhove aborfe.
ihe Dafne. To ride the wild Mare.
: Sedesferrer. To contradit(and thereby betray)bim-
pik 3 4lfo,to aan loofe bis floes as a borfe.
m. as Def ; a challengesor hoftile defiance.
Desfiance: £. A difidencesor miftruft.
de Diftrafting ; despairing in; miftrupifull 3 alfa,
| defiin
Desfiche: :m, ée :  Loofedyvnfixed,vnfaftened.
Desficher. To looffeunf eu er a 7
Desfiement: m. A defying; alfosa difirufting.
Desfier. To defy,to challenge unto the pes!
Se Desher.To diftruft; or to difpaire.
Se Desfier l’un de l autre comme aveugles. To
miflruftlke two blind men,one another.
esfiourer. See Defigurer.
Desflé: m.ée: £ Vatwifted ; umvonen; rauelled; dif:
ordered,
Soye desfilée. Slewe filke.
Desfiler. To ge spat pe ae: i deel
__ foto varanke, diforder ; put off a file.
ancé: me: f. Deprined, vnfurnifhed,drayned,
of treafüre.
aininé: + cc: £ Quenched, extinguifhed, put
out,as a
Desflacimer. “To quench , extinguifB, put out the


Desfleure. . To fa oh silo netsh Jed,
euri: m. ie: f.#bofe rs are caftor fhe
Desfleni. as Defleurir.


esfoncé : m. ée: f. Kaocked out,broken open,as the
| _ bead of Caske.
| Desfoncervn vaiffeau. To agit tren bot-


À _ tome of aveffell.
pars En frs ex
esfortune: m. Misfortune,mifa cena MR
4 Desfortuné: m.ée: £ Vnluckie, unbappie, vnfortu-
nate,
| Desfoui: m. ie: f. Digged out.
Desfouir. To dig out.
Paina, à frais & desfrais. Defraying, or freeing of
char,
Desfrayé: oe éc: f. Defrayed di[charged, be
ges are
Desfraye r. To defray, difcharge, or beare the charges


Desfriché. as Defriché.
Desfrichement. nos: fits
cK gronnd rootes,


*« ra
if: m.ée: f. Crufhed à in peeces.
Desfroncé: m. ée: :£.Variackled,nootbed ;cleered,
or cheered
Desfroncer fon vifage. To Looke merrir; te cleere,um-
cloud, or ete bis vifage , to fhew a cheerefull
countenance.
Desfrongncr.# Desftoncer,or Defenfrongner.
Desfroq uer. as Defroquer.
“Re Side = To Monsey or abandon his Monkifh
Luther di
D De: A pire à bearing of charges
LS mre, if canil,
nc Nr ri)
bare beaded. “3 US hNe


DE Ss


Desfuler.Se Desfuler. To put off bis cap,hat,or miter ;
to be uncouered,or ge bare beaded before,
efgagé: m. ée: f. Ungaged, disingaged , redee-


mea,
Defgagement. Anvngaging,disingaging;a redeeming,
or fetching out of a gage.
Defgager. To vngage, duingage, redeeme; fetch out a
ie pledge. *
eur: m. A disingager, or redeemer.
Delgai if Anwnfheatbing, or drawing out,of awea-


pon.
Il y marcha bien d’un’ autre defgaine. He procee-
ded in a farre quicker fafhion ; be went about it with
another manner of refolution.
ae aya :m.ée: À. Vafheatbed, drawae out of ibe
eal
Defi gainée,& Defgainement. as Defgainc 3a draw-


Def 2 forth of the fabberd.
SES To unfheath ; to draw out of the fcabberd,


Defgainnade: f. An onfeatbing or drawing of wea-
pons; alfo, a bickering wherein edged tooles arg vféd ;
alfo,a Purchafe made,or Prixe takensby rele pe
rats,

Defoarni: m. fe: £. Difgarnifhed unfirnifhed of.

Ddgarnir. To difgarmfb, vafirnifh, deprive of, take
away from.

Defgarnir la terre. 4 vaffall to tranfbort his moue-
ab Fonimodities out of bis Lords territorie.

é:m. ée: £ Vabound,valooffedunfettered,
‘untyed,delinered from bands; alfd, torne,ragged,tat~
tered; whence ;

Vn vallet defgaroté. A Raggamuffian; and we [ay
when the toes, or knees peepe out, ‘Wey bane broken
loofe.or broken prifin.

Defgafté: m. ée : f. as Degafté. pi

€-parcs. Fould-rauaging,parke-wafling.

D BA To waft, poyle, make bauocke of, bring loffe


feelé: m. ée:£ Thawed; melted,yefolued.
x Baer To refolue,mel', thawe.
er vn licure.To dc Hare off ber ree
eplac m.eé: f.


a To thawe > or take the yce of; to make


Deolout: : mic: £.Gulped,or fwallowed done.
outir. To gulpe,or (iva Low dorvne.
- olué : m.ée : f. Vaglued ; looffed; feuered.
luer. To unglue,to looffe,to funder to feuer..
Debit m. ée: f. Spued,cafi, vomited out; alfo,as
put ozillé.
obiller. To fpue,caftor vomit.
Ner.To rob.
Defgonder. Looke Degonder.
é:m.ce: f Diféorged, fpued, vomited out;
fr re ace by fing
‘om greafè,drc
orgement.A cieorgngsvomiting ingscefings
an emptying euacuating,
ic orgement d’un lac. The mouth,or ifue ofa


Lake thats nourifhed by a Spring.
“homer te To difgorge, ‘vomit, (pue out, caft bis gorge,
: 5 10 voi euacuateemptis a


CC ;
PME ke à out € the


DR ». ie: f. Vabenummed; Pt at


awed; the ice Toshi is mel.


euacuated,voided ; TE frowned, or cleanfed |


PAL ee


fe Éd sm, de …


4


h © — a Lig © Ba ded ds
. : 4


CRE


«


ee ee et


À.


DES DES


nimble,gentle;pliant ; alfo, difpatched, rid out of the


Way.
Defgourdir. To vnbenumme ; to quicken, reuiue, re-


Solue a thing that is benummed,or iff with cold ; al-
S0,to fupple ; to make,or wax nimble, gentle,plyant; al


fo,t0 rid, or difpatch out of the way.

Défgourné YA ce: f. Vancurbed.

Delgourmer vn cheval. To uncurbe a borfe.
coul m, as Degout.

Deigoutte. Tafileffe,diftaftfull, without flomacke ; nice,
daintie ; diflaine full, wayward, froward; loathing e-
uerie thing, pleafed with nothing; ont of the bumour
with,bauing no mind unto.

Defgouftement: m. 4 diflafting, loathing, abborring
of meats ; alfo, the flrange lufling, or longing of wo-


men,
Defgoutter. To diftaft,loath; diflike,abborre; be out of
bumor with,haue no mind por maw"vnto. geil
Defgouziller. To gulpe,or {will up, to fwallow downe,
vozillé. whofe throat is cut.
Defgradé: m. éc:f. Degraded, depofed, put froma


lace, or degree.
2


Defgtader. To degrade,or depofe; to deprine of or put
from,a place, @ degree.

yer oi m, ée:f. Vaclaiped, ungrapled, vnhooked,
looffed fiom.

Defgrafer. Towngraple, bis vabooke ; looffe, or
finder, things that are grapled.

Defgraiffé:m.éc-f.Vafattenedymade leant lean-
fed,purced,ungr eafed,rid of greafe ; alfa

Defgraifler. To Mes de vid of fat; purge
fronr greale ; make leane;or cleane ; alfo,to rifle.
Terre à defgraifler. Fullers earth,
efgrapher. as Desgrafer.

De(gravir. To fetch, or throw, downe a climbing
thing.

Defgreflé; &, Defgrefièr. as Defgraiflé, & Def-

raiier.

Délgroifé: m. Ce: f. Leffened, fubtilixed made finall,
finesov leffe proves alfo,polifbed, refined, made band-
dleroller t into fafhion. ibe: he ai

rofler. To le([en,ungr eaten, fubtilixe, ‘ina

D Ges rl gatas pollen headed
bring into fafhion. LT eet os =

Defgroffir. as Le PE

Er Looke Deguerpit. ._ eae

Defguerpiffement: m. 4 quitting, leaning, abando-


ning, forgoing.gining oner of.
efguerpiffeur: m. as Degu


enelt À : Pl


ea


cur.


. Delguerpy: m. ic:f. Quit, left, abandoned, forgone,
e A CERTES


eelded up,ginen ouer.. PETER
Défuilletésm. ée: f. Vatrufèd or whofe bofe are
depriued of their poiats. - RAS : LP
uilletter. To vatruffe,vnty,or undoe points ; alfo,
to take points Rae SSS RE 3
Defguindé: m. ée: f. Let downe, orlet fall, from the
2 height it was liftup unto. ;
efguinder. To let downe, or let fal (a thing) fromthe
beigbtit was lift op unte.
ym. ée: f diembled, fained,
ited 5 ied, fiphiicated.
ent: m. A difguifing 5a diffem pu?
ter feiting, ; 34 i rat 20. L A;
Defguifer. To difguife ; to counterfeit , id i
00807 2h nt er adulterat, fal
cate. ae Cnet ; ’


Se er feit,be dou-


LT fe. :
Deon ic Dishonour, fhame,reproach, infzmie,


ble, falfe, bolow-bearted ; [ay one thing, and meane
another.
Defguifeure: fas Deguifement.
eshabillé: m.ée:£ Difarrayed,unclothed.
Deshabiller. To difarray,cnclotb,make vnreadies put,
or if clothes.
eshabité. Disinbabited.without inbabitants,
abiter. Te disinbabitate, or deprive of inbabi.


tants, 4
Deshaiét: m. Sadneffe, beauineffe, penfineneffe; dif:


quiet.

Deshait. as Deshai&.

Deshaité: m. ée: f. Sad,griewed,penfiue,beauie-bear-
ted, depriued of ioy, deuoid of gladneffe; alfo, crafie,
JSicklie unbealthfill.

Tu m'as deshaité. ‘Thou baft turned my icy into fad-
nelfe.

Deshaitement: m. Vanbealthfulne{fe,infirmitie, fad-
nelle penfiuenefe. .
eshalé de famine. Pined, withered, worne away


throu er ; flarued.
Vn x sae . Out of beart; baled, or tyred
out,


Deshanché: m.ée: £. whofe banches are broken, or
put out of ioynt.

Deshancher. To breake,or put out of ioynt, the bips, or
hanches.

Deshanté: m. ée : f Difüufèd.,or not haunted as in for-
mer times ; alfo, whofe handle,or fioffe is broken,or ta-


‘om it.

Deshanter. To forbeare his haunt ; 10 leaue the compa-
nie of alfo, to take from the bead of a Speare oc the
bandle, or flaffe thereto belonging.
esharnaché: m. ée: f. Vabarneffeduntrapped;un-
fürnifhed,or whofe furniture is taken off:
esharnacher. To vnbarneffe, or vntrap; to take off
the furniture from a borfe. :

Desheaulmé. Bereaued of bis helmet.

Desheaulmer. To take a helmet frem the bead. |
esherance. Want of beires ; or,the inberitance of one }

- that hath left no heire bebind bim ; an Efcheat for
want of heires. |
Droit de des. See Droit.


Pesheritan ince: f. A diffeifin.
esherité. Diffeifed, YT ebevited. deprived of an inbe-
Yilance, | ;
acritement : m. À disinberiting,a diffeifing.
\Sheriter. Te aiffeife, jinberite Pre le “ à inhe-


ritance.
Deshingandé: m. Ce: f. Lift,or throwne,off the bind-
Ges; out of frame,out of all order.
Deshingander. To lift,or throw, off the hindges ; to put
out of frame,bring out of all order. .
eshonnefte: com. Difhone/t, leud, bad; foule, im-
pure, filthiesvillanons ; vnfitting, vnbe[emng, disho-
nourable,
Deshonneftement. Déshonefily, impurely, vilely, fil-
_thily, badly, leudly, naughtily, difhonourably, [has


es fteté. Dishoncfie, leudneffe, villanie,bad-


ele, wn~


_ neffé; Fine, impuritie ; bafeneffe, vilen
c nelle. |


diférace,obloquie difcredit,ignominie.
Deshonoration. 4 difhonexring,diferediting difgra-

cing,defaming,traducing. = Fe,
Deshonoré: m. ée:f. Difbonoured, difcredited, dif-

graced,fhamed,traduced defamed. aes


Originaltrom °


THE-OHHO STATE SCR oie


~ “


Deshonorement. @sDeshonoration. |»
PA To difhonour,diferedit, fhame ; defame,
traduce,diferace.
fis: gr : À Impudent, fhameleffe, brafen-
ti


Deshontément. Impudently, fhamefüly,fhamele(y.

Deshoulé. whofe ves puled ra à y

Deshoufer. To plucke off boots.

Deshouffé: m. 6e : £. whofe footcloth is taken off.

Densité vne mule, To take off the footcloth from a
Mi *


Desia. Alveadie.

Des-ja.So farre; or,thus farre.

Desjanté : m. ée: €. Vinfiraked,as a wheele.

Desjanter vne roué. To vnfirake amheele, to pull the
rakes from about it.

Deficcatif: m. iue : f. Deficcatine ; of power,or proper-
tie todry up.

Deficcation. A drying up.

Defidence: £. Idleneffe nonvefidencie.

dre m. eufe: f. Idle, laxie, lither, flowb-


tle,
Desjeuné: m.ée : £. whofe fat is broken (in amer-
ning.)
Il à efté desjeuné de ce nouveau ftyle. He bath
(to his coft) learnt what the[è new tearmes meane.
jeuner. See Desjuner.
| Defignatif: m.iue: f Defignatine denotatine,appoin-
ting; fhewing,declaring.
Defigné: m.ée: f. Denoted,fignified fhewed by fignes,
or tokens; alfo,defigned,prefiribed,appointed.
Defigner. To denote, fignifiesor fhe by a marke, or to-
ken ; alfo, to defigne, preferibe, appoint ; as,Defigner
les limites de, &c.

Definence: £. A definence,ending, clofing; an end, or
clofe.
Def im, A defigne,purpofe;proielt,priuat intention,

or determination. Ets
Desinterefé : m.ée : f. Diféharged from; or,that hath

forgone,or loft, all intereft in. | TL
Desintereffer. To diftbarge,or faue barmele(fe; tovid

from alt inter efi in. ù
Desjoin&: m.éte: f. Disioyned ; parted, feuered, fe-

perated. fundered,diuided,difunited;vncoupted.

esjoindre. To disioyne, difunite, part, vncouple, di-

wide, feperate, feuer, finder. :

esjoingnement: m. A disioyning, difuniting, par-

ting feveration,diuifion, feucring,findering.

iouflé: m.ée:£ Vinhusked.

cfir: m. Defire; a coueting of; awifb,wifhing, or lon-

gene eétion,or appetite, unto; à lufting

after.

If commence bien à mourir qui abandonne fon

defir : Prov. He that leaues to defire begins to dy.
a com.Defirable; fit,or worthie to besvifhed

Pe : Tor

Defirant. Defring; coueting affecting,wifhing for ;lus-


ting aft


affetted, fancied, lufted after. 7


2


~ Pafques long temps defirées font en viriour voft
: 8 Le


_ paffécs: Pro. (Sot! ich was expetted long is en-
pened ie = FT “
«To defire; couet,wifh, ; to fancie, af.
SEB = require; luft after. a =; Caapaha be


Dob ee: leat ho


pigibized by Go gle


Defiré: eg éc:f. Defiredcoueted ied. longed fo |


DES
Defiftement :m. A defifing, ceafing, forbearing;lea-
: weg of ining ouer.
Defifter. To lefif, ceafe , forbeare, leaue off, gine o-


Her.
Desjuché: m. Varoufted; taken downe(as a bird)ffom
the rouft whereon it Wed : a
jucher vn oyfeau. Tovnrouf,or take downe a bird
From bis rouftor pearch where be refleth.
esjuné: m. as Desjuner: m.
esjuné: m. ée: f, That bath broken bis faft ; Looke
es peste
esjuner: m. A bre 94 mornings repaft.
Desjuner de chafleur. .4 large break, meale,


repafl.
Dee To breake faft in the morning.
Leuer matin n’ eft pas heur ; mais desjuner ef le
lus feur : Prov. There u more fafetie in eating, then
ine dn ifingseariy à mornings.
abré: m.ée: f. Torne,ragged full of rags ; alfo,all
vnbraced,or looffely untruffed.
Deflabrer. To teare,tatter, make ragged,or make rags
of; alfotounbrace.
eflacé: m.ce:f. Vatyed,unlaced,as a woman.
flacer. Tovnlace;to vnty. x
ays m. éc : £ Difcharged ; looffened s let goe,
et fly.
Deflacher. To difharge,xs a Gunne,or Croffe-bow ; to
let goe.let fly,let looffe.
Deflaicté: m. ée: f Milked; alfo,weaned.
Deflaiéter. To milke, or draw the milke from; alfo, to
Weane.
Deflainé : m. ée: f. Fleeced ; whofé wooll is pouled, or
pulled off.
Deflainer. To fleece; poule, pill ; defpoyle of fub-


flance.
Deflaitté. as Deflaiété. .
Deflaitter. To weanesto take from the dame or nurfe;
D or as Deflaïcter. . def

É: m.ée* £ Loofféd,lei fly.

Deflafcher. To looffe,er let fly.
Deflaffé: m.ée:£ Eafed,refrefhed,unwearied.
Deflaffer. Torefrefh; to eafè after much trauell; to rid

from wearinelfe or wearifome incumbrances.
Deflaté: m.ée: f, Valathed.

eflater. To valath; to take,or pull,away lathes, »

eflavé: m. éc:f#afhedaway.
Deflavement. 4 wafbing away ; an inundation.
Deflaver. To wafh away.
Deflayé: m. €e: £ Supled, softened, allayed; foaked,


fleeped.
Deer ip ena oe Sk
yg A foftening, allaying, fuppling ; foaking,

ening. L J

Defer. #eDellayer. \*
Deflié: m. ée: f. Vnboundyvnfétteredcndone sontyed,

at libertie,fooffe,free. "=
Deflier. To wnloofft vntyeunbind,ondoe ; to deliuer to

freesto vid from. :

On euft dit qu'il n’euft fçeu deflier vne moufche,

One would baue thought that butter would not bane

melted in bis mouth. . ‘
DRE m. An Epithete of Bacchus, or Wine,
_ which del ers men from car e,penfinenelfe, vr thought-


Defle a : méex f Dislodged ; remoned, parted or de-
pete fiom an val den.
Deflogement: m. A dislodging yemouing fhifting of
ano rie lodging ; a flitting, parting, or depar- |


T


4


Original-trom
THE OHIGISTATE: UNIVERSITY


Le 4 € =


SITET dis cé te! et ee  .,


Dr +7


D ES


ture from an accuflomed abode, |
Deflogement de vie. 4 dying, decenfing, depar-
tin


Defloger. To diflodge remone; fhifl, flit ,part or depart
from an accuflomed lodging.
Se defloger.The fame. >
Faire defloger de. To vnneflle; to thruft, or drive,
out of; to difpolfellesor diffeife of.

Defloqueté : m. ée: f. Ragged,torne,tattered.

Defloqueter. To teare vate rags,or tatters; to make
clouts of.

Defloué: m.ée: f. Difpraifed; difallowed,reproned;
alfo,looffened,or put out of it place,
Deflouer. To difpraife,difallow ,blame,yeprooue ; alfo,
to laojJen, or put out of it place. À
Deflouéure : f. A loofingmouingor putting of a thing
out of it right place,

Defloyal: m. ale : £ Disloyall,unfaithfull, wrufileffe,
trecherous, falfe,traiterous.

Defloyalement. Disloyally, vnfaithfiully, falleh, tre-
cheroufly.

“As té:f. Disloyaltie, trecherie, falfebood,faith-
lefne(e,untruth,vnfaithfiduelfeinfidelitie,


La Là


Definaché: m.ée: f Vachawed; alfo, ‘out.


cret,and concealed matter ; or,as Demacquer.
efinag :m.ée:f. Pulled downe or taken afin-


= To undoe, take afunder, pull downe,
| flone-worke, +4
Dedinaillé : m. ée : € Vnmailed; unlinked ; undone,
|. cut in pecces,packed unto peeces, as à coat of maile.


to pecces,a coat of maile: : : rs
efmailloté: m.ée: £, Vnfwathedunfwadled.

naillotement : m.An vnfwadling,or vnfivathing.

Definailloter, Tovnfwadle,or-unfwath; to looffe, or

take,a child out of the fratbing bands.

imaillure : f. dn-vamailing ; an Undoing, tearing,or
cutting,as of maile,in pecces.

maintenant. Prefently, even now ; from bence-


forth. : : +
Deftmaifonné : m.ée : €. Turned out of bis boufe; thru
| out of bis owne doves ; diffeifed, or difpoffeffed of bis
} Delle diffe LR fis 0 st
| Defimaifonner. Todi ov diffeife of bis owne
| dweHting, to piques" php 0

out of bis owne dores. :


; ah ie bindges. fin of
fmanchemnent:m, Anvnpbafting; a flying ont of it
: baft,or beta, beacesany sn ER re


dinate,or difobedient, pranke. — PEUR
= À Definancher. To vmhelue,or take beluesor bafi
i ee aoe n, diforder, put eut of
| _ frame; turne out of it right place. :
Détrandibuiés m. ée : f. Vniawed; whofe iawes ave


breake,or vnioynt the iawes of.


ae = in pe Sit:


FFT


7 Digitiziedsby Go. gle ae


Defimacher.To unchaw ; al/o,to blurt out,by force,afe- :


Defimailler. To vnlinke, undoc, cut in peeces, or backe ‘


3 toturne -


efinanché: m, ée:f. Looft, diforderlie,ombelued, |


| © redsdiintricated,¢uitengled


a Le LE


14


DES


alfo,a flepping afide,a trauerfing of ground ; and(more
eacrall and mop hab) amy part gate going; al.
0, ward, fence, or the lying of the bodie in fencing ;
and the poflure, or carriage thereof in any motion, or
aélion wbatfoeuer. A À
Definarche de cordier: A flepping, or going back


ward.

Defmarché: m. ée : f: Stepped backe, remoued back
ward ; that bath loft ground; thats gore, or put from
the place he beld;thats vecoyled, thats retived.

Defmarcher. To flep,or goe, backe ; to plucke,twitch,or
bring backe a fiep ; to remone a foot backward ; to te-
coyle retire, flerre from, gine backe,loofe ground.

Definarer. To vzmoore; or,as Demarer.

Defimarié: m. ée: f. Dinérced,vnmarried againe.

Defmarier. To diuorce,unwed,ov unmarrie.

quer. To take away the marke rem ser to put
fiom bis marke.

Definarrer. as Demarer.

Defmafquer. Toxmmaske,difcouer, pull, er take off bis


maske, ,
Definelancolié: m. ée: £Vnmelancholized,rid of me-


lancholie,
Definelancolier. To rid of mclancholie,take away {zd-
neffe; gladden,reniue,cheere vp ; comfort, félace.
efimembré:m. €e: f. Difmembred, peecemealed,
rent,or torne from. !
embrement : m, 4 tearing, difinembring, ren-
ding from, or in peeces.
Socopceoner To ras et gabe teaie,man-
e,cut,t ‘omor in peeces ; tomake hauocke of.
bre fon fief, To/ell, alien, paffe ae or
part with, a part thereof.
Definenacer. Tovnthreaten,to revoke a threat.
Definenagé : m. ée: f. Scattered as a familie,remoo-
ued asa Poufibold, broken up as a boufi; alfo, trans-
ported,or flifted,as houfébold-fluffe, fiom one lodging
Dek another. ‘
elinenageinent: m, A diffoluing,or feattering of a
familie, a breaking up of boufe. 7 a meh
Definenager. To give vp 7 poe Spas Gatter bis
familie fo remone honfèbold ; alfo, to transport boufe-


enti: m.Tbe Ly (ginen,or taker) alfoya little Sti-

letto,or fharpe-pointed dagger. — - ;

f itm. ie: f. Digreffed,or derogated frompro-

ued n grown falfe ; fayling in word,or of expetta-
tion; alfo,by whom,ar to whom the Ly is ginen,

En cette maifon il n’y a rien de definenti. ‘This

Mr: not awbit funke, fbrunke, or fallen into de-
cay.

Definentir. 7e gine the Ly unto; alfo, to fryle; digreffe,
or derogate from ; proue naught,or falfe; doe contravie
to expectation.

Se Definentir. Looke Se Dementir.
Vn bon arbre ne definentira poin& fon frui& en
fa faïfon, A good tree will not deny it fruit, or will not
oie ecla t hityinduefeafon. à. 1€
La maifon definent. The boue begins to filefirink,
J commen sex} 1150 L

e:f A


=


A faylingsdecaying fivinking.finkinc.
lé: m. ce: f. Looked,opened,cleered,vipelie-
’ : 3 alfo,dealt in pardled,
1 cnt: md looffing epeningclecring,unpa-
‘tering. disintricaring, ci: im lue tae f >
managing,diffatching of dealing in,Lv/inepese D
- Def


Original from


THE OHIG.STATE UNIVERSITY


‘ DES “DES


Definefler. To looffe,open,cleereunpefter disintricate
pores disintangle ; alfo,to bandle manage ; difpatch;
and hence;

Se defmefler de. To determine, finifb,difpatch: or,
to rid bis bands, get cleere of, vawind bimfelfe out
0


Vne chofe à definefler. A matter to deale insa courfe
to meddle with,a thing to (cuffle for.

Definefnager. as Defmenager.

Defineturé : m. ée :f. Huge, vnmeafurable, immenfe,
infinitesexceeding great; enormous exceffiue, outragi-
ous, unfatiable,vnyeafonable,moft unrulie,unbridled,
lauifh, difordered immoderate.

Definefurément: m. Ahugeneffe, immenfene[e, un-
meafisrableneffe, exceeding greatneffe ; alfo, outragi-
oufine/[e,enormitie ,un{atiableneffe unr cafonablenelje,
extreame diforder,exceffine vnrulinefft. . *

Definefuremént. Hugely immenfy, unmeafurably, ex-
ceeding greatly; outragioufly, unfatiably, exceffinely,
moft vareafonably ; the moft out of fquare, out of rule,
out of order that may be.

Delinettre. To d:(place,or put out of bis right placeas a
member out of ioyat ; alfo,to difiniffe,let goe,lay down;
alfo,to depofe,

Se definettre du bien qu'on nous a fait.To retian,
Send or gine backe the good turne one bath donevs. -*
inettre d'un’entreprife, To abandon, leaue


— 0 unfinnifh,difgarnifh, leaue bare, or um

prouided of. |

efnaturé : m. ée : € Panatwrall, churlifhunkind,
without natural affection; alfo,weakencd through the
lefféning,or loffe of nature ; alfo , vanaluralixed upon
bis owne petition , or by renouncing publickly , and to
that endbis natural Prince,and countrey.

Defitaturer.70 make unnatural; to weaken in nature;
to renounce bis naturall Prince, or Countrey, ta th’end
he may line where,and under whom,be bf.

i om zm. €e:f. Percaucd of faewes , or of

rengt

Defherver: To bereaue of inewes,or flrength; to wea-
ken,enfeeble debilitate. ‘
efni: m. Lg gop i

Detniaifé: m.ée : £ That dah beche extreamely chea-
ted,or qulled ; alfo,purged of the foole,that bath fèene
the Lyons; made wife taught wit,by coftlie experience,
or by many tricks put vpox bim,

Defüiaifer. To coufén,cheat, gull of; alfo,to purge of the
foole; to make wifesor teach wit by ofien deceining, or
putting many tricks upon: à
Se Detniaifersor Defniaifer(witheut e.)ro put off
chilgifhne[fe, learne wit, gaine experience, by baning
beeke often cheated,or much gulled,

“‘Defhiafeur: tm. 4 coufener, euller, cheater, connycat-

cher sor, one thatgpakes 1 ignorant grow cunning by


off defift from,an enterprife. coufening theme >.
Se definettre d'un’office. To refigne, frrender, gine iche: m.éc : f:Vnaeafled, or unncafiled; drinen,
ouer yan office. afed,or plucked ont of a neaftbole,or hold,


Defineu :m. cué: f.Remoued,altered;put off; defifi
0m, 4
Defineublé: m. de: f. Disfarnifhed, ge


moueables.


Defmeubler. ro ifh,or depriue of m 3 | Defirig
A eh x € from a place. : di c
Defm :f. Difblaced,depofed; mifplaced,put out ed,
of due place ; alfo,dsfinilfed yefigned,let goe,leftof,gi- | Defnigrement: m. as Defnigration.
uen oner; alfo, fubmitted bumbled, fubmifiine, Defnigrer. To defame,traduce,reproach,diferedit, ble-
Defmiflion:f. A demifion, depofition; a difplacing,


: flew blot the good name of.
mifplacine; arefignation ; difmiffing, forgoing. D


in: f.Adefiming, flaundeving,difcrediting,
i7e,or blittiag the good name of.
qm. ce: f. Defamed,traduced,reproached,
whofe good name is foulely flained, or ble-


ré


efn
mi
efnoüé: m.ée: f.Looffed,di[folued,vnknit,vmbound:
Definiffion de foy. An acknowledgement of. tenure itera Serio out of ioynt. ,
made by the tenant vato bis Land-lord ; a fubmifion, | Dcfnouëment: m. An vatying unknittingwnbinding
or bumbling of | himfelfe. b 20 (of knots;) a putting out of toyat.

Jé: m, e€ :f. Emptied or deprined of marrow; | Defnouër, To Mere Me 3 diffolésrefolue ; to


weakened, - : explicate,manifeftunfould.
| etn Toemptic,or deprive of marrow; bence, | Se Defnouër quelque membre. To lap{fe the bone
ü,10 weaken.
Defmonté : mes :f.Difinounted; taken,or lift off; caf, hs
ne,


thereof,or put it out of oynt.
or throwne


efnoiteure: f. as Defnouëment ; 4/9 , 4 part, or
member of the bodie, thats out of vec
er etes — caft,or lift, of al- | Defnué: m. ée : f. Earedifiripped, ereaued,deprined;
sto di or ava. "=: j
Hu A pente To difimount or throw dovone


voided,or deuoid of; cleane without. .
é row dé Vn enfant defnué. Bared of flefb, that bath nought
4 Canon with counter-batterie; alfo, to take it off the
carriages,


De skin and bone left onit. ‘
efnuer. To b rip,turne naked, bereaue. ine,
Defmonter vn'elpee. To take it out of the bilts. ce Pr ren banat bo
Defmonter vn homme. To vhorfe a man.


er void of.
- | Defobcir. To difabey,refift authoritie ; be flubborne, ve:
efinonter vne navire.T0 difarme a fhip,to defpoile fie be ifobey,refift 3 be flubborne,


vAruue.
À  ber of all her munition,and furniture. Defobeiff nce: € Difobedience, flubbornneffe,headi-
Definorchésvithout powder in bis tauch-bole: qRab, wel witha Lo ris Li
Defmordre. To diftaft ; to part from ; to forgoe, gine o- | Defobeiffant. Difobedient; finbborne , verulie, reftie,


ersloo/é Jet go bis bold. î lelfilleds fullen; hard, fifvnpliant.
Doi, Toremoue, difplace, driue backe, put | De obligé: f ée:f. Difobliged ; difcharged, from alt
oa ‘


from. obligation, or bebouldineneffe. |
Se definouvoir de. To decline, fivarue,change,bee WA à ji we pane 2 3 to releafe, or difcharge of a
carri bond, to acquit of an obligation. ,


on: f Defolation, denaftation, extreame [oli-
© tavinelfe, er lonelinesfe ; wie rine iain,
€


+


,. “—_—_ ">


y


7
:
:


Delolé: m. ée: £ Defolate, deauelie, defart; made {o-
litarie ; abandoned of all comfort or companie.

Defolemént: m. A defolating extreame wafting ma-
= défait , or folitarie; a ruining , utter defiroy-


Defcement. Defolately, folitarily; without folace com-
pe or companie.
efoler. To defolate; make lonelie, folitarie,deavelie,
or defart ; to deudf}, waft extreamely, ruine vt-
terly.
Defoppilé: m. ce: f. Vnfiopped, fet open.
Defoppiler. To vnftop,vnfhut,or fet open.
Defordonnance:f. Difarray, diforder, breachofor-
der, confifion.


lie, difordered, outragious, unbridled, out of all good
compaffe.

Delordonnément. Diforderly, difordinately, diforde-
redly, unrulily, outragioufly, without meane, without
meafure, without any manner of order.

Defordre: m. Diforder, confiifion,vnruline[fe, licenti-
onfuelfesescelf.

eloreres. From henceforth,
Deformais. Yet ; for all that ; alfo, from henceforth.
Det m. Ge: £ Unboned; whofe bones are taken


Deo fofler-r take out,or away,the bones from; to -


Defoa D d be Sime. €L
a are isto ata 2


dE Toumveaue ; unwind; te doe, and undoe,
or, undoe what is alreadie done.

Defpaifé: m.ée:£. Banifbed,or drinen out of bis natu-
rall countrey; alfo,grovne courtlie,or bauing leftrude
countrey fafbions.

Defpaïfement : m. The abandoning of, or driuing one
out of, bis naturall countrey ; alfo, a leaning of. rude
countrey fafhions

Defpaifer.Te drineor fend out of bis natural! country;

Défaite Ta fera pal
eC To feed,graxe,pafiure.

Depampé m. €e: f.Bared,asa Vine, ofleaucs.
espamper. Tovvaleafe, bare of leaues, pull the
leaues off a Vine cc.

La vigne, ou la Rofe, fe defpampe. Sheeds her
… leaues,or leauie branches. +
Defpamprer. as Defpamper.


Depaguser #


Deparsgé m.ée : f, Difparaged.


an unfit,or unworthie conditions.
Baer as Departement.
D . Looke Departir.


LS eut be dine to par't,or goe afimder,
. asD
ae aa rm, ENT inbred pecemeated, cu à in


eces ; pul pn ig oe i


Defordonné : m.ée : f. Diforderlie,difordinate,vnru- |


Despaqueté: m.ée: f. Ppacked; broken open as a
. To vnpacke ; torifle, et: pue up


er. To disparage ; A pale ona


Defpecerfon fief. zs Defmembrer fon fief.
einét: m. Cte: f. Vapainted ; whofe painting is
defaced, lufter decayed, colours worne,or blotted, out;
alfo,as Depcinét.
€. To unpaint ; to deface, blemifhyraxe,blot,
or put out,things painted.
int. 45 Defp peinét.
naillé: m.ée : f. Ragged,torne,tattered ; filof
clouts,rags,tatters.
D :f. A larder, floreboufe, gardemanger; alfo,
boufsbeld wine; or, fimall wine mingled with wa-


Depenct: m, ée:f. aes deh expended Spent ; be-
flowed, or difpoféd of.

Defpencer.To difpend,[pend expend; beftow, difpofe of.

Despenceric : f. À Spence,Larder, Storeboufè.fèr vic-
tuals.

Dielpoñdance: f. A dependancie ; a relying or banging


Defpe ndeur: m.4 fpender. riens tbrifi,waft-
D Hs or prodigall
Defpendeux: ae oe: ae Spendfil af fullyiotous,
pi
2 :m. mises) fpeñding,expence; as in
> Prouerbe:
poet endre giftle profit. There's gaine made by
fame) (pending ; or, foie ret vnlike our) Ener fpare
and euer bare; Looke Pro
D efpendre. To difpen PES, dusburfe; befiow,
ia ad upon; alfo,as Dependre.
dre tout. To waft, coalime.at Squander all


Defpendre trop. To prodigalixe it, lauifh, or lafh
out.

Autant defpend chiche que large: Prov . Looke
Chiche. si “ 7


Prou defpendre,& peu gaigner faccage le mefna-
oh our dobence oe little gaine put a boufe-


eeper to much paine.
fa oe je wre Se ge: That
w Qui ti bich gaia e
sod pete a y faut
are ent: & Qui send id qu'il


: rare sil ne 3%, faut pas de beface: Pro. He
ma all be gets, or, prodigall, wafls any more,
not a purfe with the rich (but may need a férip


Qu plus ete n’a vaillant defpend,il fait la corde
à quoy fe pend: Pro.He that fpendeth aboue his abi- |.
? Home) at length bang bimfelfe with ereat agilitie.
Trop tard fe repend qui tout de > Prov. when
alPs confiam'd repentance comes too latesorrepentance
is neuer in feafon with one thats ener anvntbrift.
Defpendu: m. ué: f. Difpended,fpent, expended be-
flowed, imployed, layed out upon; alfo,prodigalixed,la-
Der ont; wafled,confumed, {quandered away.
Ds -Expenceseafscharges orexpences,disbur/e-
Mallon declefpens. eut,cofis, and c Me
Looke Mai
re i uns ne =
Despenie: : f,Charge,cof, ces dis
_ peñdin me ined nee,
f rm.ce:f. Difpended. fpentexpended, difpe-


. Tadifpend, [pend qxpend s below diffe


fer:m.A Ipender,wafler,prodigall,,pend-thrift,
waft-good;alfoyacater, or clarke of a Kitchin. De f


Original from
THE-OHIOsSTATE- UNIVERSITY


D ES.


Defpenfier: m. ere: f. Spending, expenfiue, fpendfüll,
prodigall,onshrifiee ifiulls fie in,lanifh ofex-
pence.
Delpenfiere: : À as Defpenceric ; af, a woman cater,
heeper,or dispofèr of vituals.
: Defperché: m.ée : f.' Vapearched; irometeeies,
| or fétched;off a pearch.
D d'or . To-unpearch; to throw,beat,or fetch, off a
peare
Defperonné: m. ée: f. Without fpurres.
Desperonner. To depriue of fpurres.
Desperfuadé: m, ée:f Difuaded.
Desperfuader. To diffuade, - .
Despefche: fA difpatch, baft, riddance; difébarge.
Despefché : m. ée : f Dispatched, haflened, rid,
away quickly ; as delinered, freed, diféhar-


Déefelcher Fo haflen, dipateb, rid, tm fe


a dé


ly; to take a {peedie courfe with, make a (peedie
end of; alfo, to deliner, free, diftharge ; Looke De-


pe er,
efpefcher au petit point. To cannaffe throughly,


et! foundly, take up for balting.
: D m. ie: £. Vatbickened,or made thinne; alfo,
ari fil ed,


Sa To vathicken, or make thinne ; alfo, to cla-


é:m. Ce: f. Vapeflered,cleered, disintangled ;
vnwound,unfoulded,rid out of.
Defpeftrer: To vnpefter,dusintangle ; vafould, unwind,
eere,deliuer,rid out of.
uplé: m. ée: £. Dispeopled,or vnpéopled, disin-
bavizel {
Defpeupler. To sr cpg ompeaples he:


De 9 a ra 08.
Bee Lt & De jecer ; Looke
Defpecé,Defpecement,
Defpit: m. Depa, eh anger, [pleene, flomacke,
vexation.
Il n’eft fi grand defpit que de pauvre orgueilleux:
à There’s no despight to that of a proud beg-


Defpitan. Defpigbting , {pighting ; angring, vexing,


Defpité: m.ée : f. An ER ne cha
a ca offended, res top moued. se mé


ier. To defpigbt, Sight, or doe a thing in fpight


S ter. To be to fret,
sei amin
Âgeon.or
Defpiteufe angrily, ae
metal ; with great ela ge -
Defpiteux: m. eufe: £ Teflie, famib,defpi


mack fill, pes O0 or moodie;
+ or fpigbt.


Defpitonné: m. ,ée: € Wayward; ueamifh.
Desplat m. éc:f erie from bis.
Depiacer, To dipl to put from a place; alfo,to part,


— "né om a place.
doit nommer en face qui bien | affis fe def-
: Prov, Looke Fol.

>. To To dipl; diflike, offend, anger, vex,


uel By pourait om fe


Diditzed by Go. gle
°A MNT dy < ns


‘Delpler To difplay, — unfonld ; manifeft, make
d,


DES


Defplaifance: f. Greefe, unpleafantneffe, angui Le
sels 3 alfo, a difpleafure, or i4 pris a nas


Defplaifant. Difpleafing.soffenfiue, troublefime,onplea
fant, irkefome
Eftre defplaifanc de. To takein ill part or, rot 10 be
well contented with.
fir: m. A difpleafure,offence bad office ill turn;
swrong,iniurie ; trouble ; preiudice.
Deane m. ée: f. Vnfloored, or, whofe floore is


Defplu er. To take, or pull vp the (boorded ) floore


Deflane m.ée: £.Displanted,plucked up by the root;
vnplanted,unfet remoued.
DE To diplanar plucke vp by the root; to vn-
onjet, remo
Dei plié: m. €e: f. Difplayed vaplaitedyunfèulded; ma-
Dat fled, made plaine,layed ‘ en,{pread abroad d,
liement: m. An va, ulding ; displaying, un


pg plaining ; manifefing-; opening , difcoue-


Del iement des Prom The nimbleneffe of the 1
lees or, a aimble beflirring, or gathering up there-


aine, lay open, {pread abroa
efplierles jambes. To runne lightly, nimbly to be-

ee gather vps legges.
Def eC liffé: mi ée: ££ Unfoulded, umplaited, umwrinc-


Défier. To unfould, ae unwrinkle,uncrumple;

* _ finooth, plaine ; Looke Deplicer.

Defpliffure: f. An vnfouldine, vaplaiting, umorinc-
eee uncrumpling ; a fmoothing, plaining , making


lovable: cor. Lamentable,deploreable ; remedi-
ae ate, pale od recoucrie.
. See D
esployé: m.ée:f. Difplayed, opened,unfoulded, (pred
abroad.
. ‘A voile defployée. with might and maine; as ff,
or as much,as oné can.
Defployer. a Defplier; to unfould, or lay open vnto
view, as a Marchant bis wares, or a pedler bis packe,
a Market.
lumation. Looke Deplumation.
Desphamé : m. éc : f. ‘Plumed , or bereft f fa-
thers.
Defplumer. To plumé,or depriue of feather Ci:
Despluvié. Toiéts pue ( (Cefta ai faidts |
en dos d’Afne,) Looke under Dos ù oe
ee mat m.ée : . Unpouched, or drawne out fa


Defpoch. To ge draw out ofa pouchsor pocket .

A if : m.éc:f a. _ ‘fie
er. Tovnpite ,or get the pitc

Despottede: m. €e: f. sae d ; put out of pofef


ae To difpoffefe , to put out of pos


De m. A Defpote ; 5 the chiefe, or foueraigne
i Coe for, pillage taken fr

9. 4 ‘OMS .

genet le the. _—. Ul, or bide of a beaft ; at


fia tnd Le ps Tenis-Courts ; the roome where


cn bla | des OE oe


De


D


0 play may attire  themfèluesfor the


Cci


LA
Origi na irom


THE QUES SEAT eee:


lade defpouille F0 Their fruit, leanes, barke,
Le defpoules de baflimens. All kind of rub-


bifh.
Les illes de iardins. Weedes; withered, or
dead bearbes ; refit or out-caft flaulkes , leaues,


Ladefpouille de terres. Corne hay; all kind of fruits
comming in by Husbandrie; or of themfelues yeclded
par ot de gotten within,grounds,
deff efpou e de vignes. Grapes.
De €: m. ce : f Stript, difarrayed, unclothed ;
fi re of; robbed pilledspol-
Ufo, flayed, mued, vncoated.
ne Defpoute-aucls Sacrilegions,altar-fpoyling cbr. ch=
ef
= 1247 RE A defpoyling, taking off, or away ; a
mr 7 difarraying, depriuing, or vnfurnifhing of;
D: laying ; a muing, a cafting of the skin,or coat,
pouiller. T fr vncloth, difarvay ; to deSpoyle,
se away, unfirni{h, deprine, or bare of; to vob,
i pole the oyle ; alfa,to flay or take the skin off.
{pouiller vn cerf; to breakewpa Deere. 22
Si elpouiller. To vncloth bimfe elfe to mue bim-
Self; 19 caft bis coator skin.
Se de efpouiller avant que fe coucher; to make bis
Hig in bis life time , abfolute Maifters of all be
bath


On ne peur defpo defpouiller vn homme nud: Prov. Of
a naked man who can haue clothes? where there is
nothing the King loofès bis rights.

Defpoulfer. To expulfe,or thruft out of.

Despourpré: m. ée: f. whofe (purple)bue is loft,alte.
ved, ov decayed.

Se Defpourprer. To looft it purple hue. -

Despourveu.# Defprouveu; Vaprouided,

Despravation. .A corrupting, deprauing, marring ; a
crooking M oy ae:
cfpravé: m. ée:f. Depraued, marred, corrupted,

oyled.

pg ver. To depraue corrupt,viciate, fpoyle, marres
make crooked,wreft,wry to bad purpofes,

Defprendre. To looffe from,to let bis hold goe.

Desprier. To vapray, disintreat; rewoke a fit, recall

prayers,defire to the contrary.

Defpris: m. Dif spre) neglett, little regard,

‘mall re (pect contempt or difdaine of.
pris de Dieu. Impietie, wickednefe ,ungraciouf=
ee ungodlin


Deff epprilable: : com. ee heft despifeable, contempti-


Defprifé : m. ée: f Diem negleéted, made
br of, LR verie low ; de ined, con-
Das 4 alf,dispraifèd, di if |, blamed,con-


oon . A dife leéting, Lox-
À Bs: define Re aa Spree,
Ip laming,condemning. wali


er. To difefleeme, vilipend, negleét.
bt by, prixe at a low vate; to despise, con-
ondemne, “pei


, difdaine ; alfo, to blame, t


2 sG


:£ A dj
i a #4 on, dan,


k
Sat


pa


| Defra


r AE
Delanger To difianke, difarray, diforder; to thraf
out


_—:  —_S.”:h


DES
got out of prifoms freed, fet at libertie.
onner. To vaprifon, or disimprifon ; to deliner
from, to get, or take, out of prifons 10 free; to fet at
libertie.
Defprouveu: m. ones f. Vnptouided, vnfurnifhed ;-
deuoid of wit
‘Rdelproneen. At unawares; without thinking of,
or looking for ; or unthought on,unlooked for 5 napping,
as Moffe took | bis Mare.
ucelé: mée: f. Depucelated, deflowred,vamai-
{a depriucd of, or that bath loft, ber maiden-


Da


jé ce e defpucelée. That hath beene imbrued ; that
- bab beene one in,or feafoned with, blend; thai bath
drawne blo

Defpuceler. To depucelate,deflowre take the maiden-
bind of, depriue of ber maidenhead,

cellage: m. Depucelage; a deflowring.

Despucellenent: m, À ONE à or deflowring ;
the taking of a maidenbead

Defpumé : m. ée: £ Scummedsclarified ; whofe foame,
or froath is taken away.

rg To clarifier to feumme the foame, or froth,


cher. To plucke off,or teare away. Rab.
iné: m,ée:f. Rooted up,or out ; plucked vp by
the roots,
cinement: m. 4 rooting out, a plucking vp by
the root.
Defraciner. To deracinate,root out, or plucke up by the


root.

NES :f. Wong, iniuflice,vareafanablene[fe want
of reafon

2 gage com, Wiongfull, vniufl, vnreafo-
nable, ;

Defraifonné: m.ée:£ without reason, bereft of rea-


fon,

Deframé: m.ée: without eee branches; swhofe
boughes baue bene cut,and lop

Defiamer. Tovnpearch, to Heo ke ch, or pull downe
froma push to rid,bare,or deprine of boughes.

Defr m. éc: f, Diftanked , difordered, difer-


ranke, pat out of array; turne out of er-
der. :
: m.ée: f Difordered,out of order and arvay,


his due place.
Défrciglé: m.éc:f. Unrulie, difordered, outra-
gious, unbridled ; vnmannerlie ; immoderate, immo-
_ deft ; ; drregular, > vareafunable, “vameafurable, mr


_ fram

Defreig! dmbe: m. Vnruline
ps to immodeflie,
irregularitie.


Deftei


@ ; diforder, strats
uiinefe, ent |
t. Diforderedly, varulily} ms

, immodefily ; out of ser 5 2%


= it Apapplaiepe muses T
. To or vnre
brae Du be of meat al
xp

: f Aififcaion or prooft of tbe demal à of:
3 A Geog ewith aman 1 charged by |
| Defrener. nt ifegenals good, the deny-

all of an aét,or faci, EN

Deffeté : m. ée : f. Pafhared, fed pr denerédous


of anet. 7 “Dee


lerately.


Original.from


THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY - =


DPE! Si DE S


Defteter. To uafnare; free, rid, or deliner out of a
net. ;


Defteumé: m. ée : fi whofe rbewme is dried up.
umer. To dry up the rhewme. x
-Defridant. Planing , finoothing ; looffening , flacke-


ning.

Defridé: m.ée : f. Vinwrinkled,vn folded; planed, finoo-
thed; alfo,looffened,or flackened.

Deftidement:'m. 4 planing, uswrinkling, vnfoul-


ding. -
Deftider. To wnfold,unwrinkle,or take away wrinkles;
to (mooth, plane,or make plaine.


Pdhowe +f. Arout,breaking, difcomfiture, putting tb


flight.
Defrouté: m. ce: f, Put, forced , or inticed out of
the way ; alfo, broken, difcomfited, put into rout,vnto


Defroutéement: Cleane awry,as one out of the way as
one thats put by, or dinde Way. Z Re
Refufer ront defroutéement ; to refié wholly, x +-
terly,altogether; or 16 te a demaunder,by an abjilute
denyall,cleane out of the way of renewing his requeft;
a to unes his beart, or crufh bis bopes, by a refolute

enyall.


€ iderles voiles,cordes, &c; to looffen,or flacken | Deftouter. To put by, drine from, intice out of, the

# the [ayles,tackling, rc. \ ; way ; alfo, to breake, difcomfit, put into routor onto
| ñ efrivé: me: f, Varinetted; alfa,ouer flowne,broken (ee ;

| out of; or, ouer flowing,brecking ouer it bankes, or or- | Defroy: m, Diforder difarray varulinelfe,confisfion;er ,
à dinarie channel. as Defarroy. ANNE
f Defrivement. 4 varinetting; alfo, anouer flowing, | Defroyé.as Defarro €.
“4 breaking ower, going out of it bankes , ov ordinarie Defroyer. To diforder,difarray,diiue out of order, put

y chanaell, ~~ out of array; See Defarroyer.
Defriver. To vnrinet; to looffen a nayle, or take out a | Deftuer. To goe amiffe, or loofe bis way, in a tovone; to

2 piane that is riuetted, l miflake om be another.
5 Se defriver. To over flow, breake over, goc out of it | Defrumé: m. ée: & Rid of the Rhewme, dryed ep az


a Rhewme.

Defruner. To rid,or-dry vp,the Rbewme.
elruné: m.ée: fDifordered disiufied, peruertedun-
filly disioyned, ill-fauoredly taken afiunder, or fet toge-
ther..

Defruner. Te diforder, distin, pervert , put out of

ifbion, er array, a thing which before was enerie
way well fitted; ill-fauoredly to take afunder , or fet
together. *

De rex m. ée : £ Prophaned, vaballowed, viola-
ted.

Deflacrer. To prophane, violate unballow.

Deffaifi: m. ie: f. Diffeifed,dispoffelfed, depriued, be-
reaued,put out of.

Deffaifine: f. A diffeifin, difpofe[fion,depriuation, be-
reauement ; a looffing, fo¥gping, or letting gochis hold:
of; in Law,moft properly,Mycelding of polfeffion;or the
leaue giuen by the feller unto the purchafor, to enter
wer {nd fold.

Se Deflaifir de, To diffeife,difpoffeffe,bereane,deprine
pepe of; to fergoe, gine ouer, looffe, or Let gor, bis
old of; ;


Deffaisonné: m.ée: f Pnkindlie;vnfeafinable.
Deffaler. To vnfalt ; make frefls; bectine frcfh.
Deflallé: m. ée:£. Thatbath feene the Lyons ; or, as
effansle Leif. Pugirtpr-ontirtbed
:m.ce:f. 077 ea, :
Clangler.. To ungird ; to looffe , or looffr, 4


girt, s
Deflirrier. A woman tocaftber child,
uvagé: m. ce: £. Tamed, ciuilized, reclaymed,
brought from wildneffe.


banker ordinarie channell.
Defrobbant.steating,fi'ching lurching,pilfering.
Defrobbé: m. ée: Stollen, filched,nimmed,lurched,
pen 3 440, contrined.
nt defitobbé ; that was begotten in Adulterie.
Vn huis defrobbé. A fecret, or priuie dore.
Defrobbée.à la defrobbée.Priuily,fecretly,by ficab,
_ conertly,clofely under band.
Deftobbement : m, Stealth ; a fealing, filcbing,pilfe-
Deke bonnie - fer ve
efrobber.7a ale, filch,pi icke,nimme,purloine;
ad to lurch,priuily to pees towithdraw, from,
‘Detrobberlaboffe à S.Roch; Looke Bof.
Il eft caut larron qui defrobbe à vn larron: Prov.
_ He wacunning theefe thatrobsatheefe.. =.
Defrobbeur: m. 4 theeft,ftealer filcher,pilferer,nim-
mer, pur loyner. ;
Defroché: m. ée: £ Taken, or hewed out of a rocke;
violently pulled;caft,beaten,throwne;alfo, fallen down,
as the broken peeces of a rocke.
her. To beat,or hew out of a rocke ; alfoviolent-
ly to pull bresie, throw dove ; alfo, to fall downeyas
the broken peeces of a rocke.
fon rs i un rivage, reir AN to put off
(as a {hip that gets clecre off arocke;) or, to
a fom the fora pan aoc
eet or. Tovnroule, teopen a voule; or, as Defrou-
Deftompre.asDerompre.
He 2e See Derompu. RES
Defrondir. Townround, vnborw;vncompalfe,bring out
of roundneffe,or compaffe. FASO
| Deffoqué: m.ée:f. Ouertbrowne in wraflling. er. To tame, reclaime, cinilixe, bring from
| Deftoquer. To overthrow;as in wrafiting. bh wildnele,
| Defroté : m.ée:f. Vatyedonbound. _ + | Defleelé: me: ft Vnfealed. =a et |
Proust :m. ie: £. Grownepale, or decayed in red= | Deficeler. To vafeale,take away the feale from, open a
| nec. \_ thing thats fealed. ;
. i vas To grow pale,to loofé bis redneffe. Defleigné: m. ée: f. Defigned, purpofed, proiec-


| Defrouillé na £ SR ne nit 3 : “

ae: ine {Je taken away. . i : To: , purpofe, prie, ‘plor.
s Det oe eto af ca Defer. « Dele pot os BS
| tine: ! = ing:m. 4 defigne, plot,

¥ Deffoulésm.ée: f. Varouled,unfoulded, layed open, windiest et | =


incest Deféileméert Plaid:  *
Deffouler. Toa unfould,lay epensdisplay. Tounfadle, 12 shy See Se
es RL HSE Ceci Def. |


G


~


ee | 20riginal-from |
Digitizad. by Go. gle «= THE OHIO:STATE UNWERSERY


È See ‘ a
’ i dE ie + Za a


4
5
q


DES D'HEST a


D m.ée: £. Difa ‘affembled disioyned linided, Dells: : m. (fubitan.) le deflus de ; the Superficies, |
erated, Le beer art of; alfo,the treble parbin Mufitke.
De ifembler. To difaffemble, disigne , dinide, fepe- yo - unhabit;tbe outfide of a garment(called
ù ds Se


Deffenglé. as Deflanglé. Vn deflus de porte; the haunft of a dore.

Deffengler. To vngirthor looffen the girtbes of. Faire le deflus ; to fing the treble part; alfo, to play

Deflente. The Goist proceeding from a rhevwme. the Maifter,owerrule,dominiere ever, and bences

Defferpilleurs de pee Riflers, ranfackers of paf: L’ homme fait la malencontre quand fa femme
Sengers ; robbers by the high way. re 5 deflüs: Prov. (wherein there is a double mea-

Deflerre: £.4 fuddaine looffing opening omfbutting; re-
leafing,di{thar ging snlar ging sor fetting at large; a vio~
lett, or quicke letting gor.

Defletré: m. ée: f. Releaféd, opened, vafbut, looffed,
difcbar ged, fet at large.

Defferrer. To bof ‘fet at large;to releafe ,difcbarge,
open,va|hut,
Deffert: ay The “aft courfèsor ‘feruice at table ; of fruits, .
comfets, {weet meats, crc.

Deflerte : £ as Deflert; or,the reuer fion of a meale; at.
fo,merit,or deferuing.

Deflervice: f. 4 duféruice, demerite, offence, ill office,
mildeed.

Deflervir. To doe one ill féruice,or bad offices.
Deffervir fus table. To take away the table.

Deere: m.A table-attendant,an ordinarie wai- |


Dai, (adverb. Aboue,ouer yu on,aloft,on bigh.
— & Sade, as s'en As defoubssis Def-
Et bien, là deffus > well, what then ? what of that ?
what came of that? :
Eftre deflus ; to be on foot,or fland vp on his feet.
wha rout deffus; be is upon the head of it (a Bowlers
afe €.
Leur sc toufiours deflus ; bawing alwaies the
better of them,prewailing ener againft themsalfo,being
Still upon their lacks.
Eftre au deffus du vent encontre; to bane the wind,
or upper band of; tobane on the hip.
Venir au deflus de ; fo atchieue, compaffe, obtaine,
Sit iubdue conquer ouercomte.
Deffus-mis : m, ife: £. Put ouer, fet abone.
é:m, ée:f. Vatyed, looffed, unbound; alfo,
cleanfed,or purged from fp ots.
Deftcher. To Le hef ind: ah, to take out, or
purge from,fpots.
DR «D aD ie
Deftaillé: m. ée: tere Cut,flit,gafhed, backed, nicked,wot-
ched ; alfo,retayled.
Deftailler. To cut flit hache, nicke, notch; alfo, to
retayle,or paffe a 064 reels
Deftaindre. To ine dan ke away the colour of;
or as Defteindr ;
Deftampé: m. ée: £.Vnpropped, whofe treffles are ta-
pa from onder it. tte fe
€ TR Pre treffles from.
Defteinetrin Ge iene; palma, ee


. coloured; whofe
fein Defteindre eg de mre ire.
a
Se ANG To decay in colour, to loofe it(linelie)
Dehtelet les chevanx.To-vnlooffe vnteame,vnfpang the


bt borfes
Define cree flackensonfiretch, leoffe,undoe,


Deffeveli: m. ie: f, Disinterved unburied.
Deflevelir. Ta disinterre umburie,take vp, or out of the


ground.
Deflevé: m.¢e:f. Disfèuered,parted,fundered.
Deflevrer. To diffenet part, ,funder.
Defficcatif. as Deficcatif. Deficatines drpng ue
i m. ée: an a
Deffieger. To 0 raife a fiege,to €.
Deffillé: m.ée: f. V ajecledsonbeodsving, whofe eyes,
or fight is opened.
Deffiller. To vm/eele,unboodwinke ; open the eyes of,re-
fore unto fight.


Po or rather Defghirer. To vend, or teare.


Dans. as Deflein cing:

Defloive: m. ée: whofe thirft is quenched. te

SeDeffoiver. To quench the thirft.

Deflolé: m.ée : f ds ame hf in
or boofe is pared quite
efloler vn cheval. Tovnfüle; to M goay pr wholly
cut core bottome of a

Deffonger. a to |
ada out of a dreame,|tarting,

Defi ic 7 cn eects

orceler. To di

Deflott. née: m.ée: f Vbefatted; mb quieneder
roued in underftanding.

Deffoler.” oct; to quicken, refiner cleere a dull


vnderfanding.
Delloubs: m. Thai) le -des:The bottome,low-


let downe

Deflendre la Tapiflerie, To vahang, or take downe
Hanging.

Deftendu: m.ué: f. Slackened, unbent, vaflretched,
looffed,unbanged, let,or taken dovme.
Le temps eft deftendu.The weather is opened,or be-
gins tothaw.

ture: £ An unbending,wnfir etebing,flackening,

ting,or taking downe.
Aim. ée : :f, Digged, or taken, =: ged


: bes take out of the ground.
né: m. €e:f. “Dustin nina 4 depofed froma


5 1 . To däthronixe, or or mlbrone ; to ‘oft
2: = ont ofa Throne,
To unweane;or as Deftitre.
Deftin: m. Deflinie fate; Godstpr Gad mme,
purpafe,er decree. Des.


doubs. Pole rer ml topfie turnie,
with the bottome vpwards. j
Defloulde.En defloulde. Scattered,out of order fe.


y Original from
COS gle epee = THE OHJO STATE UNIVERSITY


—_—A lh ae Te MERE ba ad Pe ee bé or wera Leese Ol | 16 oe


| Deftination:£, Adeflinction,ordainement, appoint-


purpofed for. l
Nul vent ne fait pour celuy qui n'a point de port
deftiné. No belpe ferwes bim that runnes uncertaine
courfès(or knowes not where to end them.)
inée: £. as Deftin,
Deftiner. To defiinate,ordaine appoint unto; to purpofe


for.
Deftiftre. To vnweaue, vntwifl, unplait; looffe, dif:
folue,undoe,
Deftituable : com. Deftituable; difppointable.
| ’ Deftitué: m.ée : £, Deflitute,unfirnifhed gor difappoin-


flore unto warmth, (ence or motion.
Deftonneinent: m.4 difcord,or iarre,in found ; al,


ted of.
j Deftituer. To difappoint, abandon, forfake, faile at a
(a pinch; to leaue deftitute or unfiwnifhed of.
‘ "| Deftitution: £. A deftitution,or deflituting; a leaning,
i iling ,difappointing,
S gst Uap panning, ; at?
k eftitution de compagnie. Loneline[fe, or folitari-
à neffe, want of compame.

Is pourfuyvirent Ja deftitution d’ aucuns Capi-
} taines, They {ied to bane (ome Captaines caffed,
1 4 Deftombi :m. ie: £ Vnclampfed,unbenummed, vnaf
4 tonied ; reflored unto warmth, fence,notion.
| : Deftombir. To vabenumme,unelumpfe, vmaflonie ; re-


a changing of tune. SES.
Deftonner. To change,or alter, a tune; to take it bigh-
er,or lower.
Deftordement : m, A wringing writhing, wrinching,
parer , bending awrie.
To writh, wrie,crooke,wrinch, wring,bow,
bend,wreath, turne out of the right way.
Se deftordre. To firay,toerre, wander decline from,
Def: wrote
: £. Awrithwrinch, wring ; alfo, an errour ;
alfo,an erring, firaying,or wandering out of the way;
af, by-way, fide-way,or turning-way ; alfo, misfor-
tune ,binderance incombrance. À
ruillé zm, ée: f, Opened, unwrithen,umwrapped


vnwound,
Deftortiller. Tovrwrith, umwind open, vmvrap.


pure. rs :

eftoupé. 7, pped,vaftoppelled.

Deftouper. Tovaftop,or pol. the flopple out of.
Deftour :m. A turning,by-way, crooked way ; alfo,a


blind corner betweenc bills or in a boufe, wherein men
may bide themfélues ; alfo,a cunning fhift, futile euafi-
en,craftie auoidance, |
Deftourbé : m. ée : f. Diflurbed,troubled, impeached,
hindered jnterrupted ji | se
Deftourbement:m. 4 bindering,letting, flopping,im-
peaching. - we >
Defiouihied Todifturbe,trouble, comber ; let, binder,
interrupt ; alfo,asDeftourner; whence;
Sans vous deftoutber gueres de voftre chemin.
without turning you out of your way. x
Deftourbeur: m. 4 diflurber troubler; binderer, let.
. ter, interrupter ; a troublefome fellave ,comberfome


ghef,prating,or bufie companion.
eh all bance; comber, trouble inter.
ruption impediment ncombrancc,let bindrance.


Entre ka bouche , & la cuillier fouvent advient
grand deftourbier : Prov. Great lets oft tuft be-


men ‘ €.


Defting: muss £.Deflinated ordained appointed ‘unto,


D 'E :S
PDeftourné:m.ée :£ Turned,declined, withdrawne
« diwerted alienated, diffuaded, remoued, altered from;
alfo, conueyed, filched, purlayned.
ournez.By-places, blind corners onbaun-
ted roomes, deauelie habitations , folitarie lodgings,
dwellings which fland out of all bigh-wayes.
estournement: m.4 turaing, diuerfion, diuerting ;
a withdrawing, difjuafion,diftrattion; alienating, ef:
Siranging yemouing from; alfo,a conueying,er pilfering


away,
ieee de pieces de procez. A côcealine,
or fuppreffing of bookes,or enidences.
Destourner,Te turne divert diftract,avert withdraw,
diffuade,remoue, alter alienate,e/lrange from ; alfa, 10
take away craftily, conuey away falfly, forcfall with
violence ; to filtch,pilfer, conuert ‘unio bis owne vfe
what was prouided for another.
Se rde, To forbeare the companie of; to
withdraw his fauour and loue from.
Se deftourner du cheinin, T0 erre, wander, fwarue,
oe Se fiom the right way; or(as we fay) goe
ry the way.
Se deftourner d’un dard. To auoid,efchew, or bend
from,a dart,by a nimble turning or leaping afide.
Deftournoire: f. A bunting-pole (mber ewith comber-
Some branches are turned afide by a wood-man pafing
through thickets.)
Deftourtoire. as Deftournoire.
Deftrabord. starboords the right fide of a fhip.
qué: m.ée:£ as Deftraqué.
Deftracquer. To put from a vacke,or,to fpoyle the rack,
marre the pace, of ; to put out of bis racke, or pace;
. (Hence) alfo,to depraue,diforder miflead,corrupt, fe-
our ir from boneft courses ; alfo, to flaunder or
trait from.
Deftracquer vnlievre, To vatie the doubles of a
- Hare,
Deftrainét: m.cte: £. Ssrained,pre[fed,wrung, vexed
brie 3 aU, flraitencd,refiraimed,abridged of li-
© bertie.
Deftrainéte : £4 narrow firait,or pinch; abard,or ex-
treame wring; alfoavepraint of liberte.
eftraincte d'amour, The anguifh,impatience,or ex-
tremitie of paffionjn loue,
eftraindre. To firaine,preffe,wring,vexe extreamely ;
to flraiten, refiraine , or abridge of libertie,
anché : m.ée:f. Cut off, bewed from, backed a-
Sunder, chopped in peeces. ;
Deftranchement: m, A cutting off, hewing afunder,
chopping in peeces. sais
Deftrancher. To cut off, bew fiom,backe afunder man
glesor chop in peeces.
Deftrancher à coups de langue. Toreuile,repreach,
rattle up,raile on.
. Beaten,or fiamped with the feet ; alfo,ridyor
freed(as the fect)fromintanglements.
aper.To beat,or flampe with the feet; alfo,to free,
vid,or cleeve the feet from the things intangling them.
Demex : m, Ce: £. Put out of aracke,or pace; alfo,
Seduced, mifled,corrupted, depraned, or drawne from


boneft courfès ; alfa, flaundered,or detraëted from.
Destraquer. To fpoyle the pace of,or put out of bis paces

hence; to depraue, corrupt, miflead,feduce , er draw

from honeft courfes; alfo,to flaunder, or detratt fiom ;


Looke Deftracquer.
Destavésmc £ Vafbackled , wneyued, vnfitte-
Destraver. Tovnfhackle;vngyue,vnfètter. 5


Original. from
THE OBIOESTATE-UNIVERSITY


+


SR PS EE


D'ÆE'S


D> Ez Sx


Destret


:m.ée:f. + foaked, moiftened made
fluide,


re thinne ; feafoned, or laiedin water ;
foft ened,or allayed by watering,

Deftrempement : m..4 /oaking, fleeping; moiflening,
wakriag,

Deftremper. To foake, fleepe, moiften, water, {edfon,
or lay inwater; fofien,or allay,by laying in water; to
make fluide, liquid,or thinne.

Deftrempis. as Deftrempement,

Deftrenché. as Deftranche.

Deftrencher. 4s Deftrancher.

Deftrefle: £ Diftreffe,perplexitie,anguifh of mind, [ear-
citie in eftate ; a fivait, narrow pinch, bard tearmes.
Deltrier : m. A fleed,a great borfe,or borfe of feruice ;

alfa kind of wafer.

Deftroiét: m, 4 Jrait ; a narrow place, or paffage; a
narrow entrance into,or comming vnio,4 way; a Way
between two hills; alfo,a narrow fea,or firait between
two lands.

Le deftroiét d'un Bailliage. ‘The inrifdiétion, pre-
cinéts,or liberties of a Bailrwicke.

Deftroict de la gorge. The bottome of the mouth,or

iawes next aboue the Larinx,

Deftroit.æ Deftroiét, |

Deftroquer. Tovntrucke ; to alter, annibilate,or goe
from, a change agreed on,

Destroufle :F. Spoyle, bootie pillage , or 3 or baggage got
from; a ranfacking,or firipping of;aband ae
enciics,alfi,a bofisle 1 ‘oad incur fion,or inuafion
in fuch bootie is got ; alfo,a Bee ouerthiow; beg-
gering,or undoing of, people,
estroufle: m. ce :f. Vatruffe oe A unpacked,
vnloaden vndone; alfo,robbe ripped, (e>
thereby) undone,

Destroutlement: m. pas: unpacking, vn-
aan,

Destrouffement de gents. dees, rifling,ran-
facking,(ruining)of people ; a freebooting.

À Destrouflément . tour destrouffément. Flatly,
plainly fier); oc, pedi a
til ty.

Destroufler. To vatrn etes vaload, onpacke,
wndoe ; alfo,to.vob, ri  rafacke 5 defo, 3 defpoile,
eu fs tic et 07 boothale.

ur de gens. A robber, a on ee Cah
“bythe bigh-way- Je of S.Nicholas Clerkes; alfo,
a eee a boothal
f Darina otter fübuerfion, ox
nuit amabfolute r ouer throw of,

Destruiét:m. te: : £, Deftroyedsvtterly fubuerted,or de-
uafted ; abfolutely ruined, or ouerthrowne.

| Destruire. To deftroy; ruine, fubuert, overthrow; de-

À uaflmake defolate ; rauagesor fpoile utterly,
Destruifant. Deftroying; utter dre yor denaf~


abfolutely ruinin
= ae bee ifeur : mag nae EE
Boia? © "Ler ofenere thing be deales with,or comes neere.
2 Besant: :m. CC: f. Rifled, ripped, robbed of al bee


nen Arifingsobbine, ripping
ice co tue Seg al bee


Defvelopement : m. An vmwrappine,vnfiulding ; vn-
Pr Le manifefting,difplaying, (preading
per. To unwrap, vnfould; undoe, open,
pn difplay, pue abroad ; rid,vnpeller,clecre.
Defvely: mie : £ Changed through ficknefje,or indifpo-
yen, i Caps face is fo altered that a man can bardly


Dard, roomed, as a virgine that leachers:
{Langue
Defverrouillé : m.ée : f vrboulted.

Deville yn huis, To vnboult, or vafparre a


door
Defvelti: m. ie: f. Denefled vncloathed ; diffeifed, dif


Di vacloath, defpoyle, depriue ; diffeife, dif

pollellé o

Se defveftir de.To firgoe,leaue,gine over,paffe away,
difpoffesfe bimfelfe of.
esvidé : m. €e : f. as Devidé.

Defvider. Towindthreadérc, from blades into bot-
tomes.

Defvidoir :m. 4 paire of blades,or yarmwindles.

Defvié : m. ée: £Hifled put out of the way; alfo,dead,
or deceafed,

Defvier. To miflead,or put out of the way; alfo, todie,
deceafe,or depart this life.
efvisagé :m, ée: f. Deformed, disfigured; defaced;
whofe face is rent, or torne,

Defvi cr. Todeforme, disfigure, bereaue of feature ;
to deface.
Defultoire. Chevaux defültoires, Two borfès (tied
- together) from the one whereof an aëtiue rider leapes
upon the other,ina full careeve; alfo, borfes that bee
led and kept frefh for the ufé of Souldiors, which ina
fight baue tired thofe they férued on.

PRE: m.éc: £./nfhaded,or deprined of the fha-


Defsabie, Tovnfhade,or deprine of foadow.

Dela ss m.ic : f. Difunited,difioyned, uncoupled, feue-
red, fundered,

Defunion:fDifaniting,difunion difiunktion,feperation.

Done same ntm ai Iter


Defyoilé:m. ée: £. Vauayled,manifefted,openly fhew-
Deffoller To cage ifeouer rani take away the


 vayle fr
:m.¢e: f. Mifled, frayed; in an errours

rant out of the way.
Chemin “ossi 08 An indiveél, onufuall, or vacer-
Laine wa
Eftomac idefroyéd looffeweakened,ov diflempercds
flomacke.

Defvoyement :m. 47 prrineamenlN, fivaying one
Bere not whither; a mifleading.

fvoyement d'eflomac. Loofene{fer meakneffe,

of the fiomacke.


oyement de riviere. The turning of a riuer out |


of it ufiall conrfe or channel ; alfoya ate xd
made for that purpofe. ts


Defvo Sethe To miflead,or bring out of the way.


RAR ertes roro ain di the


Orca OT
JAE ORIO STATE UNIVERSITY


a his


D'E'T


—_ ees


DET


Defyvré: m.ée: f. Made fober againe. .

Desyvrer. To make faber afier drunkenneffe.

Det: m. A dye to play with ; See Dé.

Detail: m. 4 Peecemealing ; a bewing or cutting in pee-
ces ; (bence) alfosretaile, finall fale or afelling by par-


cells or in peeces.

Detaillé :m, 6e: f. Peccemealed; cut into parcells hew-
ed im peeces(or,as Deftaillé; Jalfo;retailed, fold by re-
taile


Detailler. To peecemeale, to cut into parcells,or peeces;
(bence)alfo,to retaile,or (ell by retatle.

Detailleur. Arttailer, or tradefinan that fells by re-
taile.

Detalenté:m. ée :£. Vawilling, lufile[e, vndifpofed,
out of the bumor , that bath no difpofition unto a
thing, ë ,

Drenppes To vabung, to open the bung-bole of :€Ble-

1en. :

Decotiten, See Deftendre,

Detenir. To detaine, or withhold; alfo,to retaine, bufie,
occupie, flay,bold,continuc in a placesalfo,to refraine,
or keepe in,

Detente d'arquebufe : f The Tent of a Caleeuer ; the
little peece of yron that keepes the Cocke vp.

Detenteur: m. A detainer; a wrongfull keeper of pof-

Se ffion ; a withbolder of another mans right.
etention: f. A detention;detaining withboulding;re-
firaining.

Detenu: m.ué :f Detained, withheld ; refirained,kept
in; bufied, occupied,

Detenué: f. as Detention. ; 1

ergent:m.ente: f. Cleanfing, fcouring rubbing a-
wayeipingef

Deterioration :f. An impairing,or making worfe.

Deterioré : m.ée : f.lmpaired marred, fpoiled;growne,


or made, i
Deteriorer Te impaire, 2. 1ke worfe, marre, fpoyle,


Stroy. + :
Determinance: f. An order, decree, ordinance, fen-
tence determination; an ending, conclufion, determi-
nation of a matter alreadie debated,
Determine: m. é¢:£ Determined, refolued on, ended,
concluded.
Vn homme determiné.Arefoluteor couragious fel-
low; one that feares no dangers, dreads no colours.
eterminément. Refalutely, couragioufly; alfo, with
a full end,and conclufion of matters, determinately.
Determiner. To determine,conclude,refolue on,end, fi-


Dolto dei e Digged, ortaken out of the earth ;


allo difiaberited, diffeifed, left e.
DV nl ie
herit; deprine of; leaue without;land. =
Deterfif:m.iue: £Deter fus; a eowringsor cleaning
qualitie. VEGA |
Deteftable : com. Deteffable,execrable, abbominable,
moft odious,exceeding loathfome, : el
Deteftation: f. A deteftation, loathing ,abborring.
Detefté: m. ée: f. Detefled loathed, abherred,
Detefter. To deteft, loatb,abhorte, baue in abbomina-
tion.
Dethroner,ou Dethrofner. as Defthroner.
iré : m. ée: f. Rackedsretched.or firetched out with
violence ; almoft pulled in peeces . at
Ter. To racke,retchor firetch ont with violence ;to


| | °° going, exceeding, that bath ouerranne anotber. ‘De


Detouillé: m. éc: £. Difincombred ; jfntangled,

pind ifin 3 aff, difintangled,
etouiller.To difincomber,or unpefter;al{o,to vn,

So el ‘ed bence cé peda deat
“ay beaucoup à detouiller. 1 bane much intricat
and fbuffled,bufinef[e to order. ®

Detourbier. as Deftourbier.

Detracter. Te detraéi from ; to flaunder, backbite, de»
prane,difpraife traduce report ill of; difparage in pee
ches; raile on,reuile one,behind bis backe.

Detracteur : m. A detrattor; flaunderer, backbiter,
poy Pepe traducer, or dfparager of o-

thers behind their backs; anill-tongued,or foule-mo
thed fellow, _ “ante eee ee

Detr: ion: f. Detrattion; flaunder, backbiting.de-
Prauation,diférediting, mifreport of, priuate difgra-
cing,or difÿar aging ; pee Speeches reproachfull
tearmes ginen of one bebind bis backe.

Detrapper. asDeftraper. 4

Detraqué: m. ée:f. Out of the trath, inf path, right

_ way; or,as Deftraqué.

SeDetraquer. Yo put bimfelfe out of bis path,or out of
the way; Looke Deftraquer.

Detravé. le monde eft tout detravé, The world is
cleane out of fquare, out of fafhion,out of frame put of
order, off the bindges.

Detrencher. See Deftrancher.

Detrefle: f. Looke, Deftreffe.

Detrichoitere : as Dextrochere ; alfo,the fould of lea-
ther wherewith yarne-winders preferue their fingers
from skarres ;alfo, the {harp Irom wherein the quill, or
Spindle of awbeele doeth twirle.

Detriment:m. Detriment, loffe, domage;burt, binde-
rance decay,

Din 2 : = : pans y ns ;
much bindering, full of loffe, dammage, difaduantaye.

Detrifté: m. fe sift bes ha ; cheered up ; whofe

._ griefeisa |, whofe forrow layed afide.

De none fadnefe. .

Detrompé: m.ée:f. Dehuercd from error.

Detromper. To undeceine, to rid of error.

Detrouflément.as Deftrouffément.

Dette: f. A debt; See Debte.


Donne To defile, file, forvle, foyle, make foule or ill


Deu: m. deuë:f. Due, owed , or. owing, ones one;
alfo, iuft, fit, right, apt, feafonablestonucmient. "|.
Devallant. Deféending, alighling ; bringing, or letting À


downe ; penis or throwing downe.
Devallé:m.ée:f. Brought, or let downe; tumbled, or

throwne dovoneward; deftended, alighted.
ee :f Adefcent , or low ground; a fallin


ground.
Devallement: m. 4 defcent, an alighting ; a fliding,
or going downe ; a bringing, or lettig, a tumbling, or

ti g,doveneward, 7, ae
De bring, ot let done, to tumble, or throw
meee ae to descend, alight; flide , or goe
owne. , |


Devancé:m.ée:f. Outgone,exceeded:fhr ipped, ouer-
runne, preceded, got before. |

Devancer.To firip,outgoe,ouerrunne,get,or goe befère;
to prenent ; precede, forerunne, :

Devancier. nos Deuancicrs. Our auncefiors, or pres
deceflors, our forefathers. ' ih

vancier:m.erc:f. Forerunning, preceding, more

old;of greater antiquitie then; got or gone before ;out-


ce


é Original from»


THE-OWIO:$ TATE: UNI VERSRE SES


7 (wes
ip) ae = lee


DEV


ae


D ELV


Devant: m, (Subflantiuely) as; vndevant de robbe;


akirtle; or. È ;
Le devant d'un pourpoint &c. The forebodie.
Saigner le devant par derriere. To out/trip,or ont-

goe by wrong , priuate , or by-wayes ; to croffe, or pre-
uent a mans proicéts by courfes different from th’ordi-
narie,or his. ~

Devant. (of the verbe Devoir; ) laquelle chofe de-
vant eftre. which thing fince it muft be.

vant. Before, formerly.

Par ci devant. Heretofore,in former times.
S'en(or Sens)devant derriere. The wreng end for-
ward ; the infide outward; the cart before the borfes;
cleane kamme.
Tout devant. Right againft, ouer againf.
Aller au devant. Te goe meet.
Aller au devant par sabre To goe the wrong way
to worke.

Devant.(interje&.)fed,as our ,Auaunt,in the drining
away of a dog.
evanteau : m. An apron.
evantel : &,Devantier. The fame. i
evants : m.Stands ; or places wherein men fland with
bowes dogs, or otherwife,to fhoot, bound. or looke, at a
Deere,as be paffes along.

Deués à vetando. Priuiledges of forbidding (otbers to
Sifh,or gather flickes,in bis waters,or woods.)
eveiner. as Defveiner. -


Deore m, ée: £ Difinueloped, vmverapped 5 -


the blades érc into botiomes; or from the fpindle on 4
reele. .

Devidet. 4s Devideau.

Devidoir: m, A paire of biades, er of yarne windles,
evidoire :#. # Devidoir,

Devier. See Defvier.
evin :m, À Dininer,Soothfayer, Fortune-teller, ghef:
Ser at, foreteller of, things to come,
Renyoyer quelqu'un au devin. cecy nous renvoit
au in. We not know what this is | whatitwas,
what to make,or thinke of it.

inailles :f. Diuinations , prediciions, conigéiures,

gheffes.

Devinaifes : £. as Devinailles.

Devinance. # Devinement.
xine : m.ée tf. Dinined, foretold, gheffed, comieélu-
red,

Devineinent: m.A dinining, foothfaying, feredeeming,
Fee gheffng, {uppofing, fiermifing what will

Deviner. To Diuine,prefage, footh/ay it; to conieéture,
oe foredeeme, fuppofe, fismife,prefume,what will

om,


I nous a mis à deviner. He bath put vs te our plun-
ges,or dumps ; be bath driuenvs to our wits end,or to
{earch enerie corner of our wits.
inereffe:f.4 Dininereffe,or Propheteffe; a woman
that gheffes at, or foretells ofsthings to come.
Devineur. 4 Sooth/ayer; é&c ; as Devin.
levis : m.Speech, talke,diftourfe, aconference,or com


Developper. To unwrap,unfould,difplay.

Deiiement. Duely rightly, fitly, as it fhould be.

Revely. Changed,or altered, fo that aman cannot know
im


Devenir. To wax,to grow,to become.
Que deviendra ceft argent? what will become of,
wbat fhall be done with,this money? how fhall it be be-
flowed, how mul it be difpofed of ?
Que deviendray je? what will befall me, what
a betide mee? bow fhall 1 foift, what fhall 1
oe? L


munication; deuifing , conferving,or talking together;
alfo,adeuice, inuention; difpofition, er appointment


of.

Devifagé: mice: £ as Delvifagé.

Devifager. as Defvifager.

Devife:f. A deuice,pofie ; Embleme: conceit, coat, or À
Cognizance borne,ov giuen for {ime priuat refpcéts an
inuention; alfo,a diuifion ; bound, meere, or marke di-
uiding land, °
Quelle devife y avoit il. en cela? what reafon, or
fence was therein that ?
evilé : m.ce : f. Difeourfed,talked ; inuented,denifed,
ordered, difgefied,difpofed of. Bens

Deviler. To commune,tatke, difcourfe,confirre, deuife,
chat, conuer{e with ; alfo,to deuife,or inuent ; alfo, ta


evenu :m.ué: £. Become,waxen,or growne.
Devergondé : m.éc:f, Shameleffe ; (avuflicall word.)
verrouillé : m.ée :£ Vnboulted,vnfparred.
Deverrouiller. To vboult,or vnfparre adoore, °


Vevers, Towards, __ order difgeft,or difpofe of.
‘|. Devers Orient. Towards the Eaft ; alfo, of the Eaf. | Deument. ream
= terne coafl,or countries ; as,je fuis fille d'un Roy de- | Devoir :m. See Debvoir:


Devolu: m. A lapfe; a thing denolued, letten fall, or
fallen into lapfe ; or as Revolut.
Devolu :m.ué: f. Devoluéd ; in lapfe, fallen into lapfe;
4 fallen from one to another ; alfo, letten fall; and
ence;
Proces devolu. 4x attion, or fuit furceafed, nonfui-
ted abandonned,ginen ouer.
evolut : mas Devolutaire;a//0,a grant of or prefint-
ment vaio, a Benefice, by lapfe ; allo, as Devolu.
Devolutaire: m. Adeuolutarie; one that obtaines the
( grant a Benefice by a complaint,or foe of infuf-
CE: iW


vers Orient; 1 am the daught ing.

Te vicarde deers facies Pr mit

Degen come of \ ph ree

| evert . To e "ey
Devel a difadupure: or mi y

Devettir. To put bimfelfe out of polfeffion of Looke D

Deveftu: m. uë:£., Diftifed, put ent of po


Vexité :f Dewexitie ; a bo e, bowing, ben-


_ din double,or di
eves € wound from blades(or yarnewindles)


iciencie,or intvufion in kim that fo it; alfo, bee

whom the fuperior prefents to one , fallen inte lat fe,

“a fa want of due pr by the Patren, or Ordina-
rr A


_Devolutif: m.iue: f Devolutiue ; readie, er like,to de-
rightly Mon :f 4 devolution, orfalling into lapfe,
| Devoré : m. ¢e: f. Deuouredirauined. ak)
orer. Toraxine,deuoureynglut; cat grecdipfral-


Original from


|
FHE-ORIO STATE UNIVERSITY
2 LE aM


DEV


low whole, gulpe or let done without chawing.
Deyot: m, te: De
a!/o, fcrupulous,or curious(religioufly.
Devotement. Dewontly,holily,r eligtoufly xealoufly ; al-
Sa,curtonfly, ferupaloufly with feare of con{cience.
Devotieusement. oft devoutly, :
Devotieux : m.cufe: f.Full of deuotion.
Devotion: f.Deuotion,xeale,boline [fé confcience,godli
oe 34 religious awe, reuerend feare, feruple, curio-
1e.


Hommage de devotion. Looke Hommage.

cvotionné: m.ée: f, Deuoted,afeétedunto.
Devoüé: m.ée: f. Deuoted, vowed, or defined unto;

appointed,ordained,prouided for.
Devouément: m, 4 vowing; or, denoting unto.


daine,or prouide for,
evouté :m, éc:f. Vrvaulted, vaarched ; unbent;
as a bow ec. ‘

Devouter. To vnvauit,or unbend, as a bow in fhooting


it off.
Deufdet. as Mañe d'armes.
Deuvet. as Duvet; Sofi dawne.
PCUX. Two. 4
Les deux; ou tous deux. Both,or each of them.
+ Deux àdeux. By nwo and two, from two to two, by
couples, euerie two,
Deux fois, Twice.
Deux pour vn. 4 Snipe-knaue; fo called,becaufe two
of them are worth but one Snipe.
Entre deux, Doub: full, indifferent, in (ufpence, one
kaowes not whether; alfo,in the mid-way,or betweene
both ; alfü,readie,in mind,or about te do a thing; al/o,
at his owne choicc,as he lifts himfelfe. F
Dem entre deux & as. Louke As.


double. R Pete
Refpondre entre deux®& as. Cunningly taframe fo


maunder knovves not what to make of it; (froma Die
that flands edgling, and thereby yeelds an uncertaine
chance.)
Deux chiens ne s'accordent pointd vnos: Prov.
.  Lnoke Accorder,
|, Deuxhommesfe rencontrent bien; mais iamais
eux Montagnes: Proy. Two men may often meet,
©. but mountaines neuer.
Deux loups mangent bien vne brebis : Prov. Two
© wolues can make good flr ft vith one poare fheepe.
cux orgueilleux ne peuvent eftre portez fur vn
rs Prov. One fimple Affe cannot beare two proud
Ales. oO 2) A Secreta in ings ams
Deux yeux voyent plus clair É spe Prov. Two eyes,
fee better(two men know mnre)thenanes +, = 7
Qui bien tire deux en a: Prov.He that drawes well
drames twice; a good draught counteruailes a double
draught, \ cr or
Secret de deux fecret de Diew: Prov, Looke Dieu.
Deux pour-vn. À Saipe-knaue, tae


nelle; apne (fe ; alfo,bandfomene(fe,comelinelfe,gr ace-
fulnelTc. -


Dextre: com. vn homme dextre. 4» able,abliue,pro-
per hand{ome,well-beliaued man; Seeke Adeftre,
De tre-ädextre ; ou, à cofté dextre. On the right
and er +


ie


nout,bolie,godlie,xealous;religious; | D


Devouer. To vow,deuote,or define vato; appoint, or-


Mettre en deux. To double (in foulding ; ) or to fould


doub{füll an anfwer berweene yea and no,that the de- |


 Dextcrité: € Dexteritienimblenelfequickneffereadi- |


Sete |


D I A


Dextrier. as Deftrier 5.4 Steed,or borfe of feruice.
extrochere: m, The right arme (from 1b' elbow to the
wrifl) whereon there hangs a Maniple fringed at the
~ bottomeand charged all ouer with Ermincs.
Zen Dez. Incontinénil},by and by, forthwith ; exer
and anone,

Dia. Thecry wherewith Carters make their horfes tune
on the left hand ; alfo, a tearme fet befire medicinal
Confettions, or Eleétuarics, that were déuijed by the
Greekes.

Diabete:m. 4 continual, and immoderate voiding of
urine accompanied with extreame tbirfl.

Diable: m,4 Divell,a Fiend,an exill Spirit.

Diable defchainé. A divell got lgoft ; a Hell-bound,
or Furie broken out of bell; a diwellifb,porrible or ter-
rible fellow, à d
Diable de mer. 4 fea-Coot or, fea- Cormorant ; alfo,
the eae reread Sih ; called, the fea Frog,or
fea Toad, | : hep.

Diable en préc: A notable wrangler,or cauiller,a
wonderfull plodding, flinring, or bufie-beaded com-
panion. -

Vn povrediable. 4 poore wretch, poore faake, rag-
ged;neediesor beggerhe fellow,
Banquet de diables. wherein there isno falt.

Mors à diable. Hearbe Auens,Bennet or bleffed(cal-
led fo by fome.)

Mors du diable. The hearbe Eorebit,ov Diuels bit.
Vallet du diable. C’eftvn val:du d; il fait plus gue
l'on luy commande. Said of one thats too diugent of:
ficious,or bufie.

Voix de diable: Aile d’ Ange, & voix de diable.
The defcription,on file, of a Peacocke. ;
Le diable y fera bien. Therewill be a foule coyle,bor-
rible flirve monftrous confifion,or garboyle, :

_ ‘Acesdiables. Tost apace and fpare not.firs; furbeare
itnot as long as it will af. ~~ ET
Faire le diable de Vauvert. To keepe an old
horrible bufiling terrible fwag gering;to play
reakesor raks-iakes, ae ae
Faire d'un diable deux . To make a thing the worf
by fecking to amend it;to commit two errors in firiuing
to falue one. aes 60

_ Futtil plus diable qu'iln'eft.cornu. were be much |.
more terrible thenbeftemcstobe.  ? L'AACS
Ie le rendray plus diable qu'il n’eft cornu ; I will
affvight him more then be fèares others. Lin
Il n'eft fi diable qu'il eft noir. He is not fo lewd

ab hé lockes; nar fo bad as he is taken, for, he 15 no
shine Te offenfiue mifcbicwous or dangerous ashefeems |
bobe. | À LL, Eee RU
Le diable n’eft pas toufours à vn huis: Prov. The. =

_ duuell is not alwwates at one dors 3 be tempts, and a

tempts, men fundrie waÿes


“
i?


> oy: wy. se ¢ : n
Au prefter Ange,au rendre diable: Pro. (Thusdoe }


vngratefull men when tbe would borrow, rs |

when they muftrcpay,raylé.) >. Si ees

De pie Angelo vicux diable: Prov. we fa |
es i


jo int an old diuell. RE" ETS.
Eephis alediable, & plus veut avoir: Prov. The |
pac divell bath the more be would ; (And herein,
as inmoft points elfe, the greedie [crape-good humors
Ire a Freres, ire de Diables : Prov. Looke,
Ire, + x
du diable s'en va moitié en fon: Pro.


Half of the diwels meale turnes unto


On cognoitle able frites: Pr. he ae


x


El


DIA F DIA


is none by his clawes ; a couetaus beart difcerncd by


Dialogifine :m.4 fevre,or diftcurfe, wherein one kr: |


: catching bands. ay" guing with bimfelfe asif bee talked to another, bosib
4 ; Quand JeFrançois dort lediablele betfe. (4 Pro- moues the queltion,and makes the anfiver. 72
| uerbe made by the Flemings out of patience with tim- ialogue:m. A Dialogue ; a difcourfe berweene tre,
patient,and re[ileffe bumors of the French.) or snore. .
| Qui a maraftre il ale diable a? atre:Prov. Looke | Dialthée. An ointment , whofe pxinat ingredient.
: Atre. 4s the mucilage, or flime of Althea, or mar fh Mat:
Diablerie : £. Diuelifhneffe ; alfo,a dincllifh crue,knot, low, ;
or companie ; alfo,a Play, or Shew of dinells; and Diamant : m.4 Diamond; alfo,the Loadfione ; (in fiead:
ay hence ; of Aymant.)
y La diablerie à quatre perfonnages. A great mat- Cloué à clous de diamant. of faft,moft fure.
ter,or mifchiefé ; a mifchienous hap; alfo,a wonderous Diamantin : m.ine:¢. Of a Diamond,as bard as a Di-
rumbling, terrible coile,borrible flirre. amond, .
£ Diableffe: f. 4 fhe dinell,or female diuell. Diamargariton. An Eleétuarie, fo called by veafonof
Diableteau. À little diuell,a yong diuell, the Peavles whereof tis made.


Diableteau de coeur. A lad-dinell, or nowice dinel | Diambre. A confittion of Amber,and other beart:com:


P (a Le allufion to,Enfant de coeur ; 4 Quirref BP ole merle cnet d'inde abies
: ab. ' . HAS, runs fale;

R Diableufeinent. Moff dinellifhy. fhitien fellow. a

|


Diabolique : com. Diabolicall , diuellifh.féendetike.

Diaboliquement. Diabollically, diuellfhhy.

Diacartami.A purging compofition made of fundrie in-
gredienñts. |

Diacatholicon. 4 compofition fo tearmed , becaufe it
purgeth all kind of bumors.

Diacininon. A compofition made of Simples fit to dif
(olue windineffe in the .

Diaconal: m. ale: £ Diaconall; of, or belonging to, a
Deacon, ;

Diaconat: m. as Diaconie.

Diaconie : f, A Deaconrie ; the place of a Deacon,

Diacre: m. 4 Deacon.

Diaculon.A certaine mollifying plaifler tearmed other

HS he, ser EUR A it is made of tuices.

Diadeine: m. 4 Diadem ; a Crowne,or wreath for the
bead of a King; propery it fignifies,a wreathed bead-
band (with which the auncient Kings were contented,
as ees » that the Crowne belonged onely to the

045. )

Distance: com, Cleere bright, tranfparent, tranflucent,
through-hining,through which one may fee. *

Diagalange. 4 conféciion, or falwe made of Galin.

gal


‘} gale, Mig x
‘Diagonal: m. ale : f.Diagonall ; or extending from one

tal ee Ly from

onaleinent. Diagonally ; from corner to corner.

Diagone: tna À dine chat extends from one corner 10 a-
other, :

Diagoné: m. ée :f. s Diagonal; alf@-more high, or
deepe,than broad. pees ty me
Se A medicine,or ointment made of the Gumme
‘ Diagredi. Fae? ;

Dia wedi. A firong-purging Gumme , which difiilleth—

the root of the hearbe Scammonie. «

| cdie : me :f. Mixt with Diagredium,er Scam-


nonie prepared,
oS «ath A Diarie, or Fornall ; a relation of things
enerie day.


_done
Le soto Of a day,of one day, continuing for a day
(andi er.) : 2 +.


Diametralement. Oppofitiuely , right euertlwart,
dare Croft , in oppofiiton to, or one ouer againfi ano.
ther ;


Diametraler à. To correfpond, or anfwer unto diame-
trally ; to fland right over againft, 3
lametre: m. A Diameter ; a firaight line, wbichpaf. :
fing through the middle, or center of à fyuare, circle 5
or other figure diuides it into two equall parts,

Diammour. The Dinell : qBarrag.
lamouron. Syrop of Mulberries, .
iamef{chum. 4 kind of cordial powder. ;

Diane. à ladiane-In the morning,at tbe breaking vp of
the watch(a militarie tearme.)

Bailler la diane. To gine a cold pie,or mornings cami-
Sadoe ; alfo,to furprife,or affaultby Mooye-light.
Sonner la Diane. Trumpetters to Pati a morning
to their Generall,and Coptaines.

lanier :m.ere : f. Conficrated to Diana; ov,that bath
vowed chofitie. %

Dianifum. An Elcéluarie made of Anife feeds and o-
ther things good to breake wind. :


Diantre, Thediuell, the god of darkenefe: Nom.


Dispafon.4Diapafn » in Muficke; alfo,aslauge; a |
Lage to meafure caske with,

Diapente. A powder,or compofition. wherein there are À :
fue equally incorporated ; Myrbe, Gentian,
long Birthwort, Bay berries, and fhauen or fcraped 1-


Lorie.
Diaphane. as Diafane; Tranfparent,tranflucent,cleeve À *
"as Cryfiall


Diaphaner. Tocleere,brighien,maketrar fparent.

Diaphenicum.A purging Elcéivarie made of the Dates
called Phenices. ‘ig

Diaphoretique : com. Diffeluing, cr ewapovating bite
mors,


Diphragmatique. veine diaph. Looké Veine.
Dig me. The Midriffe; a long, and ronnd weif-
de, the vitall parts are fiperated fim
“the natural and the beart @ lights ficm tke femack,
and nether ey 8 - dinerffed

| ré : m.ce: f Diaperdor diapred ; diverfféd with
hu CRUE. aid ia
Diaprer.7o diaper, feurifh, diuerffie with feurift-


| mes. 6 :
a ag :f. Flourifhing in worke ; or, flourifit
J worke, 33
| Diapreure: f 4 diapring,or fleur'fling in werkt; a


am Diapers.


“a


Oma!) ahaa)
THEEOHIO: STATESGNIVERS
oes Be Fe... ; -~


Dae


Sf Diarrhée 4 Laskey or flux without: inflammati-


on. yz]
D'iarrhoëtique. That hath fuch a laske.
Diarrodon. A kind of paine-abating fÿrrop.
Diarthrofe. 4 ritting,or connexion of bones, that eni-
dently moue together.
Diafene. as Diafenné.


Diafenné. 4 purging compofition made of Sene,or Tri~
le. @


aating,or fowing of feed : ERab,

Diaftolerhe dilatation of the heart.

Diatipofe : £. 4 double Deféription'ÿ or Figu-
ving.

Diatolique : com. Continuall , without intermifiion :

+ @Rab.

Diaule : m. A meafure containing two fierlongs.


Diatpertifane/r rather) Diaipermatifant. Diffemi-


Dicaftes’:'m. The Judges of the auncient Thebans :


@Rab,
D'ici. LookeD'icy.
Diét : m. Ge: f. Sayed, fpoken , deliuered, vitered,
expreffed, fhewen, told, declared, fignified, reported
À vato,
M Dictam: m. as Di@tame.
Diétaine: m. The hearbe Dittanie, Dittander, garden
Ginger.
Dictame baftard. Baflard Dittanie; fomewbat re-
fèmbles:the right. one, but is neither fweet of [mell,
in taf}; fome aff call Fraxinella fè.
Dictamebdlanc. Tragium , Fraxinella ; called al-
‘fo, baftard , or. fufé Dittanie ; and oft miflaken,
and much vfed , by Apothecaries , for the right Dit.
tanie, though ,im “As be nothing like it : (&Ma-
_ ahiolus.) sa! x


DiGamede Candic. Dittanie, ¢>,DittanieofCan-


dia,the right Dittander. ‘.
Diétämon. as DiGame. Aa
Diétateur: m. .4 Didlator; an Officer among the
Romanes, who, for the time he ruled, bad Soueraigne
» authoritie.
Dictature: f. The Diftatorfhip.
Dicté : m. ée: f. Dittated ; indiéled.
icter. To diélate, appeint, or tell another , what and
a Es
‘< ion: f. 4 diction , fpeech , or faying.
_ | Diétion: Mona drone (apt
| 4 Apothegme ; alfa, a finall arreft, fentence, indge-
cat, order, penned at large, and commionly fubfcri-
bed ye fan ins FRE D
D'-icy. From hence; from this place,or time, - 2
Pile 55 es ? How long ? in what time? till
) #- CRETE HR Crée ort Pi ’
Diesble, for Diable ; The dinell: qParifien,  -
Diéfe: fA fharpe,in Ma) PT.


. SAE tet.
Dicte: £ Diet, or dailie fare; alfo, a Diet , Parla


mentor affemblie of the States, &> Princes of the Em-
re. - À +25 te
Dietitique : com. Of,or belonging to, dicts prefcribing
a diet. in ove
Dieu: m. God. AUS À Seay) 43
Dieux ! An Interieéion of admiring; as wwe fay, good
Bocufde dieu. Awrem. NE
roixde par dieu. The Chri
booke wherein a child learnes it,
RayPE So. be RS


vO; or


D1‘


‘or defperately-fore ss
- + Maifon dieu. 4 ae Hofpitall.
_ Paulme dieu. Palrna Chrifti, Sutyrien royall,
Vn pleut 4 dieu. Looke Plaire.
i Colas, By S. Nicholas, er for. S.Nicholas Sake:


+ QLorrainois : Rab.
‘Adieu ne plaife. God forbid, God fhield,God fivare.
[A


De par dieu foit. In the name of God be it; God prof:

per it; or fend it well tofpeed,. -

De par luy bon dieu.12 the name of God;or,for Gods
Sake: QLymofin: €Rab. . ”

Et eneor pour dieu {oit,fi.dnd he may thanke God,

or, bee 5 bebolden to bis aduerfaries pictie ;if.

Ne croire à dieu que fur bons. gages. To truft no

man, bow rich foener bee bee , without good parnes;

to beleeue yo man , bow honeft fèeuer, without

great proofés : (in which’ phrafe though God bee

mentioned; yet isnot an impious,but a churlifhydifirnft

meant byit,) —— 5;

Faire Je doux dieu deffous vne pefle, Il fait &c.He

4 very mice,quaint, precifé,or curiousin all bisabloinss

Looke Pefle. -

Oublier dieu parmi tousles Sain@ts. I oublie, &c;

me: acerer be is to the Church , the firther be is from

od.

Dieu donne biens, & boeuf, mais cen’eft pas par

la corne: Prov. Leoke Boeuf.

Dieu donne le froid felon le drap : Prov. Godfènds

men cold according ta their cloath ; viz. affliétions ac-

cording to their faith,

Dieu {gait qui eft bon pelerin : Prov, God knowes

thebearts of Pilgrims, =

“Aperea maiftre,3 dieu tout puiflant, nul ne peut

rendre l'equivolent: Prov. No man can fufficiently

vequite bis Father, Maifier, Maker.
-‘Atoileourdiedieu. mande le fil: Prov.God Works

begun enablesvs to follow.

En petite maifon diet a grand part : Prov.lta lit

tle manfion God bath a great portion.

En peu d'heure dieulabeure : Pro.God quickly does

what he will doe. j

Jne perd rien quine perddieu: Prov, Hee loofès

wothing that keepes God his friend.

La ou dieu veut il pleut: Prov. Looke Plou-

voir.

Pour devenir bien toftriche il fauc tourner Je dos.

a dieu : Proy, The way to grow faone rich is,t0 forfake

religion.

Qui fere dieu il abon maiftre: Pro.He that (eres

God, fèrues a good maifter.

Secret de deux fecrer de dieu Prov. Yeti wee |
Jay 5 that, two can keepe counfell when one is 4.
Ww, J 4 LI


Way, at ne |
Dicu-donné : m. Theodore (a name for aman) |
ae ati. vn dieu-gard. Afiltation iia “ God,


an
Do Aidilognd sert :
Dieux Hnterje@. Looke Dieu. +
Diftamation:£. 4 defamation;defaming,deprauing,di~
crediting,traducing,open diftracing mm fheeches.
Diffamatoire : com, Diffamatorie.
i :m jobloquie;reproach,diféredit igno-
minie difhonomr, difgrace,an ill report en cuil name,
_ an impuation. ee ies


honoured much andil id She ame
vaintéd;reputation | ia plo


a


. . ’ + bd ‘i ad (1 »
at vs 7 >
LE : , x $ Dre es
'


DIE


prane,diftrace,difhonor.
Differanté :m. ée : £. Differed, or difagreed from ; in
debate,or at variance with; afediserfifed.
Differanter. To differ, or difagree from; te iarre,con-
tend, debate,or be at variance with;alfo,as Differen-


ter.

Differé :m.ée : f.Differed,protratted delayed lingered,
drinen,putor fhificd off. ’
ifferemment . Diflinéily, feuerally, difftrently with a

Difference: f. A difference diuerfitie ; valikelineffe;


diffesence.
diflinétion ; difagreemg; alfo, a certaine diftance, or
meafüre in Geometrie.


| Differencié: mée: £ Diflinguifhed , made different


om.

Different: m..4 difference,controuerfie, fuit variance,
difagreement contention, [irifé,debate,ods ; alfo,a dif-
fêtent marke,or thing; or a marke whereby one thing
us diftinguifhed from another,

Different. Different ; unlike diners, differing, varying,
difagvecing, (euerall , from; of another condition or
qualitie,nature or kind. Be ?

Diffcrenter. as Difterancer ; 4/0,10 diuerfifie, or va-
rie,

Difterer. 2 ee à driue or put sh ; to ra

long, linger,procrafti i 4
ca diferer. Prefently at the veric inflant, without
faying one iot more,any whit longer.

Difficile :com. Difficile, difficult; bard uneafie, trou-
blefome, intricate, painefiull , almoft impoffible.

i fait du difficile, Thats backeward , unwilling;
flubborne; {queamifh, coy, nice; thats verie loath to
meddle with,or to be drawne unto, a thing ; thats ve-
We hard to bee intreated , or woon to undertake a
thing.

Difficilement. Difficultly, bardly ,vneafily , trouble-
ar gg ;[cantly, fcarcely; with great paine, with much

0e :


adoe,
Difficulté :f. Adifficultie ; a great let, maine impedi-
ment.a trouble,a painefull or intricate enterprife.


Difficulté de digeftion, 14 difgeflion , rawneffe of


the flamacke.
Difficulté d'haleine. Purfinefe; obfiruétion of the
conduits of the lights, ,
ifficulté d'vriner. The Stramgurie,
Difficulter. To difficultate, or difficilitate ; to make
pues of uneafie; to make it a bard matter; tomake


nes of.
Difficultuëux. Verie hard, verie difficult, full of diffi-
culties, ve
Danone Auf bowgariresbing
ifHation : f. A difflation, j cathing.
Difforme : com, Deformed ,ouglie, ill-fanoured; vn-
Seemelie , vncomelic, mifhapen , formeleffe , out of


fafhion, ER
me nd


#4 a v. on Dil, bred, fiattered abroad ;


{ looffe ; alfo, fpilt,pow-


.


Di LE


‘bath tro wines together; alfoyone |" fi
u i] hs sitet ‘Diaton A deferring, delaying, prolonging,protrac-


D'1:G


Diffamer. To defame,traduce,diferedit, reproach, de- | Muicle digaftrique. .4 mu/cle ifuing from the Pro-


re Maftoide (fometimes from Stilloide)the
@ of it is tadraw the lower iaw downeward.
Dig :mée :f.Difyefled, concocted digefied,borse,a-
iden ; alfo,difpofed.forted,ordered.
Digerer. To difgeft,concott; brooke,beare, digef,abide,
away with ; alfo,to fort,order ,difpefe.
Digerer bien vn confeil, 7 ously to examine,
cp aeninkeset confider of,a counfell given.
Dig if: m. iue: £, Difeefline, or procuring difgef-
tion,


Digeftion: f. Difgellion,concoétion digeftion.
Dig tale. The bearbe called Fox-gloues. ?
igitale jaulne. Fox-gloues with the yellow flower,
£ lefe, and leffe common then)
igitale purpure.. Purple Fox-glowes; called (o of
the colour of the flowers.
Digitation:f. The forme of the fingers of both bands
soyned together ; or the manner of their fo ioyning.
igitte:m. À Diget.the Charatter. which exprefjetb a
figure in Aritbmeticke ; as an v, the figure of fine;


oe,
Digne:com. Wortbie ; condigne, defèruing; meet, fit


Dignementsortbily,condignely defecuedly,according
fo merit,

Dignité:f. Dignitie ; promotion; bonowr ; authoritie,

superioritie; greatne]e of eflate,or in office ; great efli-
mation,or vorthineffe ; Nobilitie,or nobleneffe.
Fiefde dignité.A Fief that bath a dignitie or title of
Nobilitie, annexed vntoit ; Looke Fief,
Seigneurs de dignité.Are Dukes, Marquifés,Earls,
Princes, Vicounts , Barons, and Chattelains; No-
ble-men; or fuch Gentlemen as are Lords by inberi-
tance,or birth,

Digonner. To dig,or pricke : €Norm,

Digreflion:f. 4 digreffion , or digreffings a going,
Slraying , fwaruing , afide , or from the mater; 4
changing of purpofe, an altering of difcouife.

Digue. 4 ditch, bound,or banke ; a iettie, damme, or
mount,raifed up for a defènce againft the incurfions,
or inuadations of waters.

Difeesteations 6-4 tearing or vending afunder,

aceré : mée : f. Dilacerated ; rent, or torne in pee |
ces, D : 4

Dilacerer. To dilacerate, rend,or teare in peeces,

Dilaïé :m.ée: f. Delayed; or allayed.

Dilaier. To delay; or, allay.

Dilapidé : m.ée : f. Dilapidated.

Dilapider. To dilapidate; ruine, or pull downe flone-

… buildings ; alfo,to vid of or purge from[lones.

Dilatable: com. Dilatable, inlargeable, extendable,
widenable. {

Dilatateur : m, A dilatator,inlarger, widener ; exten-


< (10
Dilatation:f.4 dilatation; a wideninginlargingfiret-


ching out, (preading abroad, |
Dilatatoire :m. 4 dilatatorie, or inlarger; an Infiru-
ment wherewith (hirurgions open thofe partes that


ickeneffe > or otber accident, are too much clo-


laté :m. ée : f. Dilated,widened, inlarged,firetched
out , pred abroad, made broad.
Dilater. To dilate, widen, inlarge, extend, firetch ont,
ad aby broad,


1107. : ie
Dilatoire: com. Dilatorie,delaying , deferri
_* Dilayant.


TATE UNIVERSITY:


FHEGHIO'S


ebe- 7 LR ~ ~~ vy.


DAS Le:


Dilayant. Delaying, deférring, protratting, prolong-
my


Dilayement: m.asDilation, à
iligemment.Diligently, feduloufly quickly, fpeedily ;
ira Aodou} ser fl ndafrion (i satentine
b vigilantl. |
Diligence if. Speed ; fedulitie; diligence, quickne(fe ;
much trauell,or fludie; great inftance; laborious induf-
trie; earneft intention,about,
Fairefes diligences. To performe,or pay bis dueties,
Le meant of fuch as are to be performed before one canre-
ay couer land fold by his next kinfinan, or forfeited by bis
, owne default ; alfa; in the firft cafe, to enter bis atti-
I ry firs or, to enter,and take pofft fjion of the land (0 a-
Te iened,
Diligence paffe {cience : Prov. Diligence exceedeth
Science ; paimefulaefe of more merit then skilful-
€


nelle.
‘ Diligent. Diligent, fedulous, quicke , fpeedie; fiudi-
\ ous, laborions, painfull; vigilant, intentiue, carefull;
ye earneftor bufie about a thing.


Diligenté: m.ée: f. Specded, haftened; quickly pre-
pared, foone prouided; forwarded apace.
Diligenter. To baflen, forward, gine [peed unto, fet on


apace.
| Sediligenter. To be diligent, Minble,quicke 3 painful,
7 earnel about;to make [peed,or beftirre bimfelfe apace,
f in a bufineffe. -
| Dille : frbe Quill,or Fawcet of a Hogshead ec.
| Dillon :m. 4 Duinfell, for a borfe.


Dilucide: com. Ciceve,bright,plaine,manifefl, enident,
eafie to be difcerned,
. ilucidé: m.ée: f. Dilucidated ; cleered.
ay Delucider.To clecre,dilucidatesexplaine,manifefl,make
5 “plaine tobe vaderfiood. _ ‘
Dimenche : m. Sutday; the Sabboth day.
Dimenche de blanches. Palmes-Suaday.
- Le Dünenche de pafques fleuries. (The fame.)
Dimencheret. valet dimencheret. 4 Holy-day fer-
uant; one that waits but on good dayes.
Dimenfon :f. 4 dimenfion,or meafuring.
Diminué : m.ée:£ Diminifhed,/effened impaired aba-
ted,extenuated ; qualified.
Diminuer. To diminifh, leffen, impaire, abate, extenu
* ate; alfo,to qualifie; alfo,to diuide (in finging.)
Diminution: f. À diminution; appairing, leffening,ima
airing diminifbing,extenuation ; abatement.
minutions. Dixifion(in Muficke.)
} Dinanderie: f. Broken ware, Copper ware, Tinkers


Bose alfo, the place where fuch fluffe is fald; or


. 5 ‘s ‘ = EN an di
Pinte aati tes


Fe


on ie rine of Meue) wherein copper letles,@esr


(A >
Dinarchie : £ The ioynt ment of two Princes.
indan: m. The di Tes daa ga
} Dindar. A Turkie-cocke ; Secke i
iner. A dinner ; See Difner.
intiers : m, The cods, dowcets, or tenderings of a
Deere. , ,
jocefe:m. A Dioceffe; the inrifdittion of a Bifbop.
e: The diuell : ‘tes + serie
D Peau Die re.The skinne of th Amal.
in Goat, where; rl es record bu.


| DES fe — cs


D IR


Ride. A thirflie fellow : Rab.


iptam, ou Diptame. Hear be Dittanie, Garden Gin-
ger; Locke Dictame.

Dique: £ as Digue.

Dire: m. 4 faying,tale, [peech,talke,word,

Du dire au faidt y a grand traiét: Prov. Deeds and
words dwell farre afunder:either beccufe many things
that are [poken are not intended to be done;or becanfe
fewthings will fo quick!y, or can fo eafily be done, as
they ave fpoken.

Dire. To fay, fpeake ,talke utteryexpreffe,deliner,tell,de-
p A fignifiesrelate, report unto ; alfo,to bid, or
commaund,

En ‘dire{a coulpe. To beat,cr thumpc bis breaft, as a
repentant finner, for his faults. ¢

Dire 8 jeu. To ieafl.

Dire le mot.70 breake a ieaft.

Dire mille pouilles à. Toreuile, reproach, raile on,
Scould at.

‘A dire. Il ya autaed dire, quedu.Theve is as much
difference,as betweene.

Trouver à dire. Te miffe,lackeneed, want the things
we bad before. '

Je ne trouve rien à dire en cela. 1 find no fault with,
Ifèeno deféétin,that.

le nedis pas. (Encore fi elle eftoitieune,ie ne dis
pas.)I would neuer fpeake on't.

Maldiré. fortune voulut mal dire à. would croffe,
or become foe vato.

Qu dire. par ouy dire. By beare-fày,by the report of
others.

Sans dire guare. On a fudden, without warning, at
unawares,

Que fautiltant dire? what nced fo many words a-
bout the matter ?

Dist? Indeed ? 1t is euen fo? (an angrie manner
of fpeaking.) +

Que dis tu! (In admiration) 1s it poffible ? good God
who would haue thought it ! tix a wonder you tell me !
Tene dis qui le dit ? 1m nothing, who 5 any thing?
(a Card-players pbrafe.)

Les dez luy disent fort bien. He caffs verie well, or
hath pajfing good lucke,at dice ; the dice are exceeding
fauourable unto him; The like 1;

Fortune vous dit. Fortune anfivers your expe (lation,
07,1 fauourable unto you.

Lalivre dit douze onces. The pound contgines,or
confits of 12 ounces.

On dit. The fpeechis,the report cocs ; tis faid, or tal- |

_ -ked abroad. cane
On me dit ton frere. Men call,namesor tearme mee
thy brother. ; eos, >
Vous dites d'orgues, You fpeake to the pyrpife, you
Say maruellous well; Ironically.) 4) ;
Affezen dit qui apportebonnes nouyelles: Prov. !
He fayes ynough that fayes bis newes are good ; or, be
that brings good newes loues totell themofien.
Bien dire fait rire, bien faire fait caire : Prov,
Good words breed laughter , good deeds admira-


tun, ;

Entre faire & dire ilya grand à dire: Prov. ke-
tweene fayi doing theve is great difference;
( before in Dire,Subftan.)

On doit dire du bien le bien: Prov. Of things well


done we ought tofpeake well.
Tout ouit,coutvoir, & rien dire, merite en tour
temps qu'on I’ admire: Prov, Heare and fee all, but
fy sSomaieft thou fill beadmived, "
Ddÿ Tour |


Original. fron


THE OHIQISTATE ONIVERS [TY
ee a ee


— =a dl]


D IS


Tout vray n’eft pas bon à dire : Prov. Eerie trueth
usnot to be

Direct: méte:£. Direét, frraight , rig bt, iuft, plaine;
immedidiate, peculiev.
Seigneur direct, A Land-lord ; a dire&,immediate,
or next Lord,
ireétement. Direftly,yightly, firaightly, iuflly; imme=
diately ; plaincly, without crrcumftances, to the pur-


Dircéter. To direël,guide, lead, conduët; rule, order;
flraighten the courfe of, or keepe i ina firaight courfe;
af, to acknowledge from whence a good com-
meth.

Directeur: m.A diredler leader ,condutter guide ; ru-
lev, couernor infiructer,

Direétion :£ 4 direétion; guide, conduttion; inftruc-
tion.

Directoire : com. DireGorie,direétine,directing,

Direption:f. 4 fhoyling, robbing, ranfacking ; pulling,
vending tearing sor taking away by violence.

Dirigé : m.éc:f. Diredted,guided, conduéted, led; or-
dered, ruled, gouerned ; addreffed, leuelled $ made

right keps firaight.

Diriger. To dived, guide, lead, condutt; addveffe , le-
me #, make right, keepe fi ‘aight rule, order, go:
uerne,

Difceptateur : m, An Qt ar re ge
ra apleader ; alfo, a Dayes-man, arbitrator, o7

ickler.

Difceptation : f Adifteptation ; difputation,contenti-
on,arguing dcbating,veafoning about amatter; alfo,an
arbitrement.

Difeptatrice :f. A woman that difputes , reafons, or
debates, a matters alfo, an arbitratrix.

Difcepté: m.ée:£ Difputed, debated, reafoned, plea-
ded argued ; examined arbitrated.

Difcepter. red difputedebate,reafon,plead argue a cafes
alfo,to arbitrate, or examine a controuerfie betweene
partie and partie,

Difcerné: m.€e: f. Difterned,or diftinguifbed ; parted,
fèueréd, fundered.

Difcerner. To difcerne, or diflinguifh one thing from a-
nother; alfo,to part, (eperate, feuerdinide aon; to


make or put a difference betwene.


woe m. AScholler, alearner , a Pupill , a Difci-


Ditciptinable: com, Diftiplinable; teachable, fit ta
learne.

Difciplinaire : com. Difciplinarie ; belonging to difti-

pk fine: of inflruction ; correttiue, [choolng.


cipline : £ Difcipline, learning, firuétion ;
sie feience ; alfo, fo, correction, Chon, {cbooling, and pe-

jor a whip to doe penance, or se ll
Dif m. vats :f Diftiplined; fébooled, corrected;


Diipliner.Te To alitipline, fébool, correél, bring under
2m “(and bence)alfo,to bip, or put unte a fharpe


| Difcole: som, ras grd, without
~ gouernment. —


Pigitized by Go. le
Mbitized by a D |


Diéoatieitiba: fA AM, or diftontinu-
ing; an intermiffion, furceafing, difcontinuance, brea-
king off, giuing ouer, for a time,

Déco :10.Ée: £ Difcontinued, [urceaféd inter.
mitted.

Difcontinuément. Difcontinuingly, intermiffiuely, by
flops, with interruptions.

Difcontinver. To difcontinue, firceafe, intermit, fer
beare,put off for atime,

convenance:f. A difagreeing with, a diffenting
from; a being vnfit for,or vulike unto,

Difconvenir. To difagree,or be at ods with; to be unfit
for,or unlike unto ; to diffent from.

Difcord: m. Difcord, iarrmg, repugnancie, difigree-
ment ; variance, debate altercation, firife ; diffention;
contention.

Difcordamment. arvingly,repugnantly, difagrecing-
ly, without any order or harmonic.

Difcordant.Difcordat,iarring difagreeing vepugnant,
contrarie; molt bar{h, moft vatuneable.

Difcorder. Todifa ir differ, diffent from; to nie
Strine,be at dij Fe with; to be repugnant, unlike, or 7
contrarie unt


Difcofte: com. . Diftant, remote, farre, farre afunder,


fares
Se Difcotter de. TPremous, put from bim, rid bimfelfe
pint afide, abandon , quit, furfake , furgoe,
utir. To dy ifcourfe of; to relate,report, recite, re-
beaïfès to particularize point afier point; alfo, to
perufe,examine, fearch into ; furuey, difconer , runne
oner; and bence ;
Difcourir plufieurs païs.Topaffe,or trauell through,
anas
Difcours :m. A difcourft,report,rclation, rehearfil of
amatter ; alfo,n fi ru persfal examination, ponder-
of. things i in the mind,
pigs ourtois: m.1fe: £Difcourteous ungentle unciuile,
rude,bar{lwithout bumanitie.
Courtoific tardiue eft difcourtoife: Prov. À late-
ward courtefie is a difcourtefie; fanours that are long
a doing aré loathfome done,
Difcourtoifie :f. A disfavour, difcourtefie , engentle
trickeuncinile pranke,rude part,
Diferafié: m.ée : f. Pulled baled ; alfo,drie,drained,or
wrung drie ; of an ill complexion : (Rab.
Difcrepance: f.A difcrepanciedifference,repugnancie,
difagreement.
pe rat m.ante :f. Diférepant different, difagree-
ing from,repuguant vato.
Difcret: m. ete: f Diféreel, aduifed; prudent, face ;
prouident eed fill circum{pedt.
Difcretement. Difcreetlyaduifedly ; prudently ; proui-
senile eel) see
Difcretion: f Diféretion; (true) Aifeernings 4 dE
rence made, ‘ora fencibleneffe of difference Ion
’ tweene pa Age judgement ,aduifednefe, know-
‘a out whats good P'efchew what
ie of. se nage wager,


choice to


pe line as bei ae his
aes cr 4e Excruciated , eatreamely affic-
Diérucier. To excriciate, cen; tment, afi ex-
Difeatfien if,d difeuffon,o fri examination ope


Us : a fearching into,er fifting out o j
cells ; a fearcbing Sifting out of. 2


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


DIS


DII'S


Faire difcuffion fur les biens d'un debteur, To
prife,or examine the value of, a debtors goods, thereby
ta kta how able be isto fatisfic Creditors. .

Difcuré: m.ée: f. Difeulfed, debated, examined, dili-
gently (ouzhe into, narrowly fifted out ; alfo, prifed, or
praifed,as a debtors goods.

Difcuter. To diftuffe, examine, debate, [earch into, fift
out; alfo,to value,or praife goods.

Difcuteur: m. A difcuffer, examiner, debater ; alfo, a
wines > or praifer of goods, to fee what they are
worth,


Difcution. as Difcuffion.

Difeaux de gerbes, Sheafés of corne fet tenne and tenne
in a beape; balfe-thraues of tenne fheaues apeece;(ten-
[heaued) ftonks, or fhocks of corne.

Difenier: m. 4 Counfellor,or Alderman of a Citie ; al-
{0,4 Captaine, or Commaunder ouer tenne fouldiours ;
Laoke Dixenier.

Difentourner. To vnturne,or turne off.

Difert: m. erte : f Eloquent, well fpoken, of good
utherance.

Difertement. Eloquently, elegantly, with choice words
and good utterance,

Difeteux : m. eufe: f. Necdie, wanting, in want,
poong, beggarlie, penurious, unfurnifhed of neceffa-

> ries.

Difette : £ wun!,ftarcitie,beggarie, lacke, pouertie, ne-
celfitie,dearth,benurie,ncedineffe.

Difeur:m. 4 feaker, an arguer, a pleader, a pra-


ter,
Difcur d'heures. A Chaplaine ; a fuyer of prayers.

Disferre: £ An horfe-fhos of two peeces pages together
at the top with an yron pianesand thereby ftraitened,or
entarged,to fit the fuot,at pleafure.

Difgrace: £ A difgrace ; an ill fortune;bard lucke ; de-
fexture, check-mate, mifhap ; alfd, vncomelineffe, va-
fcomelinefe, illfanoredaoffe; a deformitie, ill fafhion,
rude bebauior, ouglie manner. i

Difgratié: m.ée: f. Vabappiesunluckie, difaftrous,un-
fortunate ; alfo, unfcemelie, deformed, unbandfome,
vncomelie.

Difgregé: m. ée: f. Difgregated,difperfed, feattered,
feuered, fundered. :
Difgreger. To diféregate, difperfe, featter , fever,

7


Disioa Rif: m. iue: £ Disiunfliue, disioyning, difini:
ting ,diniding.
Disjonétion:f A disiunttion, diuifion, difunitement,
parting,or puttiag afuader. ;
Diflayer.s Delayer. To defèrre,delay,put off.
Diflocation:£ 4 diflscation,a difplacing.
Diflocation de membre. A putting out of ioynt.
Difloquésm. ée: À Difplaced; pat oa oft hi
Difloquer. To put out of ioynt; to remone out of bis
dus place; todifplace. a A eT
 Difinages. Tythings,or matters belonging to tythes. :
DiGine: € A tythe,or tenth of. ei
Diffnes infeud'es,ou infeod£es. Lmpropriations of
tythes. 3 | :
Difin:, & terrage à deux mains. Looke-Main.
Veau de difine. A notable ft, blockbead., lob-


che. | | i(pofed in body. ee
| Baie la diffne de l'ail. To procure unto bim- | Di te :m.éc: £. Difpofed,ordered,forted appointed,

Self a found beating ; ( In Poiftou they fay of | trimmed, [erin frame, putin array. ike
onethathath beene well cudgelled, Uvouloit amaf- | Difpofer: To difpofe,raunge order trim dveffe appoint,

ferla del'ail. Beca4fe the Poiteuins will.not | _ fet ET :
Filth aide be payed. ww | Difpofiteur: m. À difpofer, forter, orderer, arraun-
Difiné: m. ee -dwereof tythe istaken.: | gerofe 3 ri USE
“Se, Dd iy Di£
¢ Mes GO. gle THE GHIO STATE UNIVERSER


Difiner. To tythe,or take the tenth of.

Difinerie : f. A tenth,tythe,or tything; the titleyor pof-
Siffionof a tythe; a place whereout tythe is due.

Difmeur: m. A tythe-gatherer; the owner of tythes, or
be to whom tythe us due.

Difimier. 4 x pet or,as Difmeur.

Ditné. Dined.


Ou nous avous difné nous fouperons: Prov. Looke
Souper.

Difher: m. A dinner ; and (fometimes more generally) à
meale.
Difner d'Advocats. À large meale ; (eaten, not gi-


uen.

Difner dechien. Hounds fare, onely bread andwa-

ter; or a meale wherein there is nothing drunke but

water,

Difñer de mouche. A poore pittance,a fmall bit, a

little morfell,a Sparrowes dinner. ;
ifner de femonce.A fea/t,or folemn dinner where-

unto many quels are inuited aforeband,

Contre difner appert vallet : Prov. when meat is to

i: bad' my man appeares (fayes the ill-ferued Mai-

er.)

Petit difner longuement attendu,n’eft pas donné,

mais cherement vendu: Pro. Looke Attendu,

Qui garde fon difner il a mieux à fouper: Prov.He

that keepes bis dinner bath the better fupper.

iiner. To dine,

Mal foupe qui tout difne: Prov. Hee fuppes ill that

dines all; after a gluttonous,and difürdinat youth fol-

lowes a needie, and bungrie age.


Difparagement : m. A difparagement ; an unfit, or


vnworthie condition offered vito , or impofed on, a
man. (Norm.

Difparer . ou, fe Difparoir. To venifh away, to
withdraw bimfelfe, or flinke out of fight on a fud-


nes
Difparoiffance: £. A difappearing, or vanifhing out of
fight ; à Juddaine withdrawing, or flinking out of com-
panie.

Difparution: £ A difpañition ; er,as Difparoiflance.
Dispathie : £ An Antipathie, or natural difagree-
ment.
Difpendire: m. ADifpenfatorie,or Booke, that tea-
cheth how to make all Phificall compofitions.
Difpenfateur: m. A Difpenfer; a Difpofer of


things.
Difpenfation : f. A difpenfätion ; a difiribution,or dif’
pofing of things, + |
Difpenfe : f. as Difpénfation.
Dispenfé : m. ce : f. Difpenfed with; releafed, or
beld — 3 alfo, proportionably diftributed, or dif-
ed of.
pire fer. To difpence with, to take leane of; to re-
Lafon pure ; af proportionably to difiri-
ute ,or of. ..
DIRE m. ée: f. Difperfed, feattered, fundered
e.
Difperfion : £ .4 difperfing , feattering , diffipa-
te .


110


| Difpos: m.ofe : f. Nimble, attine, luftie, found, well


i ls mA RSA ES


>. TE VS


| D TS DIS


pi rioted, confimed:

ndre, as Defpendre,or Diffiper

Diffiper. To diffipate, fcatter , difperf, diffolue , or
fe p packing 3 to wofl, confüme, riot, bring unto


Difof tif: m. ine: f. Difpofitine, difpofitorie, difpo-


Sing
Dilpe fition: f. A difpofing, ordering forting,arrayin:
r re ranking ; roro or dipofton : ñ
naturall bumor,or affection unto.
| Difpofte: com. 4s Difpos
| Dispoftement. Nimbly actively, fil, foundly, with a
| good firength, with great agilitie.
ape f. A difproportion , an inequali-
tie,
| Difproportionné: m.ée:£. Difproportioned umequall,
| _ tMbagrecing.
| Difputable: com. Difputable; which may be reafoned
+ which will admit the debating, —
| Déparaikée: m. éc:f. Fondly dijputed of, idly deba-


Ditassilen To difpute fondly, to debate a matter[èwr-
| Difpuration: £. A difputation; reafoning,talking or de-


bating of a matter pro & contra,
| Difp ute: f. À dijbute,differerice;debate,altercation.
vs vicux comptes nouvelles difputes: Prov. Old
accompts breed new differences.
Grande difpute veriré rebute: Prov à Locke Ve-
rite.

Difputé : me: £Difputed debated ; reafoned argued,
tllked. or treated of on bath fides.

Difputer. To difpute, reafèn, argue, talke, or treat
of, pro & contra, to debate a matter i contro-
wer fie,

Difruption: f..4 burfling,or breaking afunder.

Diflection: £ Adiffection; ; acleaning i arenes tht
tiag off .or afunder.

Diffeiché: m.ée:f. Dried up.

Diffeicher. Todry up. |

Diffeillonner. To unfeele,or openthe eyes.

Diflemblable: com. Diffemblable unlike divers diffe-
rent, unrefembling,

Diffemelé:m. cé : 3 Vafoled, or, wife file ae pul


Die etes To vnfole or pull the foles off ahi
Diffentiment: m. pe ro ard re-
pugnancie in opinions.


Diffociable: com Al pind 6-mbian pris sir
rude,churlifh,frowardunfriendlie.

Diffociation. 4 diffociation; or diniding of companie,
a feperation of feLowfhip.

ee is f! Difféciated ; [eperated, or feuered

om the re

Diffolu: m.uë:f. Diffolute,looffe,leud, retcbleffe, vn-
rulie,difordered,

Diffoluément. Diffolutely, looffely.

Diflolution : £ A diffoluing,abolifbing ; a diffolution,
or loofing ; alfo, diforder, exceffe, retchlefneffe, looffe-
neffe of conuer{ation.
ifsonant. ‘Diffonant ; difterding, difagreeing, iar
vines untuneable, of | different tune {r0m, founding ve-


ty.
Diffonidre To diffolue,undoe,breake,cuerthrow.
Difluadé : m. ée: f. Diffuaded, or deborted frum.
Diffuader. To diffuade,or debort from.
Diffuafion: £ A diffiafon,di ifuadingsdeborting pd
gto the contrarie.
Difflétude : £. Difife; the leauing of a réa, vr


Difitabe: com. Of two fyllables.
; re Adiftance,or difference; a {pace betweene
place an
Diftant. Dia ifferent diners, farre off, farre remoo-
ued, farre afunder.
Diftenfion : f. 4 diftenfion,firetching retching racking,
or flrouting out.
ftenfion,& convulfion de nerfs. The Crampe.
Dittillable: com. Diftillab/e; fit, er apt to be difiilled.
Diftillation : £.A diftilling,cralling,or cropping downe.
Diftillation d'humeurs. A Rhewme,or Catarrke.
DS m. ée : . ees trilled, dropped downe.
Diftillement: m. as Diftillation
Didiller. To diftilt, will, drop da dose by little and lit-


Din :m. Ge: £ Diflinguifhed, dinided, feperated,


Diffention: £. Lar. aie ariance com fener ing,alone ; diflinét, orderlie; marked,jo-
trouerfic,iarring, dif ALP ENG pari
iflequé: m. ée: f. catingetee SP ‘afunder. Diftinétement. Dipinttly, feuerally, afimder ; pointed
iflequer. To cut in peecess to open, or cleaue ajin- | inorder.plainely.


Diftinétion; £ 4 diftinttion, dinerfitie, difference, a


nig alfo, a note, point, or marke of diffe-


é:m.ée:f Diflingnifhed,dinided.
Diftinguer. To diftinguifh, dinide; feperate, feuer ; to
difcerne, or put a difference betweene; to junder by
: différent markessnotes,or colours.

iftique : m. A Diffie; a couplet, or couple of ver
fes.


Diftract: sm Any diftrattion, o7 diuifion ofa 4 Centraët,


ion: £. A difreëtion 3 a pulling, into diners
or by diuers ace sa a vient oithdrains f=


der.

Diffimilaire: com. Parties du corps diffimilaires.
— compound parts:of the bedi as are of ‘pasty
uhfances. bein
Diffimulateur: m. 4 diffenbler, Ipocrite, dif,
_ double-dealer.

| Diffimulation: Epilation feng iio,

| bynocrifie,cloaking.

Diffimul: atrice : € A woman diem) ©.

ar m.éc: f. Difembled ; pretended,counter-


, at mer re


to tp By se 2 ñ a ere Dir Dia, or sae
| abroad ; anita diners parts ersiparts, Pulled ky diners 3 violently


draveredi sm leda
tiré d’une parr&d'autre. ‘wond lly
diftraught,or diftraéted ; ma thoufand minds mofi un-
refolued which way to take; which part te chife 5) what
cha tal or fall re.

Diftraire.


; ‘ | : Oviginal from e
Baie aed Dy GG. gle THE OO STATE UNIVERSITY


Mebis


Diftraire.To diftractor difiraught; to rend into feuerall
peeces,or bale i into fenerall wayes;to draw into fundrie
parts,or driue into fundrie paffions ; violently, and di.
uerfly to withdraw,difmember or diffolue.

ait, as Diftrai

Diftrayant: m.ante: £Diflrafing;drawing into fene-
vall parts driuing into fundrie paffions ; violently, and
diner|ly withdrawing,or difmembring.

tribué : m.¢e: f.Diftributed, divided, parted; deal,
beflowed ; delinered allotted appointed.
Procez diftrib bué. Looke Diftribuer Jes procez.
iftribuer. To difiribute ; 10 diflinguifh,diwide, fart; to
deale,beftow,giue in fimdrie parts; te allot,or appoint
unto enerie one bis portion,
Diftribuer les procez. Ta referre th'examination of
caufes unto fome iudicious Confeillier, that may re-
port unto the Court the true flate thereof; alfo,to ap-
point caufes their fenerall dayes of bearing.

Diftributeur : m. À difiributor, dealer, divider; bee
that appoints unto others their fenerall portions in a

thing beflowed.,

Difttibutif. m.iue: £Di/lributine; dealing, dividing,
diftributing.

Diftribution. 4 d: iftribution dealing parting diuifion ;
a forting,or feuering ; a doale ; an allotting or appoin-
tig out unto each his portion. =
Diftribution des procez. Theforting of causes unto
their feuerall dayes of bearing,and Courts to be beard
in; o7 asin Diftribuer les procez.

Diftri&:m. 4 difirih;, the liberties, or precinéts of a
_. place; theterritorie, or circuit of cowntrey, within
which a Lord,or his Officers may ececintets or call
ia queftion,the inhabitants,

oict. as Diftriét.
Diftroict dé moulin. #,Banlieuë de moulin.

Dit: im. A faying, fpeech,tearme word.
ine faut pas enquerir d'ou foie le dit, mais qu'il
ja = : Proy.Jaquire nee Hits came foi

€ L00

Dit:miite :f as Dia.

Ditateur : :m, An inricher.

Dite: fi. à fa dite. At bis becke,at bisned 3 afler bis will
and pleafure.

Ditellet: m, A lttle worke, a Pamphlet, a finall Trea-


tife.

| Divague: com. String, raunging, voguing about,roa-
ming abroad, wandering vp and downe, whofe {hoocs
are made of running leather.

a= ae Seed » raunged ; roamed; wandered a-


Divaguer. Rue about,roame abroad,
Fo? pere des pee incon-


amy op LR
Bien on Diners ifering on mdrie,ye-
percale fe ny Re mets


waiward par.
Diverfement. Der] feuers , afunder, apart Di it
sin fimdrie man-


felfes differently,in fèuerall frfhi


oy


La ners formes, frfhions, colour DS SD
Diverter To varies, diner fie; decke pith. findrie
| colours > workein diuers


“tle fundrie formes, tne 3 te change or alter ef-


Di ef. A diner lie; feueraltie ; ontietie diffe
re 405 YI
Diverti: seeded edhe,


res Sa .


2 ivulgateur. Adrulger, publifher , proclaimer .


* | Diverfife: m.ée:f. Fa va cored made of dé


5; ‘interlace, or min-—
RSS ‘The eighteenth.


D'I V


x: difuaded averted. keptor diinen fiem,
ivertir. To divert, anert, alter, withdraw, diffuade,
keepe,or driue from,

Divin mine: f. Diuine,godlie, beauenlie, mof holie;
participating of the Godhead ; belonging to, 07 come

ing from,God,

Hat e divin. Oyle extrafted d by diftillation fiom tiles,
ar ee which baue bene fime time fiecped in verie
old oyle,

Divinance : f. A dinining, prefaging, fretelling, ebef
Lrg, propbecying.

Divination :f. 4 dinination, prefage, or coxicélurall
judgement of things to come,

Divinement. Disincly , godlily, Leanen!y, moft bo .


Diviner. To divine , prefage , foretelt ; Sce Devi-
ner,

Divinité :€ Dinivitie,Godbead.

aoe Or, deuifed; Paffed, er graunted by

euife.
Dot,& mariage divis. The Are ortion ginen,
07 Ieee out for, a daughter by ber father, or mo~
the
Doiaire divis. The ioynture, or dower accorded, of.
Jis figned,and laid out at the time of the contradl.

Divifé. Divided, parted, fiperated,difioyned, fundered,
diflinguifhed.

Douaire divifé.xs Dotiaire devis,

Divilément. Dinidedly, or diuifiuely; feperately, dif:
tinébly, fenerally,

Divifer. To diuide,pavt, (under, diflinguifh, difioyne, [e-
pérate; fort into feucrall res cht ont into squall

tions,

Divifible: com. Divifible, dinidable.

Divifion: £4 diuifion, partition, fe ‘peration, difiributi-
on, difpofing of a thing into fimdric members,parcells,
or portions.

Divorce: m, A diuorce ; afeperation, fundering, par-
ting of man and wife; the diffilution of mariage; alfa,
trouble croffts,ouerthwarting.

Diuretique: com. which hath the power, or propertie
to make ane piffe,

Diurne: com. Dusrnally daitie, done by day, belonging
tothedäys

Diuturne: com, Long-lafing, of long continuance.


ivulgué: me: f. Divulged publifhed proclaimed,

talked,or knovene allthe world over.
Divulguer, Te droulge,publifbymake commen, prea a a
Divelfion:f 4a “je ui

ivulfion:f. À div mat uli 5 ere

Seétion,or dinifion.. = in 4 im
Dix. Tenne, SR Lee


Dixain. See Dizain.: sinks datas
a fibre Ÿ


foes, Cert
‘corne confifing of ten fheanes.~
Dixenier. An Officer, or Due next in authoritie
| æmtathe Quartenier,ima Dixaine,or Ward; dr fome-
bec refembling our Aldermans Deputie; Re. oat
er Quartenicr bath diners of th
Dixhniét. Eightecne; alfo,a Lapwing, or Fe laste Es
omer; (fo tearmed bécaife ‘ber re at crie founds
= not-unlike this yard.) 5"


(1


Re dan: vis tte or
«penne -wart of serge yn nd


À Original trom; ae


IE Oi “ie HNIMERS bry


ae : CE


PANNE PTT


.
:
ë
A
2
4


| D :G
other [ubflances gotten within the ground, throughout
Francesdue unto the King; alfo,the Admirals ere,
or part(being a tenth) of ak flipwrackes, prizes, con-
qucfls,o-cymade at Sea.

Dixme: &, Dixmer. as Difme ; &, Difimer.

Dixneuf. Nineteene.

Dixneufiefme. The nineteenth.

Dixlept. Sewenteene,

Dizain: m, A teath; alfo,a Dittie of tenne Stanxoes,
or Stanzo of tenne vers 5 alfo, a paire of beades con-
taming tenne pecces(or courfés; ) alfo,a(French) Pen-
nie. +

‘ Dizain : m.ine: £. Ofor belonging to, tenme sfemne, or
containing inft teane. P S
Dizaine :f.4 tenth ; tenne whole parts ; the number of
. tenne,
: Dizcaux. as Difeaux.
Doanne. a Douane,
' Dobbe:f. 4 Tub,
| Dobé: m.éc : f Beaten,lammed,bethwacked,
Dober. To beat,fwinge,lamme,bethwacke ; to canuaffe
throughl). .
Docile : com, Docible, teachable, trattable, apt to
| learne , quickly taught, eafily infiruéled, foone concei-
|. wing. ¢
Docilifé : m.ée: f. Made docible, teachable; trac-
table.
Docilifer. To docilixe,to make docible, traftable,teach-
ble.


able,

Docilité: f. Docilitie, aptnefjeto learae, quicknelfe of
apprehenfion.

Doéte : com. Learned, skillfull, cunning, throughly in-
firuéted. E ‘

Doétement. Learnedly, skilfully , cunningly, Clerke-
like


Docteur : m. 4 Doëter.
Doéteur de Quandoque. A Dunficall Doc
for, | +
Doéteur en gaye fcience. A Daëtor of Rie; (In Tho-
loufe they fometimes ufe to make a merrie companion
proceed Dottor with this title :) @Rab,
Dotineal :t.ale : f, Dottorall ; of, or belonging to, a
Dottor. ote
Doétorande: £. The /olemnitie, or time of proceeding
Doétor in any Art ;Dottors commencement.
Doétorat : m. 4 Dottorfhip ; the degree of a Doc.


tor.
Doëtorie : f. The degree of a Doëlor ; a Dobtor-


ip.
D'R'inable :com. Docible, teachable, apt to learne,
ft 10 be taught. ap Lasagtypt
Doétrinal. The patterne ofleerniag,. MEN
Doëétrine: f. Co 2 gang
Clerkefhip ; skillin ge of, good letters,
écrite aa Palak cult ocbeiesgead neat,
courtlie bebauiour,fafhion, carriage, |
Document: m.4 document t ; infiruttion, adme-
nition, imentexamples
Bs Doc ccaëdre. A Geometrical bode guresof twelue


cchedron. twelue-conered proportion, er fi


“iL


eee


DOD


Dodeliner. To rocke,or iog up cnd dewne ; alfo,to dan-
dle,to loll,or lull,to fedle, cocker, bug fondly, make a
wanton of. :
Dodeliner de la tefte. To nod often,or wag the bead
much ; to carrie the bead unfleadily,or like a boat ina


ferme.

Dodelineur. The rocker ofacradle ; or as Dodeli-
neux.

Dodelineux: m. 4 recker ; alfo, one that nods mucb,or
wags bis bead verie often ; alfo,a fond, fantaflicall, or
giddie-beaded noddie ; one whofe bead, and bumours
are moft unfleadie; alfo, a fawning, or flattering com-


panion. L

Dodelineux : m.eufe :f Much nodding often wagging
the bead ; alfo, toyifh, find, fantaflicall bnmorows, vn-
fleadic-beaded, giddie-braind, 3
odentral. See Dodrental.

Dodine :£.4 fond,or giddie wag of the bead; or as Do
delinement.
de À la dodine. Serued in with (French) onion

auce.


Dodiner. To recke and downe;
or otha 3 Shake, foog,wag vp 507,


Dodineux. as Dodelineux. S
Dodo. .4 word wherewith Nurfes rocke, or lull, their
Sucklings afleepe.
Apres bu dodo : Prov. After fink fleepe.


ental: male: f.Nine ounces beauie snine inches,
or a full pan, long.
Dodu : m. .4 fat chops,or chuffe,
re ué: f.Fat,plump chuffie,round-cheeked, full-
odied. ;
Doét: m. A brooke,or fpring.
ogguin : m. A filthse great old curve.
Dogmatifer.70 teach firgnge doëirine ; to breed af,
or broach new opinions.
Dogmatifine: m. The teaching, or preaching of new
dotirine,the producing of anew {eét.
Dogmatifte : m. A forger of new feéis,or opinions ; one
that makes,or would trie, conclufions,.
Ogue :m, A Mafliffe,or great dog.
Doigt :m. A finger ; alfoa fingers breadth; or the fix-
teenth part of a foot,in meafuring.

- Les cing doigts noflre Dame, Fine-leaued graffe.
Se donner du doigt dans l'ocil, fe penfans figner
Férineadnier dans l'oeil. Thinking to” croffe,
do Bestch; themfelues : (appliable to ignorant, er
heedleffe coxcombes.)

- Mettrele doigt deflus. Tuas misle doigt deflus.

Thou baft hit it,or ghefled aright ( from them that lay
their band on their fmut.)
Mettre le doigt entre le bois, & Pefcorce, To loue
medling, tobe cfa bufiekumors or fawcily to inter-
meddle with,or take teo much notice of, the bufimeffes
that ave, or differences that may be, betweene iwo
neere friends ; alfo,to breed quarrels, make debate,er
Jet diuifion,betweene them, KS

~ l'enmettray le dojgt au feu, 17m moff affured of its,
1 dare anfiver féritsor pawne my bead on it; know it

doigt. To fhov manififily , point out
as it were) rr


unio a


lesdoigts. To cho fe, or fret imwardly at a
which is if bee ‘5 me of bis power 10 al- |
Rte is LU :

: Servy au doigt, & à} ocil. Sersed at a becke.
“Toucher du A doigts. To ‘al lightly,


foray
is #1


Original-from
THEOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


DO


DOM D,


or fleightly ener ; onely to glaunce at.

Les Alemanes ont I efprit aux doigts: Pro. The

Germanes are excellent Artificers ; or haue nimbler

fingers thenbeads. :

: L'herbequ’on cognoift on la doit lier à fon doigt.
pro. Looke, Herbe.
Qui a beloing de feu lecerche avec ie doigt : Pro,
Let bwa that needeth fire,take painesto find it.

Qui remuc les pierres fes doigts cafle.Pro.He that
vemoueth ftones crufheth his fingers ; barfh things are
{eldome jtirred without harme.

Vn mefine couteau me coupele pion le doigt.
teh unto any thing that does both good and
ill offices.

Doigtier ee A thimble or fingerflall ; alfoyas Digital.

Doif: m. A pipeftaffe ; and, (leffe properly) any veffell,or
caske of a(reafonable) big fixe.

Oile : The fame; or, as Douille.
Panneau de doile 4 cant pane, or peece.

Doille : 4s Douille.

Doirei for Doiiaire ; À dower, ov dowrie.

Doifil : m.A faucet.

OL: m.The name of a city in Burgondy.
Ficbvre de Dol. The french packes.

| Dol.m. Deceit, fiaud,guile, craft, tremperie, trecherie,

À. faifhood, wilinele.

À Dole m. ée :f. Squared, planed,bewed finooth, wrought,
or made plaine with an ax, or addis.

Doleance:f.1 wayling, lamentation, moaning complai-

ning, waymenting.

Dolent. Sorrow/ull, heauie, grecuing; painfull, aking,
fmarting ; wretched, wailefull,miferable, wofull.

Dolentement. Mournefully heauily, forrowfully , wo-
filly grieuoufly, wailefully.

Doler (du bois.) To chip, to fquare , to pl , 10 bew
finooth;to make plaine with anax,or addis.

Doleut : f. Griefe, forrow, pe enter teene,
heauinelfe,ache,paine, finart,forenefe;a throw;throb-
bing wringing. ‘ ART

Doleux : m.eufe f. wilie, deceitfull, Subtill, guilefull,
fraudulent; falfe, trecherous.

Doliman # Dolyman.

Doloir. Togreeue,forrow;ymoane;tbr ob ; to ake,warch,

aine, fnart.

ien efcorche à ie ne deult : Pro. No matter
though they flayed be who fecle no paine in flaying.
Femmefe plaind, femme fe deult , femme eft ma-
lade elle veut: Pro. Looke Femme.

Doloire: f. 4 (Coopers) ax, or addis ,alfo a Carpenters
ax, or plaining hatchet.

DolouereszsDoloire, . :

_Doloureufement. Dolouraufly sass derriere
wails fully moft wofully s4¥fo, griewoufly ; or till it ake
gaine. | | ? ie

Doloureux: m.eufe:f, Sorromfiull, dolorous, painefull,
wofull; alfo, finarting, griewing, payning;0r putting to
much paine. | 3

Parties doloureufes, Tender, or which cannot in

dure to be touched.


Doloufant. wayling, lamenting, waymenting, making


:m. a €, coate + 1
alt LAN pd ly 08


de mm


pa


Domanier : m.


7 familier. :
priuately,at Some oid oer 2 HU SORT


=


ritance proper and bereditarie po[fe (fions;thol: where
of be isthe right or true Lord, pojje(for, and abjolute
owner ; alfo,an abfolute, and hereditarie propertie in;
L effion of land, é»c ; alo, an Lonor ; or a prin-
cipall Ficf, Mannor, or Mannorboufe;the place wbere-
rie Fiefs are beld,or vaffalis bould.
omaine.congeable; See Congeable.

Omiaine de la Couronne. ‘The crowne land; Anci-
ent demefne ; or th’ ancient Inberitance of the crown;
alfo,any land which bath remained in the Kings bands,
mis bene difpofed of by bis officers, for the {pace often

ares. ;

lomaine forain;#4s at the firfisin Francis the firfis
time, an Impofition of iii}. d.inithe pound upon all

ind of wares, andy. s. Tour. vpon cuery Queuë of
wine fold : whereuntoHenry thefecond ivynedixvo o-
ther Impofts Refve,& Haut pallage.e> tooke for them
all togetber vai}. d. 1m the pounds but afterwards dif-
united them in effect (leuying their fenerall and rfuall
rates,) and ioyned them onelyin thi name, ;
Domaine de France.zs Domaine de la Couron-
ne, And,as it,unalienable;not by any efpecialllaw,but
by the gencrall cuftome of all Monarchies,intereffed in
the preferuation ther of,as of the chicfeft doverze which
they bring to their princes at their comming to: the
crowne.

Domaine immuable.Cenfives,chieft rents,and all
fundamentall rights, and feruices , which follow the
land howfoeuer it defcend, or be difpoféd of.
Domaine muable.A propertie in a thing whofe va-
lue may be improued , or impaired , according to the
yearelie letting of it (generally)fuch land as is, oF may
be ordinarily, and ofien leaffed; and the rents thereof
raifed or leffened vpon eucrie leafe.

Domaine du Roy. The kings demaine ; the rents re-
uenue,profits cm fruits of the crown lands;alfo, the be-
nefit of cafualties, and rights of Seigneurie, or of Iuri/-
diétion thereunto belonging ; alfo.all manner of lands
confifcated by,or forfeited vnto bimsand fuchas he bad
in bisowne right before became to the crowne ;and
füuch as be purchafèd afier. ;

Domaine du Royaume. 4s Domaine de la Cou-
ronne,


* De fon domaine faire fon Fief. Looke Fief.


De fon Fief faire fon domaine. ¢eft, reiinir à fa
Table, & raproprier à fon domaine le Fief ou
Cenfiftenu de foy: € Ragueau.


Domanial : m.alef Of, or belonging 10, a demayne,


Mannor. principal Ficf,
Exploiét domanial. A féifure made by a Lord of his
tenants land,for bis homage,rights, and feruices with-


held frem bim. a+ à
Th owner of a demayne,or of land im
demayne. ;


te :m.ere fas Domanial..


Droit domanier, The priniledge a Lord Iuflicer bath,
to proceed,of bu owne authoritie, by way of execution,
without any written commifion,in G Lis concerne
bis ancicat demasae,or ti? accuflomed rights thereof. -

Seigneur domanier. The Lord of the foile of a Man-
nov';a chiefe Lord.


Dome. ATowachoufe, Guildhall, Statehoufe, Meeting


houfe ina Citie (from that of Florence, which is called


pe 3)alfo, as Dofm


ec, ‘ RAS à
ue : com. Domeflicall,houfall of our boufe-
boul. algamesfamilersprnic. |


-Do-.


Original from
THEMQHIO STATE CMIVERSITY
« Se. FR


>a


iquer. To tame, reclaime ; ciuilixe, make fa-
enile,tratlable boufall.

mir ge ué: m. ¢e.f. Tamed , reclaymed, cinilized,

e famlier gentle,traBtable,poufa Ul.

Domicile : m. 47 boufe,manfion; babitation,dwelling,
place of aboade.

Domicilié.homme demicilié en yn tel lieu. Houfed,
or that bath a dwelling, in fuch a place ; an inbabitant
©;

Demicilier: m. A houfekceper.

SeDomicilier.To bone bin Ife;to goc to inbabit,or to
keepe boufe.

Dominant. Governing, ruling, commannding, beating

Sway pauing authoritie ouer.

Ficffuzerain, & dominant. A manner beld in chief,
or whercof diucrs others bould.

+ om dominant, 4 Lord paramount, or chiefe
Lord


Dominateur. A maifier , ruler, commaunder , goutr-
ner,

Domination: f. Dominion, rule, power, autboritic, go-
wer nmentfoueraignty, way ouer others,
ominatrice:f. A gouerneffe , commaundereffe, Mi-
fireffe,Ladic of.

Dominé: m.ée: f Gouerned ruled,commanded,fway-
ed,maïllercd, (cigniorixed,domineered oner.

Dominer. To gouerne, rule, commaund, maifler, domi-
neere,to baue foncraigntic, beare fway ouer À free
mong, others ; to feigniorixe it.

Domineur.«s Dominateur,

ns Ja lettre dominicale. The dominicall let-


vr oraifon dorninicale. The Lords prayer,the Pater-


oc :m.A kind of bood,or habit for the bead,werne
by Cannons ; (and hence) alfo, a fafhion of vaile ufed
by fome women that mourne.

Dominorié : m. ée. f. Domineered ouer.

Domninorier. To domineere , to beare fway; as Domi-
ner.

Dominotier :m. Amaker of the bood called Domi-
no,

Dommage: m. Dammage, loffe, detriment , hinde-
Ta comet ra M
difpleafure ; difaduantage; a mifchiefe done, or oueï-

beauic charge impofed,

Mais dommage que, &c. But iti fringe or tisa

wonder, that, Oc.


Qui eft loing du plat eft prez de m1 1
Pro. He that fits five from the diff is necre bis dijad-
uantage.


Domnagéable: com.Dammageable ; s burefillsbarme-
full, hindering, incommodious vato. ,
ommageablement. Hurt fully, with “dammase ; to

__ ones barme,loffe,and hinderance.

zm, À Cope-wearer ; or , the Prieft, or Can-

® non,who, ly iurne,js to weare a Cope for a weeke to-


Ca ther. .
npté :m.ée.f. Tamed,reclaimed fubdued,
‘To tame,reclaime ; dawnt ; dc, as Donter.
te-venin : m. ne
iin ode


* Donner carriere à. To feta running, agallopping, a


Don: m. 4 gift, per offerimg, prefent; bribe ;re-
ward ; alfoas D
Je don de AGE | The Sift wherein a weman is mere
mercifill then modeft. ;

Donaiton:f. Afree gift, or deed cf gift.

Denat. The name of a certaine Gremarian,rcad in fime

Schooles ; whence ;
Les diables eftoient cncores à leur Donat. The di-
uells were, as then,but breeching boyes, like Gremmer
Schoole bayer, but young in experience, but Nonicesia
the worl

Donataire: n, 4 éoratarie, er dence.

Donateur : m. A donor : gixcr, beftewer.

Donation : f.. 4 donaticn sa prefent, gift, or deed of
gift ; alfo, a ining.

onation à caufe de mort. See, Mort.
Donation entre vifs. À perfidl, and vrreuecäble
gift 5 an obfolute decd of gifi, (made, and executcdin
amans life time.)
ondaine: f. A certaine warlike engine (out of vfe in
thefe daics)whercout great round fiones were fl ot;alfe,
the burden cfafong.

Dondon:f. 4 fhort, fat, and groffe xcman ; a farall
bundle of farts.

Dongeon: m.A Dungeonsa firorg Towcror platforme,
in the middle of a Coflle or fort , wherein the cfa feged
make their lafi cfforis (of defence) when the refi i fir-
ced.

Donjon. as Dongeon.

Donné: m.ée. f. Give», conferred, be flowed; pre{ented;

yeelded,o deliuered vp ; alfo,dated.

LA onné aentendre. relation, fpecct,tale,marra-


Te s'en eftbien donné. He hath tipled fquarely.

On luy a donné fon fac,& fes quilles: He x caffed,
difmiffed,or turned out of feruice.

Chofe bien donnée n’ eft iamais perduë : Pro: He
that giues difcretly gaines direétly.

Sue: f, A dole, guift, or difiribution, a donatiue,
onne-lardon: m: 4 mocker,floutcr,giber ieaflersone
that beftowes alivery,er caft of bis wit, upon euery one
befees.

Donnement : m. 4 Egan ging flowin confirring; pre-


ser mere grant;
28 Pret adots.To y fi about bim,to beftirre
Doma ene à. To flop, or flay the curv ent of ; to .
Babee le bond à à. Looke, Bond.


gadding ; alfo, to let goe,or gine (cope unto.

se donner carriere.To raunge.flie out; make a vaga-
rie to take feme libertie,or a little fwindge abroad ;to
recreate bimfelfe a little.

Donner la carte blanche à : To delivera man a


Signed with bis band; bence,to offer to veceine,
pe eg conditions be will tye bim too,or exatt


fa det des


T Donne: ja cognoiffance de. o bring acquainted


Bon up à: Toworke or doe good in,
onner


le croc en jambe TofS penoa
turae puertbrow. sf


à. To , or fet at libertie.
ont To difmiffe,let goe,


from


Original
DAE OHO STATE UNIVERSITY,


DON
Donner dedansles. To breake in upon, rufb among
thethickeft of, them.


Donner à dos a. To affaile,or fet upon ,bebind; Laoke


Donner dronos. Looke Dronos.

Donner le flanc à tout propos. Toyeeld unto,or bee
woon by,euérie word.

Donner fond. To caft anker.

Donner cs gauffriers, To leacher. 1
Donnerioura. To grace, beautifie, decorate, gine
light,or Lufler vato.

onner jour à fa defpence.So to fpend as the werld
may take moft notice of bis expences; Looke lour. |
Donner main-levée de.To veflore gine backe, yeeld
vp, things taken,or feifed.
onner mal de tefte a. To make iealous.

Donner en mandement. To commaund , bid, gine
in charge; to will and commaund (the pbrafe of Prin-
ces intheir Letters Patents.)

Donner]a mitre, & la croflea. ‘To countenance,or
authorize by the fpecious pretext of religious Orna-
ments. à

Donner la mufei. To put into a dumpe ; to make

© to ftudie,or paufe about a matter.

Donner des oeufs de Pafques à toutes reftes : Look
Pafque. à
Tlonner ombrage à,To make icalous, fill with füufpi-
tion; gine an inkling of.

Donner parole à. Looke Parole,

Donner pente à. In wrafiling,to offer play,or an ad-
uantage, unto bis aduerfarie. :
Donner pied à. To fet aféot, fend abroad into the


world; giuebeginningto. :
Tac pied fetine À. To ground, fettle , affinre the
Seat of, gine fure footing vnte.

Donner du pied à. To (corne,contemne, (pure.
Donner le plein & lerond à, To accomplifh,or per-


onner à poin& nommé, To bit point-blanke ; to
pike the marke be fhoots at.
onner du rofmarin. Toe give a wooer his anfwersor,
“a flat deniall,

Donner yn mauvais fault.To do a man a mifcbiefe ;
jue bim a vild pufh ; make bim catch great harme, —
Bonne: ynelourde ftrette.To ierke fhrewdly,pinch
extreamely ; See Surette.

Donner de la tette. To butt, or iurre; to runne bis
bead againft.
Il SE ou donner dela tefte. Hee kaowes not
~ what to donor whither te betake bim.
Donner entre deux vertes vne meure. To feafon
matters,er inmble good and badtogetber, =
Donner d' vne. To tell a lie; to gine a gudgeon, a
durch,a gleeke;a drie lift; to gull, or make a foule


of. REL
Donner vogue d.To authorizes to gine Sway or feope


unto.
Donner voile à tous vents, 70 aile with all winds,
weakely,to be perfuaded by eucrie one that fpeakes to
him ; inconftantly,to be fooayed by ewerie feuerall bu-
DE es da done dame boll quile penladh Gp
er du doi uife penfant fig-

nes fe donnent du doigt tc, wherwith their fingers)


sine to ble{f? are like to blind, themfelues : (appli-
pay ihe inter anag eating


'


DON:
: def at eafe ; to paffe away his time dea


Tete le donne gaigné. 1 grant it, 1yeeld unto thee,
I give thee place , 1 leaue thee the vitiorie.
Ce qu’on donne luit,ce qu'on mange puit: Prov.
(atrue difference betweene bountie and fenfualitie.)
Entre promettre,& donmer doit on la fille marier:
Prov. Betweene promifing and giuing the maid ought
to be maried ; (or asunder Promettre.)

Fille qui donne s'abandonne. Pro. Looke Fille.
Promertre fans donner eft fol récomforter : Prov.
Faire words make fooles faine.’

Qui roft donne deux fois donne : Prov. Hee that
gues quickly giues twice : yiz. Doubles tb'eflimate
of bis gift. :

Qui tout me donne, tout menie: Prov, Hee that
giues me all denies me all : viz, He that offersme all,
meanes to gine me nothing.

Tout eft perdu ce qu'on donne fol: Prov. what-
Soener is giuen to fooles is lofi: for either they are fimple


and cannot,or ungratefill and will notjrequiteit,
Donneur : m.A donor; à giner,a beflower.
Dong. Then,therefôre. |


Donques. Thefame.

Dont. whence,whereby whereof, whereupon ; and (in
the beginning of queftions)how comes it to paffe.

Dontable : com, Tameable; reclaimeable,which may
beruled.

Donté: m.ée :£.Tamed,broken,reclaimed,raled;daun-
“ted, fubdued ouercome,bronght under.

Dontement: m. A taming,reclaiming,breaking;puer-
comming, (iubduing.

Donte-mer. Sea-taming, wanes-breaking , furges-cal-


Donte-orguel Pride-taming , floutne[fe-daunti

? -taming , floutne[fe-dauniing,

bautineffe-dovne-pulline. | r

Donter. To tame,reclaime breake ; daunt ; vanquifh,e.

uercome, (ubdue,bring under.

Donterefle: £. She that tameth,or fubdueth.

Donteur. 4 tamer,reclaimer, breaker, ruler ; daunter,
fubduer,onercommer.

Donzelle: £. An Eele-powt.

Dorade:f. The fifh Guilthead, or Goldenie ; alfo, as
Dorée. .

sis re teie
oré:m.ér :f, Gilt ouer; alfo,of gold; alfo, faire ,bean-
rif, brightly fining. 3 alfo,0f gold; ifm 5
Er pes dois The = |
pa par la porte dorée. viz. Bymouey. |

Dorée: ré The Dircugh Saint Peters fifh; ale (rbough
not fo preperioibe Goldfifh, or Goldenie ; alfo, a kind
of delicate yellow Summer peare , the gold peare.

Dorelle:f ‘The pulfè Orobus, bitter Vetch, or bitter
Fitch. SAT

Dorelot:m. A darling, dilling, fweet beart ; wanton,
fedle; alfo,as Dorlot. ;

Doreloté.# Dorloé. ~

Doreloteur. A cockerer,dandler, bugger ; fawner, foo-
ther, flatterer of.

Dorelotter. as Dorletter.

Dorer. To gild,or doe over with gold.

Dorcrie : f. Gilt worke ; alfo,a gilding.

Dores-en-avant. Henceforth , hence forward;


hereafter, …
Doreur. A gilder. |
Doreur Sr ja nuiG.A Gold-finder,a Jakes-farmer.
Doreure: f 4 gilding; alfo, a Bilement, or Jewell of
Bava peeces. k
Doriphage:


int: Lol À ee


Ata a ee éd in RARE CE


Doriphage:m.4 Munch-prefent;a denourer of bribes,
an cater of gifis. |

Dorlot: nm, Aiewell, or prettie trinket, as a Chaine,
brooche, ring aglet button,billement,crc wherewith a
woman fets out ber apparell, or decks berfelfe; qPic:
and hence, as Dorelot.
orlotté :m. ée : Decked, or fet out mith prettie trin-
kets ; alfo, dandled, cockered, bugged, much made of;
alfo,dvowned in pleafitre,vp to th’eares in delights; al-
So,nice quaint ynincing itymaking it fine or goodlie,

Dorlotter.To firnifh,decke,or Nel with prettie trin-
kets ; alo, to cocker, dandle, bug, flroake, make much
of; alfo, to mince it, make it fine, or goodlic;alfo, te
tumble or wallow in fulneffe of delights.

Dormailler. To flumber.

Dorimant. Sleeping; En dormant ; in bis fleepe while
be tooke bis reftas be flumbered.

Eau dormante. Standing water, isch as is in pits,ce-
flernes coc.

Feneftre à voirre dormant.A clofe window of glaffe
without any cafement; a flanding window that snot to
be opened nor fhut.

‘A qui l'on peut fans les refveiller arracher, les
dentsen dormant. whofe teeth one may plucke out
without awaking them; (Appliable to fuch as be flug-
gifb,dull,or fencele[fe in extremitie.)

Dormart :m. A flug-a-bed,a droufie companion, abea-
uie-headed luske,one that cuer flecpes as be goes one of
the feauen fleepers, :

Dormeveille: £ À being betweene a fleep and amake;or
a counterfeiting of flecpe. ;
Dormeiir : #. A fleeper.
Jamais dormeur ne fit bon guet,ni parefleuxne fit

beau fait: Pro . Looke parefleux.

Dorinilieufe,«s Dormilleufe, .

Dormille : f. The fickneffe of filkewormes during which
they fleepe ; alfo, akind of finall Lamprey.

Dormilleufe. The cramp fih , whofe propertie is to be-

numine the hands of ber taker. :

Dormilleux : m. 2s Dormillart. .

a : m. cufe : f. Heauie , fleepie, droufie,

uggifh. -

Dormir : m. Anap,a fleep 34
Vn dormir attrait l'autre:


: The more a man
fleepes,the more he may. | ie
Dontnir. To fleepe,reft; flumber,take anap ; alfo to flug

.  &L,or be negligent. ï
Dormir en chien, To fleep before dinner or fafting,in


an open Sunne. a
Dormit fur les deux coftez. To barre ep; Or,
when one is wearie with fleeping on th one fide,to turn,
and to it againe on th'otber.
Dormir la grafle matinée. To lie in bed long a mer-


nings.
Die fur le jour, To take a nap at dinner time, or
efently after ; to flecpe at noone dayes.
sis om pe fleepe vpona drinking, or difgeft
his drink with fleeping. -
{> Cefonrdescontes à dormir debope-Thefe are moft
lous,or foolifhtales, ~


8. . - -
Dormitoire. A fleep-procuring medecine.
Dorque. A kindof great and round earthen veffel;


GLa
Dorfal: m. ale: £. Of, or belonging to, the backe; |


Dortoir: m. A dorter, or lodging wherein manie flecpe


Dortuit, Sleepie, drowfie.
Dorure:f. as Doreure. A gilding.
Dos: m. The backe ; a back-part , or backfide ; alfo a


‘A dos d’ Afne. Ridgill-backed, high-ridged, or ba-


Dole. A dof ; the quantitie of potion , or medecine,
Dofine:m. 4-flat-round loner,or open roofe,to a fleeple,


Doffe d'ail A clove of garlicke.


Doffier : m.4


| D : m, Of, or belonging to, the backe;alfo, eafin
bear me nb on css 12 Ds the backs


] \ ences “ we.
| Soy . A bogs brifiles,
‘ Der soaps borfes berne(fe which


rames cre-croffe bis backe 5 we call it the ri


Prov. Asin Lid, à

: Qui a bruit de fe lever matin peur dormir iufques
à difner: Prov, He that is thought an earlie man

may flcepe till dinner time ; be that is beld an boneft

man may longabufe the world; common report gulles

manic, who thinke no burt when outwardly they fee


none.

Tant dort le chat qu'il fe refveille: Prov. The flug-

fins or fleepie Cat at length awakes,
egnard qui dort la matinée n’a pas Ja langue em-.

plumée : Pro,He cannot tbriue that lies in bed a mor- |


ng: alfo a great fifh thats enemy to thewhale,


whence;
Cautere dorfal. The backe-cauter ; fomewhat like a


knife ; or bauing a back like a knife, and armes
on the other fide. ;


together; alfo, a Churchyar


e.
Des du nez. The bridge of the nofe.
Nichil au dos. Looke Nichil.


ing a fharp ridge;bigh,or bighef},in the middle; fharp,
or fharpening, toward the top , or middle ; ‘einiiing
she backe of'an aft. .
Donner à dos à. To affaile , or fet upon bebinde : fe
donnerent eux mefines à dos. They tumbled for baft,
one ouer another.
Faire enfemble la befte à deux dos. To leacher.
Ona fait de fon dos courroye. He bath bene whip-
ped foundly,la{bed horribly. ee
Maleft caché à qui l’on void le dosProv: He's but
ill bid whofe backe is feene, +

i fai credos charge fon dos.Prov: He that cre-
dits much carries much; or, be that gines much credit
undergoes agreat charge.
which a Phifition appoints bis patient fhall take at


once.


bankettinghoufe, piggeon-boufe ec fumewhat refem-
bling the D 4 pores 3


offe : m. ée: f. Indorfed.
offerafle : f. A buttrelfe, or fupporter to bare vp the
great beame of a wall. 4 4

y; any thing that eafeth,or fiaieth
the backe,or fermes for it to leane on ;as a rayle bebind
a forme ; the back of a chaire,érc ; alfo, the backe of a


Vadoffier de pavillon. The head of a Pauillion, or
 Camopi rom ns re 7 À


cr defile, AD ben.


+. Original from
ÆHEBOFIO STATE UNIVERSITY
= ;


h à à SR Es 2


gen with a woman in mariage.

Dot.asDoft, ;

Dotal: m, ale: f. Dotall; given in dowrie; of or belon-

- giugto , adowrie.
otateur: m. Aa endower.

Doté:m.ée: f. Indued , or endowed with; bauing a
portioning

Dotter. To doate.

Doiiaire: m.4 dower,orioynture for a woman after ber

busbands death; affo ber mariage good, or the portion

ft, or brings,to ber mariage.

oilaire plein &,entier. A ioyature ofor thirds in,
the whole Land defcended; which is efpecially when no
other woman bath any dower ont of it.

Doiiairiére: £ À dowager ; a widow endowed,or that
hatha ioyntrue.

Doüane. The name of the Cuftomeboufé at Lyons ; hence
alfo, any cuflome , or impoft; and particularly, two
French Crownes taken by th’ Officers of that bonfe, for
enerie peece of gold. pr filuer (and vatably for all other
kinds of uffe,and marchandife)imported.

| Doüanne :f..as Doiiane.

4 Doiiannier : m. 4 Officer of the Cuflome-boufe.

- 4 Doubé : m.ée: f Rigged,or trimmed vp,as a ‘hi

pone To rigor trimme,a fhip.

} Doublage. as Aides Chevels; Called (6 in the Cuflomes

of Aniou,and Maine ; Looke Aides; a relicfe us alfa
called,doublage;becaufe a double,or twoyeres,rent ,
or Cens ts paid for it,

Doublaht. Doubling, making doubler as much more.

Double: m. A double; double part; or double pace;

_ twice as much; alfo,the copie of a writing; alfo,a peece
of bafe coine worth two pence Tourn, . -
Double d’ Aouft. Looke Aouft. sé
e double d'un cerf. Deeres füet.
Au double. Doubly,with great vfurie twoafold, vato
| bis great aduantage. ; Aor
‘Doub!
of as much weight,or worth againe.
Double vaifleau.A cauldron,or kettle. full of bot wa-
ter; or,as Bain de Marie. t
Habillement double. 4 garment thats lined,or furs
red cleane through,or double all ouer.

Doublé : m.ée:t. Doubled; made two-fold, or twice
as much; increased verie much, or unto as much more;
alfo bowed much,or made almoft to meet at the ends;
alfo,copied out as a writing; alfo,lined, as agarment ;

… alfo,repeatedyeiterated.

Deaton: m, asHemicycle; Abalfe circle; alo, a
double quarter of timber, =>

Doubleau. Somewhat double almoft two-feld,

Arcs asB ugiues, » |.
Double-marcheur: m. Tbe little, fpotted,and worm-
© Like Serpent Amphisbena; which bauing a head at
bath ends(an ervour in auntient authors, in the opinion
of Mathiolus, and Grevinus)can goe both wayes.

Doublemént :m. A doubling; a making two-fold, oF
twice asmuch;a rifing untoas much more; alfo, the
copying ont of a writing, InaPortfale, a double out-
bidding , or double the price of the moft that was at

= firft bidden(which be that arifes unto, moft commonly

earxies the thing)

nt. Doubly,two wayes, in two forts, for two


To double;to make two-feld,or twice as much;

very much, or unto as much move ; alfo, to

take both ends meet ;alfo,to copie out à
ent; alfo,toreiterate. —


| Doublet: m. À Double ; a Fewell,or flone of two pee’ ;


_Doubtement:m. A doubting, fufpecting ; fearing.


c:com. Double; twice as big, as great gaine;


4}. as) to hope.


ces ioyned,or glued together.
+ Doublet en cafe, A corner-point taken with two men
at Tables.
Double-teftu: m.The worme-like Serpent Amphisbz-
na; double-headed, as auncient authors baue imagi-
med; But no Serpent, fayes Mathiolus,bath naturally
two beads ; Looke Double-marcheur.
ouble-vaiffeau. as Bain de Marie,
Doublier: m.4 long, and large Table-cloth of Damask,
Diaper, oc hanging to the ground on both fides of the
boord,and laid double thereon; a Table-cloth for Piin-


ces. eat States.
Doublure. f. Lining for a garment.
Fin contre fin n’eft bon à fairede doublure: Pro, À
pa craftie knanes being matchs, will ncuer agree to.
gether.
Doutable : com.Doubtable ; redoubtable; uncertaine,
fit to be feared,
Doubtance: f. Doubt ; fufition; fêare; uncertain-
;


tie.
Doubtant. Doubting ; fifpecting $ mcertainly thinking
of; (and fometimes) alfo, as much ashoping,
Doubte :f. A doubt; [ufpeit; fêare, fcruple; mifirnp;
Sifpence; vncertaintie of, or flaggering in,opinion ; al
fo, a reuerent awe,or dread of.
Sans doubte. Queftionleffe,undoubtedl ,certainely,
without faile as fire as can be.
_ Amener,ou mettre,en doubte. To call in queftion,
bring in contronerfiemake men deubtfisll of.
Tenir en doubte. To delay deferre, bold infufpence.
Doubté:m.ée : f. Doubted ; fifpetted ; miftiufted; fea-
red ; awed.


Doubter. To doubt, fufeët, mfirufl; bee vncertaine,
make a queftion,or féruple of; to flagger.flammer wa-
uer betweene bope and feave; 1e be in fufpence; alfo,to
féarc,awe, dread, rédoubt ; ( fometimes)alfo (as much


ui ne {cait rien de rien ne doubte :Pro. He that -
“Kotowes nothing lines in feare of nothing,
Doubteufement. Doxubifiuly uncer tainly; inconftant-
ly,waueringly; miftrupifilly,
oubteux:m.eufe:f. Donbtfull, vacertaine, in faf-
pence; alfo, variable,inconflant, flaggering ;alfo, am-
M pete MERE ve fubieétto canilling, or. exception;
whereof a queftion may be made,a controucrfie raifed,
or diners fences gathered; alfo,fearefill, terrible, re-
doubtable. À
Douce (The féminine of Dôux) la douce perfonne. A
Sweet fellow fire; Ironically; SeeDoux.. ~~ +
Douceaftre : com. Sweetifh. ‘Z
Doucelet: m. ette: f. Dulcet, prettie and fweet;07/, a
Little fiveet. NÉE TS on St ae
Douceinent. sweetly, delicioufly; fofily, footy
mildly,gracionly coprteou{ly,louingly; capily , trabta~


ly.

Douce-ente : f. The name of a certaine thicke; ruddie,
andfappieapple. - : ,

Doucereux : m. eufe:f. Full of fweetaeffe, delicious;
moft pleafant ; mofl courteous.

Doucet :m. A kiad of f22-fiflike a Hedechog; Locke
Doufin. }

Doucet : mette:¥.Dalcet; prettie and five? or, a
little fiveet. 09 -

Doucettement: Sweetly ; prettily; mildly,gently cafily.

Douceut:fsweetnes delight,pleasztnes daintines:foft-

nes {moothnesynecknes,gctlenes ynildnes,tractablenes;

‘ Ee kindaes,


j OnGinaierom -
THE-OHIO=SIAEE UM VER SEY
ee ee re ans spi


PE CORNE.


.
4


7" Bat Lia2 =


6


DOV


kindne[Je, bumanitie, courtefic ; indulgencie, mercie,
clemencie,

Douceur de chant. The melodie, or harmonic of tune-
able finging.
I faut avoir mauvaife befte par douceur : Pro.
(Some-what like to our , the rough Net 1 not the beft
catcher of Birds ;) foreud beafts would be caught by
{weet baites.

Doucin. 4 Douffin,

Doucine. as Doulcine.

Dove: f, 4 caflle, ditch, or Towne-ditch (with water in
it.)

Doiié: m. ée: Endued ; endowed,

Douélle:f. À Pipe-flaffe ; alfo, the firickle ufed in the
meafuring of Corne.

Douen d'antan. Hence ouer a yeare : €Norm.

Douér. To indue, endow, or giue a dowrie vnte.

Doués :f as Douves.

Douët:m. A brooke, or (pring.

Douétte. à longues douéttes. 1m long rowes , files,
ranks: @Bret.

Dougé:m. ée:£ Small, fine ; little ; flender, thinne,

Douger. To trip; as a borfe that fiumbleth not outright,
(an old word.)

Douille: f. The focket of the bead of a pike,iauelinerc ;
alfo, the focket of a candleflicke ; any focket ; alfo, the


Douvelle : £, À Cinter , or Centrie; the ficme of wood


_ awhile after,beld vp.


D © v-
Douves d'untonneau, &c. The bead-peeces of a
Tunne,ec,


whereby a vault,or arch is both in the making, and for


oux sm. douce: f. Sweet; delicious, delightfème,
daintie,pleafing ; foft,pliant ; fmooth,tractable; gentle,
cke; louelie ; kind,courteous,louing.

Doux de fel.Frefh,vnfauorie,notthrougbly feafoned,

alfo,ef (mall flanding,or experience. q
oux à tafter. Smooth, fofi,without any ronebne(je;

alfo, fwcet,or without any manner of bar fhneffe.

Eau douce. Frefh water. Medecin d'eau douce. A

Jong.or unexperienced Phyfition. - ‘

Eftain doux. The befl kind of Tinne ; gotten in our

Cornewall.

Pierre douce. A certaine white flone,called,the Ho-

nie fione.

Taille douce. Sweet cutting ; fimall ingrauerie, fuch |

as prints in copper are cut with. .

Tout doux. Hufht ; quietly, filly , calmely, without

noife,or dinne.

Faire les doux yeux. To counterfeit ciuilitie , or me-

défie; to fèeme cey;alfo,to make as though he flept,and

{aw nothing ; or to be betweene fleeping and waking;

alfé,to winke,or fmile prettily with the eyes.


barrell of an barguebuxe,or piftoll, ‘
Douillet: m. ette : £ Daintie,tender,delicate, foft,ef-
feminate ; a milke-fop ; one that cannot beave a feather
without breathing ; alfo, quaint, curious , as nice as a
Nunnes benne. ‘
Douillettement. Daintily, tenderly, delicately, effe-


Faire les doux yeux à. To play at boe-peepe with; 10
winke lafciuiou[ly,or wantonly at ; alfo, to frame,or fet
th'eyes to looke alluringly, fiatteringly, or pitifully at
. one, thereby to get fomewhat of bim.
Filer doux. To flatter,or (peake faire.
ouce parole n’efcorche langue : Prov. wee fay, |


minately ; alfo, quaintly, nicely,curioufly, a words breake no bones.
Douit: m. as Doute: 4 brooke. ouce parole rompt grand'ire:Prov.Gentle words |
Doulcin:m.The fifh cald, the feaVrcbin: @Marfeillois. appease the irefull.

Doulcin rafcaz, A greater, and white,kind thereof ; Pouces promeffes obligent les fols: Prov. Faire


Looke Doufsin.
Doulcine. as Cymaife, or Cymace.
Douleur : f. as Doleur. ;
Douloiiere.4 poires a coopers addis, À
Douloureufement , Douloureux. as Doloureufe-
ment,& Doloureux. . cr
Se Douloufant. Pittifully complaining,in a lamentable
taking, waimenting, mot woe- Sn: creer eT
SeDouloufer. To lament, wayle,complaine,wayment.
Doulx : m, Doulce : f. Looke, Doux.
Dour: m. A bands breadth ; or the breadth of foure


promifes oblige fools ; or(as our) faire words make fools
: faine


: faine.
De doux arbre douces pommes : Prov. Such as
the tree fitch is the fruit; fiweet 1b'one , faucrie th’o-
ther ; (yet we fay,that many a good cow bath but ane-

. well calfe,) 7,


*


Doux-amer. Bitter-fweet.  .-

Doux-auvefque. The name of afweet, and tender ap-
pleas big as a middle Orange. -

Doux-balon, A certaine roundigreat,grecne, foft, and


: ) fiveet une
fees ; the fourth part of a Geometricall foot, in mea- nr : a A certaine great, fweet, round, and
uring. skinied apple.
Dourdé: m, €e :£. Knocked ymavled,thumped rapped, | Doux-gliffant. Glib,gently-gliding.
beaten. — Sosa Doux rave. viz, Doucement grave.


Dourder. To knockeynawle,beat,thump, rap.
Dourdier: m. À luske, lowt,flouch,
Doufil: m. 4 fpigot. =
Douflaine: £ 4 certein muficall inftrument.
LS RP
 Doufer.To indorfe, a paper érc.

| Donflerefle.asDofleraffe.
Doufsier :m. 47 indorfement.

Do Thefea Vrchin ; a fifhthats eatable , though


oux de la Lande, The name of a white fweet apple,
that yeelds most excellent cyder.
Doux-Martin. A certaine white,long, and drie apple.
ape The name of a white, long, and tender
apple: tse Bet foi
Douzain :m. 4 Sous,or French fhiling; (whereof ten
ae nike df frinzmng)


Douzaine: f. 4 > aie eae 25 MT ON
+ Heft bien au compte de Ja douzaine.. He à 4 for-


Je EHOUED. = DAT t SEE fellow, a fillie companion ; one thats able y-
r greaicf and mite kind theres — nomgh to doe burt, 207 pole non Le Lo
18 ‘A ap | things that yt pe 2 ot curiou
pase. =f Doubtance. — 5) | beededyare often fleightly made)
uve: fi A 6 itch (haning water init) alfo, Douze. Zee a dozen. #
Done RE | pis cenier doute. Leste Deis. $
intrails by tl HE. ee we uze-doigtier. Smart paie Le 08


right fide,e> defééding oblikely towards D cp
an


Original from


THE-GHIO STATE.UNIVERSITY


gins. i
Douzil :m. 4 fpigot. aw :
Douziefine. The Hwelfib ; alfosan impofition of 12.d.in

the pound vpon all wares fold; firft raifed by'King

Charls the fifi. tn

Droié dedouziefine. Anyearelie rent of 12.4. due

by euerie affianchifed inbabitant of Haynault, unto

«the Earle thereof, in acknowledgement of bis former
thraldome,c’> as a recompence of bis now- got freedom.
Doyen: m..4Deane ; the bead of a Colledge,or Cathe-
rall Church. :
Doyenné : m. A Deanerie ; or Deanefbip.
Doygé: m.ée:f, as Dougé. |
Doze de Venife.The Duke of Venice.
Drache:f. The little fiaulke whereby a grape cleaues to
the bunch,
Drachme. as Drame; À dram; the eighth part of an
ounce,
Dragacanth. as Dragagant.
ragagant: m. Gumme Dragagant, a gummic liquor
"which diftills from the root of the Candian fhrub,called
Goats-beard. ve
Dragée :f. 4 kind of difgeftine powder, vfually preferi-
bed vate weake flomackes after meat ; and bence, any
jonkets comfets,or fiveet meats, ferued in at the laft
cour(2, (or otherwife) for flomacke-clofers ; alfo finall
baile-fhot, of lead, rc.
ée aux chevaux. Prouender of diners forts of
pulfe mingled together ; or,as Farrage ; al/o,the courfe
graine called Bolymeng,French-wheat, Blocke-wheat,
or Bucke-wheat.
geoir. À comfèt box,of filuer ; alfo, the fat,or ve[fell
that receiues new wine, falling by a narrow pafjage,
fromthe preffe.
Dragean: m. A vine branch,twig,or fprig.
rageon fourchetan, A frig that (burteth out be-
tweene two branches, as fiom iddle of a forke.
Drageon fruiétier. The branch that beareth the
grape. : :
Brageon panipier. A vine branch,or twig that bea-
reth no fruit,but onely leaues.
Drageries : £. Comfets ionkets, fiveet meats.
Dragme : m. .4 dramyne ; the eighth part of an ounce,
or three [cruples ; alfo,a band full of.
e RE mod cup of wine ; See Pilure.
Dragoir. Looke Drageoir. à
Dragon : m, A Dragon ; alfo, the bearbe Dragonwort,
or Dragons. ;
Dragon marin. The Viner, or Quaniner; a mon-
flrows,and venomous fifb. ‘
Sang de n. Dragons-bloud ; is not(as ignorant
people imagine)the bloud of a Dragon crufht to death
by an Elephant but the Gumme of the Dragon tree o-
pened,or bruifed in the dag-daies; alfo,Bloudwort,red
Patience,bloudie Patience,(anhearbe.)
Dragonceau: m. 4 yong,or little Dragon.
Dragoncelle : f..as Dragontée.
ragonné : m.ée : f Dragonie; whofe binder parts re-
femble a Dragon :(aword of Blaxon.)'
Dragonneau: m. A yong, or little Dragon; alfo, the
ouerfilne[fe of any great veine being bent, or flretched
ont, x


Dragontée:: f The bearbe Dragons,or Dragemwort.
D ée mineur. Small Wie


Drag “So do they at Lyons tearme a kind of Gi-
bridge, prifeners ~fe to fetch drinking money
fromnew-come is. + aay EN


Drapelet. A little linnen cloth,clowt ; or Enfigne.
Draper. To make,or worke cloths to dre(fe,or full cloths |


‘gy Draperie ; cloath-felling , cloth-vorking;
. 4


Drapier: m, 4 Draper.
Drappant.werking,dreffin Mer rm à
8


DR A


Dramant. Miching,pinching, drawing out things feant-
Ysvfng them fo [carcely as if be were affraidsor loath,
10 touch them,
taine :m.as Dragme ; 4 dramme. 1
Dramé:m. ée: f. Miched, pinched, miftrably ufed,
Seantly difpofed of, firiétly meafured, or delimered,out.
Dramer.To miche pinch dodge ; to vfe,difpofe of or de-
liner ot things by a precife weight, or frriéi mcafure ;
or fo feantly, fo fcarcely,as if the meafure: were afraid
to touch them,or loath to baue them touched,
ap:m. Cloth; woollen cloth; broad cloth,
Drap mortuaire, 4 Hearfe-cloth,
Demy drap. (lothrafh.
Eftre des S de.To betowards ; to be an atten-
dant,or feruant of,to belong,or be a retainev,vnto.
Le drap,& les cifeaux luy foncdelivrez . The mat-
ter is wholly referred unto him; be bath the law in bis
owne hands. ee
Le drap des deux eft d'une mefme piece. They are
both of one kind of fluffe, mettah, bumor ; there went
but a paire of fheeres betweene them,
“A ce drap coufturiers. To it whorefins 307; let vs go -
roundly to worke; alfo, there was old cutting, fnipping,
Shredding, laying about theme
Au bout de l’aulne faut le drap. There is but inft
meafure,no more then willferue the tuines move were
too much,leffe too little,
Ml veut avoir drap,& argent enfemble. He is an ex.
treame,or vniuft dealer; he would haue mens ware
without paying for it ; or, be would baue both fixffe,
and money; one thing contents bim not, be would baue
both,
Dieu donne le froid {elon le drap : Prov. Looke
Froid. ,.
Drapé. as Drappé.
Drapeau: m,A(linnen)cloth,or clowt ; alfoyan Enfigne,
Standard,Bauner,(olours.
Drapeau d’un fufil. Tinder.
Drapeau dela Meleze. 4 white, and leatherlike
filme, or skinne (found neere to the pith of the bodies
of old Lavch trees) wherewith countrey people clofe
wounds and flaunch bloud.
Vieux drapeaux. Old rags, clowts , clothes paft
wearing; trafh, trumperie, odde ends ; outcaft fri-
perie.
Chevalier au drapeau quarré.’ A Kyight Banneret;
fo called,becanfé bis Colours in the field ave to be of a
Square forme ; as alfo, bis Armes may bepainted in a
fame field, ;
eft cout pafle,& mort commevn drapeau. Hee
lookes like death ; or as pale as a clowt.


to beat or thicken,as cloth,in the falling ; aljo, to feife,
or take another mans goods, érc;vnder a faire pretext; |
alfo,to mock, flowt ,devide, Malaise eatior champ

apace,


6, a flourifbing with leaues and flowers in wood, or
Jione;vfed efpecially on the beads of pillers, & tearmed
by our workemen Draperie,or Cilerie.


Drapier drappant. 4 Clothworker,
or beating clotb im the fulling ; alfo,mocking, flowt
deridine vet fling at.

&:m.ée:f. Dreffed, wrought, filled (as cloth ;)
eat, or, thickned (by beating ) as cloth is in the
Eey fuliing;


_—— =.) —_ Fs


4 ibn + pie “> —_— =


Srifed under a faire pretext,
Sarge . Milled Sey,
Drappeau: m.sDrapeau.
pelet : m. A little linnen cloth,rag,or clowt.
Drapper. as Draper,
Drapperie : f. Looke Draperie.
Dasppeux : meufe:f. Full of cloth , or fitto make
cloth,


Drappier. as Drapier.

Drappier : m.ere: £. Of, or belonging to cloth; alfo, fit
to make cloth,

Drave : f. Spansfh,or Babylonian Creffes.

Dravée :f. All kind of pulfe,as Beanes,peafe,ec,

Draule :in. 4s Drole ; A wag,or merrie grig.

Daulerie : f #waggerie ; alfo, the figure a Maske, Sa-
tire, Monkie,or fuch like apifh vifages and anticke vee
Semblances, [et on the top of a Scutcheon, or coat of


Armes.

Drege: f. Akind of fifh-net ; forbidden to bee vféd, ex-
cept for the catching of Oifters.

Drelotter:# Dorlotrer.

Drefsé: m.ée:f, Straightened, leuelled, enened, fet
right,made firaight; atfo, raifed, aduanced, ereéted ;
held,lifted, fet,or taken up ; allo, directed, infirutted,
trained up; ordered; framed, made, fifhioned ; alfo,
deuifed,contriued,inuented ; alfo,found of as Deere by

… dogs ; alfo,couered,as a table; difhed vp,as meat for a
meale, / we ee
Dreffer. To fraighten, fet right make firaight,Jenell, e-

| wen; alfo,toraife,aduance,erett; lift, fet,hold,or take

up; alfo,to diveét,inftrutt,order,gouerne,traine up; to
fafhion ; frame,build make,
reffer vn cerf, The dogsto find of a Deere.

Dreffer les cheveux, To flroake up the haire.

Drefler vne coquille. To fet atrap for a Woodeocke;

See Coquille,

Dreffer vne entreprife. Te plot, proieét, contrine an

enterprife.


Dreffer des finefles. To deuife fleights, or lay fares,


r fooles.

refler vn lid. To make abed. (
Dis au Cuifinier qu'il drefle. Bid the Cooke difh up
bis meat ; ou,au fommelier qu'il € 3 or the But-
ler,that he couer. : er
Se drefler. To raife, to aduance bimfelfé; to fland
boult-vp-rigbt. a? gies
Se drefler yn bon heur. To procure unto,or prouide
Sor,bimfelfe a great fortune,
Ilfedreffe'vne guerre. 4 warre is in preparing,
Les — luy dreffent. His baire flares or flands
annend, #
. Se faire drefler ue chofe à quelqu'un. To
get himtofet it Res to gine order for it.
Dreffeur’ m. A firaightaer diveéter, leneller ; fetler ; a
À vaifer er etter, framer, fafbioner,orderer jnflruéter.
Sos eur de compte. 4a Ace


caer, ,
Dre! ns ee, 2 CRE di- ;
a | im, À cupboord; à court-cupboord (without
d oo on) onelytofet plateon, ==.
i: 1 : m. A/fetting yren,or poating flicke, for ruffe

1AdS ; ing 5 ta


ee


fülling ; alfoderided mocked, flouted; alfo, taken, or | Drilles: £. Rags,tatters beg gerlie clowts.


ees fa covkes bells È Droit datrage Two pots of wine, oc, due vpon


DRO
Drilleux: m.cufe :f. Tattered,rag ged, in beggerlie ar-
ray. :

Dringuemorigue. 4 nickname for a Dutchman.
Master en dringuemorigue. To fiaulh,or front
it like a fwaggering huffefauffe.

Drogue:f Adrug, ~~ |

Drogué : m.ée:f edrugged ; mingled,purged,or fea-

Soned with drugs. c
Boiflon drogué. A fpiced cup;alfo,an impoifoned ene,
einan : m. An Interpreter. .

Droguement : m.4 drenching, bedrugging, or minif:
tring of drugs,

Droguer. To drug bedrug;feafon, purge, or mingle,
De he ai uf imei

roguer le corps. To fluffe bimfelfe with drues , to
he pe. D RÉ Shop of bis bellie. + À
roguerie : f. Thefeafon of fifhing for berrings, ando-
ther [uch fifh,which is to be faltedand barrelled vp,

Drogueries:f.Drugs,draggeries,confections; alfa,trafh.

Daisies A kind of fiuffe thats balfe file , balfe
wooll.

Drogueur : m. A druggifl,or drue-feller.

Droict: m, The Law (Ciuile,Canon,or Common; ) alfo,
right,law, inflice,equitie,reafon; alfo, aright or title
vnto,an intéref} or propertie in,a thing; a mans due ;
that which eitber be bath, or fhould baue.

Droiét eferit.(Is particularly)the Cinile Law.

‘A bon droict. Lawfilly, worthily , vpon infi caufe,
. with good reafon. ge Droit Aduerb,)

Ses menus droits. Hu vailes, fees wages,

Venir à fes droiéts. A Ward,or Pupill comming unto

bis yeares, to enter into the pofféffions that were left


im.

Venir, ou eftre appellé, aux droiéts du Roy. To
come, or be called into the Court of the Peeres of

+ France, for the trial of bis caufe, gre
Bon droiét a bon meftier d’aide.(A Proverb taxing
th’iniquitie, and iniuflice of our times; wherein good
right bath oflentimes need of great fanvur.)

Droiét : m. (alfo) A duetie,right, fee,prerogatine,prini-
ledge,royaltie,power. ;
Droid d'acqueft; ou de nouvel acqueft; ou de
Mouveaux aquefts. The fine due unto the king vpon
purchafes made by Church-men,or in Mortmaine; and
either to the king , or unto other Lords , vpon pur-
chafes made by th’ignoble,of Fiefs,or noble inberjtan.
ces held of them ; The rate of it is, one yeares profit in
three ; or otherwife,as their compofitionor the cuflome
is; ( for this Rate is mofl proper unto Droi& de nou-
vel acqueft,a per/onallright.)

roict d'acquit. Theright of Toll, or Cuflome, due
by paffengers unto the Lord of the place wherein tis v-
Sually taken,and payable if they.be not fice by birth(as
the Noble)or by condition (a Churcb-men) or by Pa-
tent,ov Charter (as fome 15, and Tovenefinen)
In which cafés they muft , in a good fafhion , ac-
bim beforeband with their eflates,or priui-


À roict d'adtouërie. Soueraigne patronage,or pro-
it d'affeurage. as Droid d'afforage.


the broaching of enerie veffell retailed; one to the Lord
Feodall, bis right für the flanding thereof in bis Man-
se for bis leaue(if be bawe iatifdittion)to [el itsare-
ther unto the magifirate, for allowance of the liquor,

and for the vate which be fets on is. Sher :
Droiét


Original from


THESOHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY-


La


a


‘
DRO

Droiét à aide. Looke Aide. - ale
Droiét d' aifnefle. The right, and preregatine of an
eldeft beire ; or,the portion due, by prime birth, unto
bim ; which is , in moft places the principal boufe,and
garden with th'inclofure thereof; and if it baue 710 gar-
den, the furlong of ground which lies next unto it; or
8 much as a Capon can flie ouer from it :In the reft of
the land be bath but añ equall fhare witb the youn-

er : (But this is not general.) ,

roict d’Aifneté, ou d'Aifneage ; The fame. .

Droiét d'Amende. Power to "à
for not acquainting the Lord of the Mannor, or foyle,
with his bargaine, (b foone, as by the cuflome of the

lacehe was bound to doe, > Sada

roict d’Annate, A peares reuenew of a vacant

reft Bene fice;challenged heretofore in moft Countries by
the Pope; but taken from bim by the Pragmatique
Sanétion , and fome oiber Editts, before Lutbers
time.
Droiét d'arreft de meubles.Libertie,or power to ar-
goods for a debt not acknowledged ; a Priniledge of
diners townes ; and cither ginen them by the Prince,
or taken, and approued by cuflome.
Droiét d'Afsize de fix deniers, 6.d.Tour, due unto
the Townefhip of Tournay for eucrie pottle of wine
thats retailed within it.
Droiét d Aubaine.£/cheatage by frangers;the right


_ of fiseceffion in the eftates of all frangers,wbo die(in a-


ny part of France) without Naturalization, and
French-borne iffue ; Looke Aubaine.
Droiét d' Aubenage. The (ame. ae
ict d' Aurillage. The profit of Bec-biues ; or
due, 10 a Lord, or to the King (as ia Provence)


~ upon the profit thats made of eucrie bine, by the ow-
ner,
Droi& de bac.The fare due nto the Lord,or owner,


of'a Ferrze-boat, .

Droict de Bailliage. Looke Bailliage,
Droiét de ban à vin, An vnalienable Priniledge;en-
toyed by many Gentlemenin Touraine; who for fortie
daies together after vintage may forbid any other wine
then their ovne,to be fold within their Precinéts,
Droiét de bannerie. The Royaltie of baning a com-
mon Mill ,Ouen, Pwelfe, ec, whereto the tenants of,


and dwellers within , a Libertie, or Mannor are to


relat. 9.
Droiét debannie. The fame ; and the reuenew tber-


~ of or the power to take fees for the ufe of fuch a Mill,
Ouen,Preffe rc.
; Drow de banniere, as Droi@ de Bannerie.


ORR A eae panies eed Halts fre xy
US


_ forreiners who without turne their cat-
tel into the waftes,or Vaines p. elonging to his
Mannars; as in Blayrie. ae
Droid de bordage., The drudgerie, or bafe féruices


referued by fome Lords upon the letting of their cottae
ges, or finall tenements; which cannot be fold, ginen,
nor ingaged bythe poore flaues that bane taken them,
Droiat de bornage, Power to place meeres on, ap-


point limits unto, lay out the bounds of, other mens


lands.

Droiét de boucherie, The Priuiledge of keeping a

common flaughter mp «rés all the inbabi

of that Quarter ave to their beafis killed’; alfo,
ing thereto; enioyed by {uch Lords as


haue Moyenne luftice, og
Droi& de bourgeoifie. Freedome ; Looke Bour-
_geoific. i" ee OO


noite Go. gle


- Sc (whom the Maifiers are to pay; ) Looke Braflage.
ea new purchafèr |


_#ants,wbenbe does bis


DRO


Droi& de boutage. A certaine dutie, or fee exalted
by the Lord of Bree (a member of aah: for the
wine thats retailed within his iurifdiétion.
Droiét de branche de Cypres. 4 ductie paied,in old
time,by Englifh men arviumg at Bourdeaux;in figne,
and as a token,that they bad beene there.
oiét de braflage. The fee due, to the particular
Maiflers of the Mint, out of euerie fort of money thats
coined ; alfo,the fées of the workman, cutter, flamper,


Droict debrefs,ou briefs, Locke Bref.
Droiét de bris. The Admiraltie of a Sea-coaft which
s aman all vpreckes,and fhipwracks,

Ct de buche; ou de Bufche, The Officers of the
wood-yards fées ; or, the proportion of wood allowed,
Vo euerie Office at Courtsand'unto diners Officers of
tH Exchequer ,ouer and befides their ordinarie wages.
Droiét de Carnalage. 4 Priuiledge enioyed by the
inhabitants ef fome places.to kill,and eat,or make pro-
Sit of, fucb beafts as breake into their grounds; but
this onely in fome cafes, and for a certaine number;
which if they exceed they are anfwerable for all, as o-
ther men.

Droict de meilleur Cattel.Heriotage; the beft cha-
pe: a tenant bath when be dics, due unto bis Land-

va, .

Droiét de Cauciage.The power of impofing taxes on
tenants, or of taking toll of paffengers, towards the ve-
Paration.or maintenance of a common caufey; (In fome
Lords of Haynault.)

Droiét de Cellerage.Sellerage; a ductie,or fée pai-
rs unto fome Lords, at the laying of wines into fel-


8
Droiét de Centiefme. Looke Centicfine,
roiét de Chambellage. 44 Income; or the fine
due by ewerie new tenant (that comes in as beire by a
dirett fucceffion)wito the Lord of the Mannor whereof
bis land is held: the rate of it is, by the cuflomes of
Mante,a (vowne of the Sunne ; by thofe of Senlis, 20.
s.Parifis; as alfo, by thofe of Vallois; and thofe of |
Noyon,(wherby tis dueat enerie change of tenant:) by
thofé of S.Quintins , a peece of gold worth (at leafi)
balfe a Crowne ; by thofé of S.Paul,30.s, Parif. by thofe
of Laon,a peece of gold of what value the tenant will:
In other places he paies more,or leffe,according to their
cuflomes : Alfoa fée due vaio the chief Vfber of the
Chamber of Accompts, + ag one of the Kings te-
age.

Droiétde Chambellenage. Is, by the cuflomes of
Britaine, a dutie of $.s,Tour, paid by enetie vafjall at
the doing of bis fealtie unto bis Liege Lord.

Droiét de Chambrelage. as Droiét de Chambel-
lage ; Stiled fo, in the cuftomes of Cambray; and of
Haynault ; in which countrey the rate of it s,60.s.
Droi& de Champagne. The fees due unto the Off.
cers of th Exchequer upon the letting of the farms
which belong to Champagne: viz. 2.5.6. d. fterl. for
Sich as are worth 100.1. 07 leffe; and 4.s. for thofe
which exceed that rate. }
Droiét de Champart. Looke Champart.

Droiét de Chantellage. Gawatellage ; or,a certaine
fee due vnto fome Lords for the Gauntries whereon
wine,thats any way to be fold.doth fland.

Droiét de Charrüage. 2s Droié de fuitte de


difme.

Droiét de Chaftellenie. The Royalties belonging toa

Cafllefhip,or Caflleward ; Looke Chaftellenie.

Droiét de chauffage. Looke Chauffage.
bey ~ Droiét


Original from
THEOHIOSSTATE'UNIVERS A


eee UNSS AT A) ee à


oy dd te COURS


DRO


toll,thats taken at Sens.

Droiét deCheminage. The fame,

Droiét de Chevage. Amyearely duetie, fine, or fee,

. of t2.d.Parifis, paied, to the Kings ufé, within Ver-
mandois (and fome other places) by euerie baftard,

ranger, forreincr,and aff anchif perfon, that is, or

bath beene married,

Droiét de Chevalerie. The Priuiledge of Knight-

hood, er to bee made a Knight ; Looke Chevale-


rie.
Droiét de Chevauchée. Compofition money,due(vp-
on agreement)by fome townefhips ; thereby exempted,
in the Kings iourneyes, and progreffes, from prouding
of borfes and carts for bis traine.
roict de chevelure, The wearing of a locke which
in old time, none but a Prince of’ the bloud might
weare,
Droiét des chiens. That part of the game which be-
longs tothe hounds for their veward,
Droiétde Cire. Is 18,d.Tour.in ewerie pound aboue
twentie giuen,or agreed, for a wood-fale;due vnto the
King,jn regard of the lights;which are(imagined to be)
pre the bargaine is in making.
roiét de Collerage.Collerage; a he due for the col-
lers worne by the borfes,or men,which draw wine vp
and downe.
Droict de commande. Is 2.d,Parifis, rt nes
by fome Lords, of euerie one of their widowes(that bold
“by Villenage)in acknowledgement,and preferuation of
e right of their authoritie ower them.
Droiét de Sopymis The right, or power fome Land-
lords baue,to confifcate feife or enter on the inberitan-
ces of fuch their tenants or vafjallsyas difaduow them,
ine them the lye,or commit felonie.
roiét de commife. The fame.
Droiét de confirmation. The fine due by all Officers
of the kingdome of France unto the King, at bis fixft
comming tothe Crowne, for eflablifbing them by bis
letters Patents, in their places.
Droiét de contentor. See Contentor,


Droiét de Cornage. Hornage; or a quantitie
corne taken yearely ÿ the Lord Ejelais of Bers
member of Bourges) for euerie Oxe, or borned beaft
that workes at the plough in the Winter-corne grounds
which be within bis irifdiétion.
Droiét de Couletage. See Coul
Droict de Couftome. 1s(is Normandie)the cuflome,
or toll , due vpon the fale of wares in Markets; In
Grand Perche; it i a penie Tour. unto Lords
that baue bafé Luri(dittion, for euerie beaft that gives
nomilkeand was bred, bought, and delivered within
their territories ; This under a penaltie of 2.s, 6.4. for
euerie one thats not {o paid for. SE
a groffe couftome. A toll, or impoft of 48.s.
_ vod. Tour. upon euerie eighteène Muids of Salt paf
us by Chartres; due unto, and equally diuided
= betweene the King,and the Bifhop of that citie.
Droiét de petite couftome. See La petite couf-
tome, #7, Couftome, fe ae,
| -Droiét de defherance. Efcheatage ; power ta fei
and conuert unto bis owne vfè, an inberitance
owner dies inte de  :
er or DV. æ
nee a © V7 rs RE
ee Droict du denier, The tenth penie, or pen-


Droiét de Chemage. The paffage-toll, er, through- |


. areexempted , for


Droit de faultrage; ou fautrage

ÿ À arm fee, due vpon each head of cattell that runmes
© inthe common medowes, or pa ofa Mannor; In
| Sieu whereof a beardfinan is maintained, to keepe the
» ground in good order, c> to


DRO


niworth,of all mines mettalls mineralls and other (ex.

re got witbin ground,througbout

all France,due unto the King; alfo,th’ Admiralls tenth

part,or fare in all hipwracks,prizes, conquelts, &c,

made at fea,

Droiét de tiers denier. The third pennie, er part of
the price giuen for an inberitance Roturier, or Bour-


) delier,due, in fome places,unto the Land-lord.


Droiét de dixiefme. Looke Dixiefme.
iétdomainer. The Priniledge a Lord Iuflicer .
bath, to right bim{elfe by execution, without any for-
mer proceeding ,in cafes that concerne bis auncient de.
maine, or the cuftomarie duties thereto belonging.
Droict de doublage. Looke Doublage.
Droiét de douziefme. An yearely rent of 12.4. due
by euerie affranchifed inbabitant of Henault vnto the
Earle thereof,in acknowledgcment of bis former thral-
dome,and in thankefilne(Je for bis new-got freedome.
Droiét pr onde The fie i pr
money paied before! an Office, which after the
barque at 9 chapman would refisfe , as too
leere,
Droiét d’ Entrage. Entrage; a fee due for th’en-
trance of marchandifé into the Hanens, andwalled
townes of the kingdome ; alfo, an Income payable toa
Leffor at th entrie of the Leffee. :
Droiétd' Entrée. Looke Entrée ; Alfo,bal fe a crown
due to eucrie Treafurer and Genevall of the Finances
(befides their ordinarie wages) for refidence, euery day
they meet, and fit in their Courts about the Kings bufr-


neffe.
Droiét d'efcas. The tenth pennie of the value of mone-
ables which are left by a freeman vnto a iner
within Seclin, and Baflée fous Lifle; due unto the
common Treafurie of thofe townes.

roiét d’efchats,&Tavernes. À certaine Impofiti-
on upon wines that are fold by retaile, & in Tauernes;
(from which all Priefls beneficed within Bourdeaux-
as much as grew in their owne


rounds,glebe, er Prebendaries.)
Dro d'Efcheance. Eftheatage..


Droi


towne,
Droiét d'Eflongne. A duetie,or fine,paiable(inBrit-
taine)by the heire,or fucceffor of adeceafed tenant vn-
tothe Lord,under whofe Cenfiue he heldsand enioyed
land at the time of bis death : And this isa penniéPa-
rifis,or two,or tweluve; or more or LefJe,according to the
annuall value of the land , and according to the cu-
‘ome, fenerall,im feuerall places.
roiét dEftablage. That which in our law is cal-
led Stallage ; or a fee taken by Lords , of Marchants,
for permitting them to open,e> fell their wares in their
Fatres,and Markets ; alfo, Stablage,or , that whith is
aied for the handing of a borf in a fable.
roict d'Eftallage. Stalla


Droiét d'Eftallonnage. She Royaltie, or Priuiledge


d Efchevinage, Power to incerporate a


it d'Eftellage. Stallage,


of affigning,and affixing of publicke weights,and mea-


tthe beafis at firft
in be not after changed. = ;
Droit de ferrage. Aprisiledge whereby fome fpeci-
all officers, and. of Court a 0
es


Original from


TEE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


DRO


horfes fhod at the Kings charge; alfo,acertein fee due
tothe Cutters of the mint. }
Droit de feftage. An yerelie dutie payable unto cer-
tein lords for euery ridge,roofe;or boufetop within their
dominion ; alfo, the feafts that are due by fome Prelats
unto their (bapters.
Droid de fin, The fame (in the later part.)
Droiét de feurmariage ; as, Droi& deformariage,
Droit de foire, & marchez : The royaltie, or priui-
ledge,ofboulding a faire, or keeping markets within a
mans owne territorie (originally of the Kings grant.)
Droits de fondalité. The rights, or royalties which
are Se unto the foile,c belong euer vtnothe lord
therzof.
Droit de forage. A certein fee,or part, out of wines
that are fould,belonging to the lords of the Iurifdittion,
or place wherein they are fould: by the cuflome of Ami-
ens, and of Beauquefne, it 4 two pots on euery fingle
veffell,er bottome thats retayled ; and belongs to the
lord bigh,meane, or low luflicer:by the cuftomes of Te-
roanne, it à alfo two pots upon exery velfel thats fould
ingroffe,and belongs to the Bifhop: In Beauvois,there
in xx. d. for euery veffell fould in groffe, and xvj.d.for
euery one retailed in the town, paied unto the Bifbop of
__ that Sea: And by the cuftomes of Ponthieu a Lord of a
- füile,that hath but low lurifdittion, may take two pots
_ of euery barred velfell thats broched upon bis foyle, or
within the limits of his authoritie; In other places, o-
{


Het à
Droiét de forban.The royaltie,or power of banifhing
an offendor out of bis territories. L
Droiét de formariage. The halfe, or third,or (as the
cuftome 1s)other yer ofa villens fubflance,due unte bis
_..landlord,or the lord of the lurifdiétion wherin be lines,
if be marrie a woman thats free,or a forreiner; this,
although be baue leaue to doit , for otherwife be loofés
__ fixtie fhillings more : In old time baftards ,and firan-
ers,who maried out of their owne condition were
$3 vato this penalty ; Now thofe in moft places, and
thefè in (ome, are priuiledged. |
Droiét de fouage.[himney-pence;or,an yearelie tax
leuied in old time by fome fiupreame Lords upon euery
chimney ,or fire,kept within their territories:1n Charles
the fifis time it was foure pound Tour. and [ome tooke
- foure bufhels of Oats ; others bread ; and others other
things:the Blacke Prince would baue exafteda franc
- of euery fire kept in Aquitaine; which bred bim great
~. mifchiefe (fayes a Frenchman :) Since thofé times the
Tailles bane fucceeded thy taxation inmoft nee


de 2°
Droiét de The fee thats due for baking ia


4 common Quen ; the fine paied by vaffals or te-»
mee ota i ord ny a


Droit detreangs One hog, er meet se
mafler waters and forrefis of Aub and
, cen ref te pad slg ja
; i


Droit de Gabelle de fel; Th’impoft,or gabell of falts
~ See,Gabelle. : 1. x
 Droiét de Gabellede vins. Thimpoft of wines due
tothe duke of Buillon.
 Droiét de gambage.Fowre bottles of beere upon eue-
rie brewing, due vnto diners Lords within the county
iS. te o |
Gants, A paire of gloues.er inlieuthere-
or lefJe according to the cuflom by
of all bus firft fermices, vato


4


DR


tbe Lord Cenfucl,or of the fiyle; Seek,Droi&t de ven:


tes &
: Droi
on,


ñ


ants.
de garde, Soueraigne patronage, or prote£ti-


Droiét de garde noble. Thewardfbip of gentlemens
lands held in Capite, or by knights D de by tbe
pap LTÉE re the king,or lords,of whom
are
Droit de gi tc. Power to lie at the boufe of a tenant,
vaffall , or fiubiett in paffing along by it ; due to the
en to the Queene ; (though fome dukes,and
earles haue bad it at the abbayes, monaferies with-
in their territories ;) now the great Bifpops | and Ab-
bots,by an yearelie allowance in money,baue got them
pue difpenfed withall,
roict de garene. Free warren ; or,a libertyto bunt
all ouer the grounds of his fubieéis, or vaffals,
Droit de Grarie. The Kings fee out of euerie fale
of wood made inhis fubietts forref's ; due vnto
him for the luflice done, and good order kept, within
them,by bis officers; thereby alfo,be challenges a part,


or property in part,of the demaine,and renenues 1here-
0,


' Geyas the cu


: Droi&de


nine pence”
in Norman-


roict de greffe: Sixtie three {hillings
Tour.due “es king vpon a fale p pus.
die,and elfewbere.
roiét de gruerie: The brow/age,or pawnage of ome
woods; belongs to the lords that bane high lurifaiélion
ouer their owners ; or as Droiét de grurie.
Droiét de gruric. (onfifts in the fines and amercia-
ments leuied,@ in the confifcation of tre{pajfing beafts,
within forefis and belongs unto the Kjng. See Gru-
rie, /
Droiétde guerre: Feud; or the libertie which one
fübieëthad,in old time , to make warre vpon another
whom be bad firft defied.
et, Calite-gardor Caftle-ward ; wheres
unto the vaffals of divers lords, that baue Caftles , are
bound(intime,or expettation,of war)by their tenures;
Jet ave they not bound to doe this feruice at any other
place then the Caftle whereof they bould ; nor to doe tt
there at, if it be very ruinous untill it be repaired :alfo,
the watch which a vaffall, inbabiting a frontire, or fea
coafi,is tied to keepe ordinarily, once a moneth; in Leu,
or default whereof be paies bis lord v.s.Tour. a time ;
or an yearelie quantitie of corne , or number of bens,
flame ofthe place is,er as they can agree.
Droiét d' hallage. Halage ; the toll due to a lord by
thofe,that fell wares in the common. balls of townes,
ie the king bath licenféd him to keep faires, or
mmariets. 4 \
Droiét d'harenc.A certéin number of berrings,bere-
tofore due euery lent unto th officers of the Chamber of
accompts;who at this day baue, in lien thereof, anyere-
lie allowance in money,
d'Haubert. A certeine priniledge whereof
there are many ie moft of bigh lurifdiétion, en.
ioyed by diners lords of Normandie. -
it d'Haultban. Anyearelie tax ofvj.s. Parifis,
ied, for the king of euery baker, and fome other Aru-
eg are Paris.
roiét d'Herbage.Herbagesor the liberty fome bane
to graze their cattell in other mens woods.
Droi De à pire Cota aren
‘as the cuflome is) payed by a poore Cottager, or co
f unto Seid that bath bi gene ordi


+ Ginn oner bim, for euery fheep be bath, if be haue not a-


bone tenne,or (as infome places) twentie..


Droiét


Original from


THE: OHIO, STATE UNIVERSEHY


a a - —_ ,” PPT 7e = ie “fC Lt. ” ee
DRO DRO
Droiét d'herbage vif. 1/ be baue more then tenne,or belonging to that Abbey.
restée, then “ty ab pie tenth fheepe ;which 5s Dros doles Certaine dueties paied by a purcha-


chofèn by the Lord, or bis O
lensed at Midfiemmer ,


ers. Thefé dueties are


grow due from Chriftmas


Eue.
Droiét d'hommes, The Kings Prerogative, and
power of bis officers, to moderate,or diminifh th’excef-
fiue taxes laied, by mefne Lords, in the iurifdiétion of
Tours, upon therr villeines | whom otberwifè they
might tax at pleafüre.
Droiét d'hoftelage, The rate Marchant-firangers
are at,in fome parts of France, for their wareboufes;
; and which, if they bold them,but a night, they L jf a
- whole yeare, they doe but pay; alfo,as Pains d’hofte-
| lage ;1n Hoftelage.
Droiét de lallage. One,two, or three pintes (as the
cuftome is)of wine,taken by a Lord upon exerie Poin=
fon retailed within bis iurifaittion,
Droiét d’ Indemnité. Looke Indemnité,
Droiét d'Inquant. Five in the bundreib, due to the
King in [ome parts of Provence.
roict d’Inteftat. A priviledge which the next of
bloud hath(tn fome places)to enter onthe poffe/fions left
by bis rc kinfinan.
Droiétd'Inveftifon. The right of InneRure of Pre-
lates,@rc,due unto the Prince.
Droiét d’ Mué. The cuflome due for the tranfporta-
tion,or exportatio of marchandife,érc,out of the land;
alfo,the rights, fine,or fernices due unto a mefne Lord
upon bis tenants alienation, or leaning of bis tenement
unto another.
Droid de luréc. A duetie, or fine levied yearely by
th’old Earles of Champagne, upon all ther fubreëts,
and vaffalls ; viz.6.d. in the pound for mouables, and
2. d, for encrie pounds worth of tmmoxeables ; yet
might the richeft be quit for 4.s. fterl. yearely ; others
not under 12.4, At this day the King, and other Lords
of Iurifdittion take this duetie,in fome places, of their
Burge(Jes,or freemen,
Droit de Levage. An Impojition of three bufhells,
and three quarters,or 15.s.Tour. upon enerie boatfull
of falt tvan{ported: In fome parts of France fn within
Anjou,and le Maine) tis alfo, a pennie
pipe of wine, load of corne, érc,and a balfé-pennie for a
Sheepe,bog crc,due unio a Lord of Iuvifdidtion,if they
baue bene within bis libertie eight dayes together be-
€ their fale,or tran(portation.
iét de Liage. Hoopage; or a fee due unto fime
Lords upon euerie hooped veffell of wine which their


vafalls bauer fell.
E/eheatage 5 the vight
is tenant,dying with-


Droiét de ligne eftcinte.
which a Lord bath ia the land of his
out beires of bis bodie,or bloud,
Droiét de litige.The right of ion to a Bene-
fice,by a Lord, while bis va (falls ave at fuit for it ;was
the Dukes of Normandie now tis the Kings ; fome bold
it 10 be rather a receiuing of the fruits, & profits ther-


fer vnie the Lord Cenfuel, whe in receining them
ints bim poffeffionof the land be bath bought; (They
€ commony as much as the Ventes, and goe toge-


ther)

Droiét de maille d'or. A golden halfe-penie due, vn-
10 the Duke of Nevers, by the Prior of $.Privé.fir the.
Faire be keepes in that place.

Droiét de Mainbournic. Soueraigne patronage, or


ote (tion.
Droit de Maire,& Communauté. The priuiledge

bauing being, or belonging 10,4 Corporation.

roiét de Manée de {el.4 certain quantitie of falt,
upon euerie borfe-load thereof entring into Bourges,
and of euerie one that fells any within Bourges; taken
by th’ Abbot, and Couent of S. Sulpice; Looke Ma-
née.
Droiét de Manteaux. 15 20.5. fterl. ayeare ; and be-
longs both to euerie Secretarie of the borfe,and (vown
of France, that takes wages , and unto thofe (run
ques ef Parliament which are ofser fir the Church,

ict de Marc. The Prouof of the Mints fre vpon

euerie Marke,or balfe pound of gold, filucr, or Billon
thats coined ; Looke Marc.
Droiét de Marchage. The Common of pafluve which
the inhabitants of one Iurifaitlion,Parifh, Vilage, er
Manner, bane over all the gronnds belunging 10 ano-


ther.
Droi& de Marché. The royaltie of bauing or keepin
a Market within bis territorie ; gest à bord
Chattelain ; and fometimes is conferred by the King om
meaner Lords of Iurifdittion,
Droiét de Marciage. Js, euerie thirdyeare, all the
profit of natural fruits, as bay.e>cjana the belfc of all
otheys,as wine,corie, ec,due, within Bourbonnois,
vato a Landlord,in lieu of bi: whole rent; tis alfo due,
as a fine,upon enerie change of Lord and tenant.
Droiét de Marque. Power toarrefi the bodie; Med
Seife the goods,of another ; graunted bythe King, ard,
mn old time, ginen by the Parliament againft a flranger,
or forreiner. 4
Droiét de Mefurage. Th’appointing,or proportioning
of meafures in a territorie; belongs to ibe Lord therof ;
- alfo,toll-corne,and tollafalt ; adipifid upon enery Sep-
tier of either.
Droiét de Minage. rhe toll due unto fome Lords,up-
on euerie Mincef core thats meafured within their
Jurifdiétions. han
* Droit de Moiffon, A certaine quantitie of cone due
Jéarely,vato the King out of the towne, and Iurifdiëti-


en of Bourges,

Droi& denen An Aid, on Subfidie of 12.4.
paid,each third sre peat hoxfholder within Nor-
mandiewntoibe Duke ra now)ibe King, on conditi-
on that the money of the countrey be not altered: fiom
thisyare all CE EN 5 beneficed men; Gentle-


pue the fit lafis. à > men ; widowes that baue not aboue 2.s.yeavelie reuc-
_ Droiétde loges. 4 certaine annual fee due vnto ewe, 07 4.5, in goods(befides their apparell,and boufe-
> Some Lords for the lodgings their vaffalls baue within | held-fiuffe)and diners ctbers,by then Charters,exemp~

their cal Slash Rath sof és SO | PRE Te 7 EE
) ét de ies. An yearelie 4 16. d fterl.le- | Dr e Monte n nage, Toll paied unto certaine
wied vato the Kings ufe vpen enerie Prouofifbipwith- | Lords by thofe that buy,andfell beafis, or olker mar-

ce wits Com ete fe ier and bete familie seater rte Es

| at PT serre eae farmed, and. | i Ses de Mentrouvage, The feme (falfe Prin
Bros c logues. A certain fe due, | Droid de Morte-meinthe right a Lord batbtothe


eflate of villeine dying without beire of bis bodiesand
no


Original from bs


THEOFIO+STATE UNIVERSEPY


DRO


no tenant in Common with any other of bis one condi-


tion,
Droiét de Mortuage. À mortuarie ; due toa Parfon
at the death of one of bis parifbioners ; Looke, Droiét
de Neufme.
Droiét de Moulage. Multure ; the fee, or toll, for
grinding, due vnto the Miller , or Lord of the Mull;
2 (by the cuftomes of Britaine) the fixteenth part of
the Corne that is to be ground,
Droiétde Moulture ; ou de Moulure ; the fame.
Droiét de Moutonnage : as, Droiét de Monte-
nage.

-Droiét de Neufiefine. A ninth part of th'yearelie
profits of fome bencfices in Britaine, demanded by the


ope.
Droiét de Neufme. 4 ninth of a third part of a de-
ceafed perfons moueables | due to the Parfon for bis
Mortuarie.
Droiét de Nommer aux Euefchez,& Abbayes du
Royaulme : Be/ongs to the king. :
Droiét de nopfages. The ke due to a Parfonfor a
mariage.
Droiét d'obliages. The fine due unto a Lord by bis
tenant who hath omitted,or forgotten to pay bis rent,or
yearelie duties at his day.
Droiét d'obole.Ahalfépennie inthe pound due tothe
King vpon all Obligations of money lent,and contr atts
- of fale,exceeding xv.li.Tourn.
it d’ oftizes.A certein number of hennes due e-
uerie yeare unto Lords from their tenants, in lien of
their Chimney-pence,or as a rent for their houfes.
Droiét de oublic.4 Douzain,or Sol in the mouth of
a Capon, payed, in fome places,as a rent.
Droiét de padventage. The right of common of pa-
€ in one, or more parifhes.


S
ét du paillé.The priniledge of theP -
ring a Pall due onely to if “apte at


5.
Droiét de pain de paniere.. 4 great wbite-loafe due
yerelie by the tenants of Saint Gondon fur Loire (be-
ides their Cens) unto their Lord.

roiét deparée. Acorrefpondencie beld berweene
Some neighbouring Lords, for the purfiang of one ano-
thers villeins into their feuerall territories ; thereby to
take from them the pretence,they would otherwife baue,
of being affranchifed by being got out of their lords do-


pondencie of lurifdiétion, agreed upon betweene a fpi-
rituall,and a temporall Lord alfo , the right ef com-
mon oh tne one anothers grounds.

Droiét deparnage. Pawnage ; or, (more generally.)
the profit made, or receiued by the lord of a for-
ref? for th'agifiment , laying,or feeding of fvine with
the malle, or of Cattell with the herbage, thereof.
Droiét de patronnage. The patronage,or aduomfon
of a ‘benefice either when a man,that giues land to the
Church, referues the feigneurie thereof ; or when the
founder of a Church conditions , that be and bis heires


minions.
Droiét de paria e.A perpetual affeciation,or corref


foal baue power to nominate, and prefent unto the Bi-
Shop a perjon capable of the benefice , whenfocner tis
vacant. LE


. Droiét de peage. A througb-toll or paffage-toll.
Droiét de Phe. A wight of fifbing,or libertie to
bin waters from which all others be refirayned.
de plaflage: A fee due,in fame places,by Mar-
chants and ware-{ellers, for the fhewing, and felli
their &


ities in the market €, oF j
fireetes,and for the roomes wherein La fem, and fell


vy


Digitized: by Eo. gle


DRO


them ; therein like our flallage.
oiét de poifage.Poifage ; or,a fée due in fome pla-
Ces,unto the king, for the weighing of wares in the Mar-
Dour Towne-boufe.
oict de police. Looke, Police.
Droiét de pontenage. Pontage ; paflage-toll at a
He SE > toll due for Marchandsze paffed ouer a
Ige. ;
Droiét de porte. certein dutie paied by the Scho-


* lers of Pavis,at their admiffion into colledges.


+ Droiét de preage.A priuiledge enioyed by fome lords,
to put, at certein times, and with fujficient gard, their
borfès and kine into their vaffals meadowes; for which
they are,at all times bound to find one that {hall keepe,
Da Le ie ue

roi ation. riniledge of being prefer-
red before “À bus ina ping no

» Droiétdepremice. Afheafé of corne,or ij. s.Tour.
and a lamb, ifthere be tenor more ; if fewer a pennie
for euery lamb,due vnto Parfons.

Droit de premices. The firfi fruits of Ecclefafticall


linings.
Droiét de prefence. Halfé a Crovone due unto enerie
Treafurer,e> generall of the Finances(befides their or-
dinarie wages)for refidencesor euery day they meet and
\ fit about the kings bufine[[e.
Droict de Preuofté:The priuiledge of hauing a Pro-
uofl vader him to keepe bis Courts, and leuic bis tolles,
rights, fines , &-c ; (belongs unto a Lord Baron, or
Chattelain that banc lurifdiction; ) alfo, a paffage
toll,
Droiét de quart denier du prix,ou de l'eftimation..
The fourth pennie , or part,of the worth of an Inberi-
tance Cottier, due vnto Landlords upon any alienati-
on thereof.
Droiét de quatrieme.The fourth pot of,or pennie ta-
* en for, Wine,Cyder , and other ordinarie drinke vetai- |.
 led;due in fome places unto thoking; e firft graunted,
for wine, unto Charles the fifi at a parliament helde
m Paris.
Droiét de quenaife. The right of Eftheatage,
sohereby an Inheritance Roturier falles into the Lords
hands, if bis tenant leaue no lawfullifue of bis bodie
bebind him : € Bretton. >
Droiét de quint. The fift part of the price of land
fouldsbelongs to the Lord of the foile upon the fale ther-
of, and 1s paied fometimes by the feller , in fome places
by the buyer, and in fome equally by both.
oitdeRegale : Seeke, Regale.
Droiét de pr eft deu pour infinuer en
luftice vn tranfport d’heritage, de cens, ou repte:
ou pour Free d’une faifine, € Ragueau.
Droiét de Regiftre. A foure-peanie dutie paied by a
tenant Coruer vaio bis Landlord, when be puts bim in
[Jeffion of bis tenement,
Droidt deRegiftre,ou Contentor.A certein fee due
vato th'audienciers of Chanceries;(viz.iiij.s.flerling v-
euery Charter. ‘
Droit de Relevoifon.4 yeares rent in fome cafes,in
others vj. d. for each pennie of yearelie ut : d by
tenants Cenfiers vato their Lord when they jirft enter
into their tenements: Looke, Relevoifon.
Droit de Relief. Reliefe ; a fine due to the Lord of a
Mannor upon the change of a tenant which houlds of
bim in fee :by the cuflomes of Amiens it is 60, s.Pari-
fis for ewerie Noble fee held by a full homage and x. li.


Paris, for eerie one held in Peeredome : by the cu-
flomes of Peronne,the yeres reuenue after tbe change,
; or


Original from


THE QHIO-STATE UNIVERSIY,


or the third part of the Kenenue of the three yeares
next before it, at the Lords choice : y the cuftomes of
Valancai,S.Aignan,azd Selles,xij.d, for euerie pen-
nie of yearelie Cens: And by the cuflomes of Paris,
and (almofl) all other places, the Lord may chufe whe-
ther be will take a yeares Reuenue, or awhole Summe
at once offered unto bim by the Tenant,
Droiét de Relods. xx d. Tour. payable by a purcha-
fèr vnto the Landlord upon euerie pound due to biw
for the Lods and Ventes,
Droiét de Rendage de chafcun ouvrage; containes
both the Kings Right of Seigncuriage,and the Majfler
of the Miats Braflage. ;
Droiét de Reprefaillesou Repreflailles. Libertie,or
Power to take,in time of warre,a ftranger prifoner.and
to keepe bim,vntill he baue repayed vato bis Taker the
ranfome be payed formerly, or fatufied him for goods
taken from bim by one of bis countreymen ; Loone Re-
reflailles.

Droict de Requart. A Quarter of a Quarter of the
price,or worth of an laberitance Cottier,due unto the
Landlord vpon the alienation thereof ; (abolifhed by
Some late Cuflomes.) À
Droiét de Requint. A fift pennie of the fift pennie of
the price,or value of an Inheritance feodal, due in all
alienations unto the Lord feodal ; but abolifhed, by the
cufiomes of (ome places,as the Requart.
Droiét de Reflort. Looke Reflort.
Droiét de Refue. An auncient Tax, or Impofition of
iiij d. in the pound for Marcbandift,and x s. Tour. for
euerie Pipe of wine, brought into, or fent out of, the
kingdome.
Droiét de Retenué.A Priniledge of fome Landlords;
who may vedeeme,within fortie Jeyisibe lands which
their tenants baue fold, paying for them vnto the pur-
chafèr, ouer and befides his lawfüll cofis and charges,
as much as he gaue.
Droiét de Retiers; as Droi& de Reventes.

roiét de Reventes. A fine due, befides the Lods
and Ventes, unto the Lord Cenfuel, by a Purchafer,
who buying an Inheritance thats charged with Cens,
Po to acquit the feller je the payment


roiét de Reventons. The fame. : ! ”
Droiét de Reverfion. The right of Reuerfion; power
to take backe , and reunite unto the demaine of the

_ Crowne, fitch lands as baue beene diuided from it by
Dowers, younger brothers Portions, exc ; as alfo to

Seize on Duchies, & Earldomes that fall among daugb-
ters.
Lee de Rivage. Shorage,or Boatage; the Cuflome,
or Toll for wine, or other wares, put upon, or brought
LOTS water,by boats,

Droiét de Robbes de Pafques, Gowmes at Eafier,
due vato the Officers of the chamber ve Accompts.

: Droi& de Rodage. 4 certaine To exatted fome
countrey Lords vpon euerie Wayne that paffes(through
the high way) by their Seigniories whether it be lo,

+ no; for if it be,they will alfa be payed for the Load,
Droi&tde Rofes. A certaine quantitie of Rofés, or a
| + fee in lieu of them, belonging to the Officers of the

wey Accompts. +

: Droit de Rotiage. Wheelage ; a certaine Toll,or Im-


| pofition upon wine fould in groffe,and carried away in
Carts; ied freee er bee Jar to
turne : aces,a Lord Terrageut hath alfo, as


M, 224


_eonbelae,a fhe euerie load of his tenants
core towards the caning of hs Testage ono is


Barne, whereto by couenant,or cuflome they are bound
to lead it,

Droiéts Royaux. The Royall Prerogatiue, or Priui-
ledges ; fuch as be the Protection of Vniuerfities, and
Cathedral Churches (whofe Officers, Members Mrni-
flers, Seruants, and Vaffals are not to bee tried before
any other Iudges then the Kings) Exemption from Ex-
communication, both for bimfelfe, and bis Officers (by
veafon of their Offices;) Power to probibit the publita-
tion, and execution of Admonitions, Interdi€iions, or
Suspenfions denounced againfl the Prelates, or Officers
of his Kingdome; Abfolute,and onely power, te furgine
offences committed againft the Publicke ; to recall the
Banifhed, releafe the Gallyflaue, and fice other mens
Villaines ; to gine Protections general Paffeportsyand
Saféconduéts ; to punifh Traitors, Rebels and Coyners ;
to gine Letters of Mart, and Reprifall; of Nobilitati-
on, Legitimation,and fill reftitution; to raife new Cuf~
tomes, and Taxes ; graunt Faires,and Markets; found
Vainerfities ; erect Corporatiens,and new Offices;make
all kind of Knights;to enter into Warre,Peace,League,
or Truce with an enemie ; to create of a(baftellcnie,a |
Baronie, or Countie 5 and of thus a Marquifdome,or
Ducbie; to acknowledge no Superiour in temporall
matters, nofubiettion unto the Lawes Imperial; gene-
rally, to exercife,and execute,all Soucraigne and Mo-
narchall Furifdiétion, 4
Droiét defaintre; belongs unto fome Lords;who may
thereby eat, with (onely) their cattell, all the waft, un-
tilled, fluble, or bufhie grounds that be within their


Manors.
Droiét de faifine, The money due vato the 10. Cen-
fuel,and of the Soyle,by a Purchafer of an Fnberitance
Cenfuel, when be is infeifined, and put into poffeffion
thereof (by the cuftomes of Paris it 1 xij d. Parifis.) |
roict defalage. A certaine quantitie of Salt due
vato the Abbot of Bourgmoien within Blois, upon e-
uerie boat that carries any into the bauen,or vader the
bridges of that Towne.
Droiét de Salin. as Gabelle de Sel.
Droiét de Salvage. A tenth part of goods which
were like to perifh by fhipwracke , due unto him that
faues thei


A

roiét de Saunclage; the fame. qBreton.
Droiét de Sauvelage ; the fame,
Droiét de Seel. The Priniledge of baning a Seale,
wherewith bis vaf[als are to flampe all their con-
tratts,
Droiét de Segorage. A certaine dutie,or fee, belon-
Sing to the Lord of the IfleSavari within the Bayliwike
of Touraine. ;
Droiét de Segreage ; the fame.
Droiét de Scigneuriage. whereby defeltine coyne is
forfeited unto the (vowne ; alfo, the right of coynage.ot
fee for coyning, due unto the King ; the firft is, the profit
he makes, in generall, b the defect of the coyne which
be authorifes ; the is (moft commonly)65 s.Tour.
vpo se jas: 8 paar NL d. upon a Marc of
ph eee eme c of Billon, er cour-

gvescollpayped.
iéts Seigneuriaux. Rents,Seruices Wardfhips,
sand all other Rights due,or Profits accruing,


| untoa Lord ont of the land that: held of bim; Looke
Seigneurial. ss ge
_ Droict de Sepulture. À Parfonsdutiesor fee, for the
! buriall of one of bis Parifbioners.
Oi de fixiefme; &, du fixiefne denier ; Looke
Sixich


Droiéts


Original,from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


€


3
Â


0


DR


Droiéts de Souveraineté. Looke Souveraineté.
Droiét de Stellage. Toll-corne,and Toll-falt ; a difh-
fill upon eusrie Septier of either fold within Buillon,
duevnto the Duke thereof. _ ‘
Droiét de Stippes,& nobis. #, in fime parts of Nor-
mandie,a pennie Tour. in other places ii) d, upon eue-
rie pound made of offers of the Kings Domaine


muable,due to the Officers of the Court of Accompts.
Droiét de fuitte de beftes. The power one batb,who
lets a beaft ont to balues, or hire, to challenge and [eixe
it, being fold,or palfed away, without his knowledge,by
him be let it unto, |

Droiét de fuitte de difine. A right, whereby a Lord
of tythe-grounds which bane kept; and wintered cat-
tell, whofe owners worke with them im the tythe


grounds of another Lord, may lawfully take balfé of |—-


thofe tythes, when they are to be gathered; (The main-
taining of this unreafanable Right breedes many fuites
and quarrels; and therefore it might without wrong to
the Publicke,be (pared ; fayes Ragueau.)

Droict de fuirte de gens; as;

Droiét de fuitte de perfonnes ferves. The power
Some Lords haue to compell their.villaines, or others
that bold land of them by villenage,to refide and keepe


a continual fire, on their tenements ; from this Right |”


(which extends vnto their goods, or per{ons) all the In-
habitants of the Kings Torpnes within Berry, are ex-
empted.

Droiét de furie&. Power to adde unto the laft price
thats ee in a Pori[ale,or Outrope.

Droiét de Tabellionnage. The Priniledge of 4 Lord
Chattelain, or high Iufticier to make, and keepe under
bim a Notarie for the ingroffing of all deedes, and con-
traéts paffed within bis Inrifdittion; Looke Tabelli-


onnage. |
Drofit de Taille: The right of Subfidie, Tax, or Tal-
~ lage; belongs as well unto diners Lords,by the cuflomes
of their Manors, as unto the King; alfo, the Preroga-
tiue,or power to raifenew taxes (onely in the King.
Droiét de Terceau. .A certaine dutie taken by a
Lord at the Fatt, or other veffell of hisvalfals wine;
and to be payed unto bimfelfe, or bis Officer, before
the wine be dravone , or elfe the vaffall forfeits fixtie
- fols Tour. |
~ Droiétde Terrage. Fitld-Rent ; Conntrey-toll;Sceke


Terrage.

Droit de Thonnieu. #5 Droit de Tonlieu.

Droictde Tiers & danger. A third, and a tenth

Part, of the price Br which wood 1s fold in the woods,

and Le elonging to the Kings Demaine (efpeci-
- ally within Normandie ) duevato bim ; Looke Dan-


Droidt de Tiers denier, The third pennie of the price
giuen for the putchafe of am Inheritance 4 or
Bourdelier, due,in fome places, unto the


Droiét deTixage . Draggage ; or a toll, or fee for |


drazgace (of falt,or wine) due unto fome Lords.
Droiét de Tonlieu. Toll due to the Lord of a Faire,
~ or AMarket, for all kind of Marchandifé, and (zttell,


| bought and fold : (By the cuftomes of Boulenois it is


~ jij d. from the Buyer,and as much from the Seller of a

Hor, Ox, or Com; a pennie for a Sheepe, or Goat ;
ij d.for2 Hg, egal tuile, as the former, be-

iveene the Buyer and Seller, before Sunne fet.) -
Droi&ide Tonnelieu ; &,de Toulieu ; the fame.
Droiétde Traife, is iy d. Tour. le r the Kia
of excrie! of Marcbandife.

2 the Territorie gM


7 REXEL]


Digiti


Ni


ed by Go : gle


: Droiét de Venditions. The Toll which Lords of


- part of the Deere,or other gare.


Looke Trai, 4 |


DRO


Droiét de Traïéte de bleds. An Impojition of vij s. À
ffert. upon eucrie Tunne of wheat (ou ‘sinh À of all |
other sr of graine) tranfported out of the Realme. |
Droi de Traiéte foraine ; Looke Forain.
Droiét de Trainage,as Droiét de fuite de difme.
Droiét de Travers. Croffe-toll ; paffage-toll ; or,
through-toll.
Droïét de Treu. The Toll, or Cuffome due vnto Lords
for Salt, or Marchandife,carried through their domi-
nions ; and generally,any Toll,
Droiétde Treu accouftumé. A Priniledge of the
Lords high Iuflicers in the Countic of Burgundie;
where if a bealt be taken, or killed in any one of their
dominions, it muft be brought, and ginen vito bim, or
10 fome one of bis Officers for him, whofoeuer the hunter
be,or from whence focuer the game was chafed.
de treziefme. The thirteenth pennie,or part,
of the money for which land is fold, payable unto the
Lord of whowtis held in fee by the Seller(vale(fe there
be @ conenant to the contrarie; ) alfo, the thirteenth
Sheafe of a crop, due vntog Lord that hath field-Kent,
or countrey-toll. TA !
Droict du treziefime denier sthe fame (in the fir{t
art.)

roict de trezielme de Vin. The thirteenth pot, or
pennie of the price of wine retayled , due, in {ome pla-
ces,unto the Lord of the Soyle,or of the luviftiftion.
Droiét de Troufle. À certaine number of Geefe, or
dutie payed in Geefé, within the lurifdidtion of Crofles
neere unto Bourges.
Droiét de Truage. #,Droi& de Tren.


Markets,and Faires take for the fale of wares , and
marchandife therein,
Droiét des Veneurs. The Huntfinens, or Hunters,


roiét de venterolles . A certaine fine due to a
Landlord by the Purchafer that undertakes to dif:
charge the feller of all fines : By the Cuftemes of Lagni

(within the lurifdittion of Meaux) it 14 xx d, in euerie
pound which he gixes ; by thefe of Scnlis,the fixteenth
part of the Droié de ventes ; by thofe of Amiens,the
thirteenth pennie of the Trerziefine ; and by thofe of
Doulens, the fixt of the Sixiefime: By ihefe of Cler-
mont it is called Reventes; and by thofe of Arthois
it 5 as Droi& de Requint.
roict de ventes, 1 (molt commenly) the twelfth part
of the price of land Cenfuel, due to the Lord of whom
it is beld;and payable, in {ome places, by the Purchafer,
in others by the Seller, and in others betweene them
both : (The French Lawes and Cuftomes ofien ioyne,
with this, another dutie called Lods, or Lots; which
is ener as much as this ; both togetber (wallowing vp a
partof that which is ginen forthe purchafé.) —-
Droiét de ventes,& Gants. A twelfib part (as be-
‘and xv d.(by the cuftomes of Tours)or x d.(by the
£ nr fora paireofgloues.
ét de ventes, & honneurs. ‘The fixt, or other
pre the cuftome is) due onely by the Purchafèr.
oiét de ventes & ifluës. is alfa fixt partor iij s.
iiij d. inthe pound ; (whereof, asifit were Lods and


Ventes,thereis buthalfé meaat for Ventes.)

pi dudes talline coke We Ofer Fa
ts d, in old tir tbe s of the

cpu al ee


~ ~ =
Originalfrom


THE QHIC-STATE UNIVERSILY


3
\
4


GE, he.


‘
S
:


?
—

+18:
-æ


to make Liuerie and Seifin vn-
in a few places to the feller, in
enfier,or Foncier; alfo,the fine,or
‘d for Liuerie and Seifin made by bim,
weuës. Authoriti¢ to make windowes in o-
houjes, for the commoditie and aduantage of
iT; oF to damme vp {uch as hinder, or annoy


thbour.
de Veufve. Looke Veufve.


L Droiét de og An cftate for lifein ; orlibertie


~~


* to eniay a thing during bis Life. .


Droiét de vignages. A certainc toll, or fee,taken by
Lords of Marchants,or Drouers,e>c, which with their
commoditics,or cattell pale by their territories.
Droit de ville clofe. Libertie, or power to inclofe a
Towne with walls,or fortifie it with Rampiers, procu-
ved from the Prince,
Droiét de Vin,ou de Vins. A fine of iij s. upon e-
uerie alienation of an Inberitance Cenfuel exceeding
xx s, due, befides Lods and Ventes, unto the Couent
of Farefmontier,by the inbabitants of louy(ia the In-
vi(diction of Meaux.)

roiét de mettre prix au Vin. A Priniledge which
4 Lord, bigh or meane luflicer, bath ouer all thofé that
retayle Wine, or fell it by the pot, withinbis lurifdiéh.
on ; alfa, the fee thereto belonging; which is,a loafe of.
bread,and alot of the wine deliuered unto bis Officers


asa sab of it, :
Droict de Vins & ftippes. 45 s. Tour. wpo euerie
Sale of wood within tbe Dominions of the Duke of
Buillon, payable unto the officers of the forreft-out of
which the fale is made,
Droi& de Vins & ventes. A Iallée fill of wine,due
toa Lord Cenf{uel upon the fale of land beld of bim,e-~
uer and befides the twelfth part of the price for the
Ventes, and payable by the Purchafer.
Droiét de Vinade. The vft, and worke of two yoake
ef Oxen, or ofa Cart, all Vintage time , due vaio the
Lords of fome Places, from their val[als and tenants,
Droiét de Vinage. Twelue pence, due to the Off-
gers of the Court of Aides, upon 4 pound comming in
for Wine (onely in fome cafts;) Alfo, the portion of
Wine due out of a Vineyard unto a Lord Cenfier, in
lieu of bis Cenfive, and to bee allowed him at the
bead of the Vatt, before the tenant can ( lawfully)
draw any Wine out of it; At Angiers, and im other
places, this dutie x turned into a pecuniarie,and yere-
lieCens. | |
Droict de Vinenote. as Droié de Vivelorte.
Droiét de Vingriefine. The twentieth part of Wine
thats made,and Corne thats gottenseucrie yeare, payed
_ ia Dauphiné, -axd el/ewhere , towards the building,
< Sirti sand reparation of the wals of Towns, Holds,
an é :


— aItles,
-Droiét de Vivelotte. The Dower, or thirds due to


the widow of a Cottier,or tenant of Mainferme,
- Droiét de Viverotte. The fame.
© Droit d'extreme Vnétion. The fee due to the Prieft
Droite Voirie, he right of uflic
tde Voiric. The ri Iuflice; or power to
dein «Vesta oy f


üade, The labour of two Oxen,or aft of


certaine dayes in Summer by


D R ©.


Droiét: m. éte:f. Right, ireight,dirett ; leueleuens
iuft,lawfill r'eafonable ; d'a ges +
Inteftin, ou boyau droit. The fireight gut, or arfès


ut. |
Mufcle droiét. The name of one of the feure principall
mufcles in the thigh. ;
Pied droitt.The laume,or laumbe of a dore chimney,
window,érc. .
‘A droiét fil. Directly forward, right forth, freight


on.
- Maldroi&.Vnapt,unwieldie, vnbandfome vncome- |
lie in euerie thing be does.
Droict.(Adverbially) as, Droict en ce lieu, inft bere,
in this verie place,or,precifely in this place.
‘A droidt.as, A droié fil. ;
Parler adroit. To fpeake diftinéily, or to the pur-


3


ofe.
rene ceft homme à droiét. Deale iufily with this
wan; vfe bim indifferently,or well,

*A droiét;ou à tort. By booke,or crooke; byright or by
wrong, one way or another. |

Audroiét d’entre eux, Right ouer againfi them.
Jos droiét. Right forth, fireight on, direëtly for.


ward.

Droiétement. Streightly, dire}, rightly ; ingily, up-

rightly, rightfully.
roictement à l'heure. uff at the time, at the ve-
ry houre appointed,

Droicture: £. Right,reafon,inflice,direEineffe,impartia-
Btiesvprigbtne[]e; alfd,a Right or due,or,the Sper
duties belonging to a Landiord, ec ; alfosa full, or iuft
prie of land,

roicture de Patronnage. Patronnage,or the Right
of Prefentation to a Benefice.
Relever droicture. as Droiéturer.
Qui d'honneur n a cure honte eft fa droiéture:
‘Prov. Hee that for bonowr doth not care, diferace be-
Sineares him, fhame’s bis fhare. ; >

Droiéturé: m.ée. fThaë hath payed bis Reliefè and all
other, the rights,or duties of Tenancie..

Droiéturer. À new tenant, 6r vaffall to doe bis Lord all
vight,and pay bim all the rights belonging to bim.

Droiéturier: m. ere: f. luftrightfull, fincere,vaparti-
all,intire,incorrupt, upright; alfo, feuere, firiét, accor-
ding to the letter of the Law; alfo,diveti,or next. .
Diane Seigneur. mans true,right,or lawfull


Seigneur droiéturier. as Seigneur feudal.
oicturierement. Intl, rightfully, incorruptly, up-
rightly unpartially ; firiéthy feucrely.
Droiffer. as Drefier, To direct; erect; infirudt.
Droit,& Droiturier. See Droit, Droiâurier.
Droitier, Right-banded ; alfo,as Droï@turier. :
Drolatique: com.waggifh,knanifh.full of rye,pleafant, |
merrie, Sport full, as aes À
Drole: m. A good fellow,boone companion, merrie grig,
pleafant wag; one that cares not which end goes for-
y cpa gies goes. m aidé
roler. To play the wag; to palle away the time, as a
. go ‘piled ter, à ile 3 alfo, 10 beat found-
olerie : f. Rye, waggerie, good roguerie ; « merrie
. Prank, plant ard knauifh parts good-fellorfbip ;
See crie.


+ m. À Drumbler,Carauell,er fucb like fall,

and fwift velfellufed si 2 À

1 on a gr tele great beafl of bur-
then, like a Camell ; verie fwift & bar die in 7


Originalfrom
'
LTHAOHIO!STATEUNIVERSITY


€


om


“Ss


-


Jet the rh


| Drylle: £ The Majle,or Akorne of the (als Oake.
e


DRY


‘| of little charge to bim shat vfétb bim.
| Diomille: f. .4 tile ffh caught (all Summer long,


but feldome during Winter) in the rivers about Li
ons.

Dromon. as Dromant.

Dronine: f. 4 pade,

Dronos, donner dronos. Kvockes, thumpes, raps,

> thwacks. qRab, "F

Dropace. À depilatorie; an oyntment,or medicine to
take away baire. Rab,

Dru: m. drué: f. Thicke,clofe together, full of many one
by another;copious, plenteous. 5. :
Oifeau dru. 4 full-fledg’d bird, a young bird readie


to fly.
Druément. Thickly,many together ,clofe one by another,
plenteoufly,copioufly. |
Druge : À as Trufte; a daintie, round, and ruffet root,
thats all inclofed within, but not on any part fafiened
al the ground ; by the bulking out whereof tis
M


| Drugé: m, ée: f.wet,thronghly moiftened, ;


Drageon: m, A little branch,twig,or fprig.


À Drugeonnement. A bearing, or putting forth of final


branches, or twigs.


: Drugeonner. To beare, or put forth many final bran-


-_ ches,or twigs.


| Drugeonneux. Twiggie, [priggie, fall of finall bran-
r es.


+ Voilà que druge bien. (Spoken of a found
Shomer) this wets throughly.
ement. 4 Trucheman,or Interpretor. (v.m.)
:f a6 Drylle.
y


Dil. is fometimes (as an Article) fet Mafiuline
_. swords, which begin with a Confonant, and fignifie the
kinds,or fpecies of things ; as, du pain, du vin, &c ;
(then of little, or no fignification:) Sometimes it ferues
as a note of the Genitiue Cafe, unto Nownes of the #a-
ture afore{aid; and then fignifies of them; as,Le frui&
u iardin : Sometimes it does the Office of a Prepo
tion; and then fignifies, in the; as, Si i’ eufle.
commencement faiét cela; du temps du Roy Hen-
ry, &c; or, from the; as, I vient du iardin ; du
‘milieu d'eux ; or, by the; as; Il a efté baru du
= Maïftre.
Du moins. 44 the leaf.


sf cout. Throug ip.otterly altogether.
itation: f. Doubtfulaelfe, vacertainetie, fufbence,
thon.


Duc: m. A Duke, (when the French Kings had cha-
[ed the Romanes out of Gallia, and | fome of the
Prouinces thereof gouerned, vader the. our
certaine martial Commaunders tearmed Duces he),
wis altered but few of the auncient fafhions ¢
countrey, beftowed the fame Title (a little curtalled 4


Ja Françoife)on füch of their oven principall captaines


as they placed in the reomes of the others : At which
time Dukes were bat Officers,and Vaffalls ; and their
Funélions, and Fiefs remacable at the Princes plea
fhre,er determined with their lines ; bowfoener after-
“wards,they ufirped, firft, the Inheritance of, and then
@ Soueraignetie ouer , them both : Looke the word
mite ; wherein whatfrener is [aid of the ancient,or
moderne eftate of Prousciall)Earles agrees with that
of Dukes; with this onely difference,that,commonly,the
Title of Ditke m2s conferred on the move warlike, and
on the move ciusill, followers of Princes ; where


Comte i


ee eee


DVC


upon it is coniectured, that when both a Duke, and an

. Earle haue beene in one Towne , the one gouerned the
Seuldiors, the other the People.)

Duc: m. (i ala) the a Owle tearmed,a Horne-owle,
or Horne-coot ; of three kinds.

Grand duc. The great Horne-coot; 1 bigger then a

dd keepes alwayes in forrefis, and defert pla-

5,
Pere duc. is fomewhat leffe then the former : Both
of them be bairie-legd, and rough-footed; and bane
tufts of feathers ,on esther fide off heir beads, bearing
= A bornes; and now and then breath ont borrt-
skrikes.
Petit duc. The final! Horne-owle,or Horne-coot ; fha-
fed = pate leffe then, le Moyen duc.
oudrede duc. The name of a moft comfortable poa-
der, made of Aromaticall drugs,and fpices,

Ducal: : ale: £. Ducall, Duke-like ; of, or belonging,
toa Duke.

Ducat: m. A Dukedome,or Duchie. .

me : m. The coyne, tearmed a Ducket; wort vj s.
viij d.

Ducat d’Aragon; de Bolongne ; de Caftille ; d’
Efpaigne à deux teftes (the duckat thats currant
among vs) de Florence ; de Gennes; d’ Hongrie;
de Portugal; de Portugal à la longue croix; de’
Portugal à la petite croix ; de Portugal à la palme,
de Sicile, de Valence, de Venize ; Au forraine
coynes; of whofe value ( often changed by the French
Kings) no certaine interpretation can be given, other
then that they bold a rate much about v, or vj s. flerl.
the peece. .
Ducat Henry.A coyne of Gold worth vj d.flerl. more
then the ordinarie Crowne of the Sunne.

Ducaton. 4 final diakat,or balfe duckat.

Duché: m..4 Dukedome,a Duchie.

Duéteur. as Conduéteur ; x guide, leader érc.

goo com. Eafie tobe hammered, or beaten into thin

Les. 3

Dudepuis: Since, fishence,from that time.

Dueil: m, Dole, grief, forrow, heauineffe ; mourning,
wayling, moaning, lamentation ; alfo,mourning nade
or mourning attire; as, 1] porte le dueil; 4/0, a mour-
ner, or mourners, following a ceurfe to the grane ; as,
voila le dueil,or,le dueil pafle ; 4/0, a duello, fingle ,
combat.pr fight betwecne two. *

Apres tout dueil boit on bien: Prov. Drinke after
dole goes merrily downe ; or, they tiple now as much as
erfl th ted ;

Affez boit qui a dueil: Pro. Sorrow és diy, fay wesor,

- asinBoire. ;

Bon eft le dueil qui apres aide: Prov. That mour.
ning’s well beflowedthathelpes the mourner. .
Chacune vicille fon dueil plaind:Pro.See Plaindre.
De petit enfant pet oui: Pro. The death of little
ones is not much bemoand, anal

Duelle: £. The third part of an ounce.

Duire. To vfe,accuflome,enure; fifbion,traine vp, frame;

ad,induce,bring,unto.
Cela me duit, That is good, or maketh, for me ; that is
helpefitll anaileable,or commodious,unto me; in which
fence they fay; Vieilles debtes duifent: Prov. afça-
= voir; belpe the creditor,(but burt the debtor.)

Duifable: com. Conuenient, fit, for ones turne, auaile-

aa profitable, whereof good ufé, or great benefit,may
meet conuenient, fitting ; handfome,feeme-
lie, becomming, ;


Du-


re en eee i) Meee ER dd


ee


D, ii ie


Ts Lhe Saree


*


:


Duifible. as Duifable. _.
pr i winenee
aiming a LA

Duit: : acc éd, enured ; framed,


ed, trained vp unto; alfo, fitting, auaileable,


ient,good for,tothe purpofe.
Dui frame pres" fs make fit for bis purpofe,
tte: m.ée: f. Downie; of dovene fa as of,

’ with,downe.

Dun. 4 old French word fignifying a bill,or rocke; (and

"therefore the townes whofe names end in it haue, com-
monly,a rockie acce(Je,or feat.)

: £ Awaue,or furge of the fea; alfo,a Downe; a
Sandie banke,pr bill neere the fea; called fo, (at firfl by
the Flemmings) becaufe it refifis the violence of thofe
wanes; andvufed, moft commonly, in the plurall num-
ber, Dunes.

Duner. Te plaine, as a borfe, that neither baltetb out.
right, nor fetteth bis foot bard on the ground.

Dunes. Looke Dune.

Dunette:f. A Thrufh; alfo, à little downe, or fandie
bill.

Dunne: f. as Dune, ,

Duodene : m. as Douze-doigtier,

Dupe: f A whoope, or hooper; a bird that bath on ber
bead a great cref}, or tuft of feathers, and loues ordure
fo well,that fhe ener nefiles in it. |

Duplication: £ #5 Duplique.

Duplique: £.4 reioynder; or the fecond anfiver of a de-
Jendant. CAT

Duppe. as Dupe. ;

. Dupliquer. To double; af, to reiayne, or anfwere the

pent a hom of ; ‘

uel. Of whom, from whom whereof.

Dur. m. dure: f. Hard; fliffe,folide ; alfo,rough,barfh,
rude ; alfo,fturdie, fierce, cruell, difficile, rigorous, m-
flexible unmercifiull ; alfo,dull,groffe beauie, fottifh,or
{er of apprebenfion ; and hence ; à h

ur à l'efperon. Dull, fluggifh, beauie-mettled, that
will not be moned , nor flirred vp by any infligation.
Dure mete de la tefte. The outward skinne of the
braines.
Duretaye.asDuremere, |
Ouir dur. Te be thicke of heaving.
Tunique dure. One of the thin skins of the eye, the

ich it enuirons ; it comes from the dure mere, and

couers alfo the Opticke finew. - :

Durable : com. Durable, lafting , of long continn-
ance,

Duracines. The Peaches,Plummes,Cherries,erc, whofe

‘pulpe cleanes faft unto their flones ; à fo > Sich as

are of ahard, o7 firme pulpe , and thereby long-laf-
ting. '

Duraines. as Duracines.

Durant, (Particip.) During, lafling, continuing ; indu-
ring brooking, fiffering. 5


“Trois inois durant. Three monetbs together.
im,ie: f Hardened, fliffened. E
Tobarden, fife


se ag ces iours-I. During that age, in.
es.
| Due whiles that , whilome that , vatill


Eee


Durée: f. 4 during,a lafting,a continuance,


sr 2 durée. Eserlafimgnefe, perpetualae(fe,!long


_ lafling. ;
Dureines. as Duracines.
Durement.Hardly ; fireightly, fiffely ; harfhly roughly,


rudely; cruelly, fiercely,rigoroufly ; alfo,greatlyymain-
ly,extreamely, exceeding much;as, I] eft durement
ai des Scigneurs.


Durer.To dure,laft,continue indure abide remaine,per-


Silt ; alfo,to füflaine brooke, fuffer.
me à qui on ne peut durer. 4 froward, way-
lg > Jullen , barfh, rude, foure, vnfociable fel-


Ils onypien befoing que ie leur dure. y lives con-

tinuarice imports them verie much; it flands the much |.

upon to baue me long among them.

Dee faut pour durer: Pro. To dure we muft in-
€.


Toufiours né dure orage ne guerre: Pro. Extremi-
ties laf not alwayes.


Durefle : f. Hardneffe, foliditie, piffenelfe.
Duret: m. ette: roll es “


| hard ; fliffe, folide ;
pan » barfh ; difficile , inflexible ; fturdie | rude,
cree.


Dureté: £ as Durefle; alfo,zoughne(fe barflne(fe,rude-


neffe ; afperitie, rigor.


Dure-te :f A kind of fpotted , and bard-headed
er.
Durillon: m. 4 bard knot, or knurre in a peece of tim-


ber,or flone, which dulls the workemans tooles ; alfo,a
corne, or bard skin in the feet, or hands ; alfo, a bard
parkle, or graine in fome Saphires, ec, hindering the
cutting thereof. :


Duvet: m, Downe, foft feathers.


Duvet du linge. Liat,


Duvetté: m.ée: f. Downie, (oft as downe; full of or fil-


led with,downe,


Puyste: a A Geamp-bele -
ly, ay,& hory ho. The Cry of Carters,
Dyatané


» & Dyaphané. Tranfparent ; See Dia-


C« !
Dynandrie. as Dinanderie ; brafen ware ere.
Dyn chie. The ioynt rule of tro princes.
Dyfcole: com. wayward, froward,hard torule ill toia~


treat; out of all order.


Dyfcrafié. Looke Difcrafié.


terie: f. The blondie fix,


Dyfenterique:com. Troubled with,or ficke of, the blow-
die flix.


pie. Vicious,or exceffiue fhamefafineffe.
urie: f. Difficultie of voiding vrineand paine with-
all when it voides , by the fbarpenel[e thereof, and
the i tion, or exulceration of the necke of the
Bladder. £


*E


Er Aer... |

. tds age, of ic an age, of A marie
“A blackifh (Ethyopian) beaft, that bath cbeckes
Boare, a tayle like an pints two long |
THES ity be extends, or drawes iward, at plea-


Bard at Ts blacke Poplar tree.
: f. waters allo, the Element of water ; al,


the yellowif Sweat which ewaporeth a 7


Originalfrom


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


the skiane of an infant (and lyes betweene the coife or
biggin,called Amnios,and the bodie)while it in the
wombe,
Les Eaux. windgalls in a borfes legs.
Eau d'Ange. A kind of excellent [weet compound
water.
Eau ardant. Aquauite, .
Eau benifte de cave. Good wine,or firong bere.
Eau benifte de Cour. Court holie water;complemets,
faire words, flattering (beeches, glofing, foothing,pal-
able cog ging.
Eau de bouchet. A compound water, which with Co-
riander water makes a kind of Hypocras.
Eau clairette. water (made of Aquauite,Cinnamon,
Sugar and old red Rofe water) excellent againfi all the
diféafés ofthe Matrix. :
Eau endormie. Seeke Endormi.
Eau ferrée. wherein a gad of bot fecle bath beene
wenched.
au Gringoriane. Holie-water. €Rab.
Eau de lai&. Clarified whay.
Eau de nafe,ou de naphe. Orange-flower water.
Eaudevie. Aquauite,
Eau vifve. A Spring; a runaing water.
Beuveur d'eau. Looke Beuveur.
Fild’eau. à fl d’eau. with the freame.
Fleurd'eau. The water Lillie, water Rofe, yellow or
white Nenupbar. :
‘A fleurd’cau. Clofe by the water,betweene wind and
water.
Medecin d'eau douce. A yore, rar, or unexperienced
Phifition ; (we fay,a frefh water fouldior.)
Pierre d'eau de mer. A kind of white,and glittering
_ Gemme ; as Ocil de Chat.


Verfeur d'eau. The celeftiall figne, Aquarius,
. De belle eau. Perle de belle L Cfa faire lufier or
water.


Debonne cau.0fa good rellifh,or taftbauing a good
finacke with it. ;

De dela l'eau. Gens de delà l'eau. Simple fellowes,
witleffe companions, ignorant creatures,

Affleurir l'eau. To skimme the water;or,goe clofe by it,
as dotha hips lee-fide in a flrong fide-wind.

Amener l'eau au moulin. To draw in gaige, to bring
ia crownes , to farnifh with cuftomers , or commodi-
ties, >

Avoir de Feau vers les garces. To bane fap,and moi-
flure enough for bis lecherie.

Batre l'eau. To lof bis labour, to [pend bis time in


vaine. |
Batréles caux. À Deere to take foyle.
Batre leur cau. To ‘hake down their driake,
as abor{e thats ridden two or three miles after wate-
ring.

’ Eftre en eau. To fiveat ; (we fay alfo)to be all on a wa
ter; Eftreen l’eau. To bein, or upon the water; (fo
that the Article makes the difference.) '
Faire cau. To leake; alfo,to water,er take in frefh wa-
ter.for the prouifion of afhip.  -


Laiffer de l'eau en fon moulin. To leaue bimfelfe euer


Somewhat to doe.
Mener à la bonne eau.To feale (45)4 borfe,(wbereto
this Phrafe is chef applied)


Metttede l'eau dedans leur vin. To temper, coole,

qualifiestame them ; to take them a bole lower.

Nager engrand’ cau. To baunt, frequent, or abide in .
1 places, Der cn m


es à
hy &


aft honour gaine, roome, and compa~


E AV


Nager entre deux eaux. To be in danger on all fides;
* to fasle betweene Scilla and Charybdis;al/o,to bold on
_ amiddle courfe betweene two extreames ; alfo, to play
on both bands ,ov apply bimfelfe unto the time ywhatfoe-


ner; Looke N grt

Paiftry d'eau froide. white-linered, dull, fearefull,
without fpirit without mettall.

Pefcher eneau trouble. To /eeke for gaine by other
mens lolfes,or brables; or, to make a benefit of publicke
tumults, or calamities,

Piler l'eau en vn mortier. To laofé time, or (pend it
verie fondly.

Tenirle bec en l'eau: Pro. To hold in fufpence; to put
off with dalliances,or delayes.

mapas tenu lebecen l'eau. Hee hath plyed the
wine-pot, and is become tipfie; bee us throughly drunke
(but not with water.) |
Tirer de l'eau en fon moulin. To draw all dealings
into bis owne bands ; to feeke only bis own profit, with-
out refpecting the intereft of others,

Tomber de l'eau. To piffe,leakemake water.

Cela luy fit venir l'eau en la bouche. That made bis
teeth water ; viz. put bim intoan extreame longing. \
L'eau qui dort eft pire que celle qui court: Pro. Sa
ds a fleepie bumor worfe then a giddie.

au & pain c’eft la viande du chien : Prov. Bread,
and water is dict for dogs. ,

En petite eau fouvent on trouve grand bieure:
Pro. A great beauer 1s often found in a little brooke.
Fol eft qui fe ficen eau endormie: Pro. Looie En-
dormi.

Il fait beau pefcher en eau large: Prov. There is no
fifhing to the fea, fay we.

n’a pas foif qui de l'eau neboit: Prov. Hee’s not
athirft that wil not water drinke. à
In'eft nager qu’ en grand’ eau: Prov. The biggeft
waters are the befi to fivimme in.

ILn'y a pire eau que la quoye: Prov. The ftilleft
waters (and bumors)are eher the wort.

Eaué. « Eau.

Eauier: m. A gutter, channell, finke, fewer for the voi-
ding of foule water.

Balk :£ The bearbe Helicampanie,Scabwort,Hor{e-

eale.

Eaurolle: f. as Aerolle ; awheale,or blifler.

Eauvier. as Efvier. +4

Ebaucher. To rough-hew ; as Esbaucher,

Ebc. An ebbe; or the ebbing of water.
Tout ce que vient d’ s’en retournera de flot:
Prov. The Tyde will fetch away what th’ ebbe brings


LA
Ebene: m, The blacke wood called Heben,or Ibonie.


cfté:m, eé: £ Made, or growne beftiall, beafilie,


ou. td

10 14e of one eye,
Ebouiller. Secke bouillir. =
Ebouller. as Esbouler ; to. throw,er tumble downe,
Eboulu. Seeke Esboulu.
Ebreché:m.ée:f.That bath loft divers teeth;or,in whofe

mouth the loffe of teeth bath made diuers breaches,
es tie

i : € Continua 2.

EET tn chui boy febing er bubling
ion: f. Ane 12,07
Re belensioy 1 leo

: £ Ofor be 10 À

Faite aera # led, É
: mee: £. Scaledor 4 ;
‘ Py Ecail-


ECH


Bealls 14 fale foal to pull the fcales off, to vid of


Bcamestt: To change, difguife, or alter ; Seeke Efca-

motêr.

Re — : mée: er féattered, as the fire ;

uifed,cr crufhed,as an apple.

Ecarboter le feu. To ftirre cae fatter fhe fre.

Ecarboter vne pomme. To bruixe,or crufh an apple.

an. Nice, daintie, queafie-flomacked ; whence ;
Ic fuis plus ecar : à boire qu’ a manger ; amy flut-
ar thy loathfome to my flemacke in drinke .
then in meat.

Ecclefiafte: m. A Preacher.

Ecclife. as Eglife. The Church. .

Eccliffe, as Eicliffe.

Eccliffer.as Efcliffer.

Ecentrique: com. without center, out of the center;
alfo, without meafure, whereof no meafure can be ta-
ken,

Fol ecentrique. 4x vnrulie,or irregular coxcombe ;
one that can be held within no compaffe,

Ecervelé. as Efcervelé. Brainele([e,barebraind,

Echaudé: m, ée: f. Scalded ; Looke Efchaudé.

S'Echauder. To be ftalded; to grow too bot, or be put
into ouermuch beat. +

Echelette. Secke Efchelette.

Echelle: f. 4 ladder.

Echelon *m, The fiep of a ladder.

Echevelé. Diftheueled. as Defchevelé,

Echevement: m. as Efchevement. :

Echidne: £ .4 Viper, or Hydra ; any kind of Ser-

nt.


pent.
Echine. as Efchine. gh
Eclat,& Eclater; Seeke Efclat,¢> Efclater.
EclipR: f An Eclipfe;aleffening, diminution, defo


Edit LE: m. ée: £ Eclipfed; leffened,impaired,
Edlipfemene rm. Az kta leffening, diminifbing,
E eee ‘ difi nifh out of fight (in part;)
er. To difappeare, to vanih ont o, in .
he ‘eligi? lafin,dcninifh,impaire Æ a8
Ecliptique. The Eclipticke line,or eect


tearmed, becaufe Eclipfes bappen, the Moone is
either in coniunélion or oppofition, under this line,
| Ecliptique: com. Belonging to an Eclipfe.
Ecliffe. Looke Efclifie. =
Ecloy: m. Lant,piffe,vvine. Pic.
Ecluse. as Efclufe.
tique. #5 Ecliptique.


Ecolleté, as Efcouleté. WE Y
Econome, & Economie. a Occonome, ¢& Oeco-


nomic,

Ecofle. as Efcofle; a cod,huske ere.
Ecoiié: m. ée: £ Curtall,curtalled,without a tayle.
Ecouër. To curtall,or cut off the taile ; Seeke Efcouér.
Ecphrafe: f. 4 plaine declaration, or expofition.
Ecrafer. as Efcrafer. “TR Et
Ecreté: m. ée: £. Topped,uncrefled ; whofe top,or creft

ith ie


h : f. Crutches(at Tours.)

: f, An extafie, fivooning,traunce ; a

mpe,or dumpe;, a great amaxement.
tatique. In an Extafie; Secke Extatique,
EGtique: com. In a confumption or ick of ax Hebticke
feutrs The wo ei D le am
thing is, th we - Meee! Lo VA 1 “Le
À / t bath pi é
all parts of the ation init felfe.


Sunne fo


Eculée: f. 4 difhfull.
Ecume: f. Looke Efcume.
wore i sombe edent. He fl! groueling on bis face,on
is teeth.
Edenté: m.ée:f. as. Edent; alfo, tootbleffe, whofe
teeth are daflt,or fallen, out of bis mouth.
enter. To make tootbleffe; to bereaue of teeth ; to
dvaw,or flrike out the tecth of.
Edenter lamorfure de, To difappoint or make vaine
the biting of.
enter vn pot, ou autre vaifleau . To overturne


ward.
Ediét: m. 4 Statute,Edi&.Ordinance. x
La Chambre de I' Ediét. as, Chambre mipartie.
cateur: m. An edifier; builder ; maker , fra-


mer.
Edification:f. An edification, building, erecting, fra-


ming making,
Edifice: m. An Edifice,building,or boufe readie built;
alfo, the frame of a building; alfo, the art,er worke of


TA |
Edifié:m. ée : f. Edified, builded, framed, ereéled,
founded ; alfo,bred,come,or brought,vp of.
Edifier. To edifie,build ; frame,eredt,found make vp(a-
ny thinz,but apache boue,
Tell herbes’ edifie de. # fet, or planted by; is bred,
or comes,up of.
Education: £ Nurture,education,bringing vp.
Eduction: £ An eduction, leading,drawing out, brin-


ging forth,

Efuifte: m. €e: f. Topped,or whofe top is cut off, or ta-
ken downe,

Elaiher. To top, or cut the top of, a plant ; totake downe
the top of.

th faire. fievre ef. 47 ague that continues but

one day. ,

Effable: cies pen which may be vttered,or fpe-
cified in words.
ffacé: m, ée: £ Defaced,effaced,raxed, blotted out.


ement: m. An effacing, deficing, raxing; blot-
ting ont,
Effacer. To efface,deface,raxe ,blot,rub out,wipe away ;


to abolifh.


peredsor put into paffion.
1. To share ,amaxe,terrifie,appall,moue,perturbe,
diflemper,put into paffion.
oucher. To mad, make wood, skittifh,wild, fierce,
cruell ; to exasperate ; alfo, to fiight, skare, feare a-


‘way.
Qui veut prendre vn oifeau,qu’il ne 'effarouche:
Proy, Let not bim goss would take,a bird.
Effaflure : f, A defacement raxe;blot ,blurre ; adafh,or
flroke through a thing written,or painted.
: m, An effect re esbednestt [accel of a

3 4 working, bringing to paffe. hing te he.
Homme de peu d'effect. Heike itlefe

ow;one that can do little,thats [carfe worth taking vp;


| Quinta point Tee Fike aatmettelefe that


eme to no proofe whereby one is mwch difappointed.


im |: rice: £ An effeétrix; foe that caufeth,procureth,


or bringeth to pafse.
Effectué: m. ée: f Effediuated,effettedsexecuted. *
Effectuér. To effectuate,effect, execute, perfirme,di/-
patch, bring to pafse.. * FE


+ Original from


Sete WHOS TATE UNIVERSITY».


a pot, or fetit on the ground with the mouth downe- |
d


É: m. ée : f. Skared, amazed, eftonied ; wilde,or
ghafilie of looke; al/o,difturbed noued; altered,difiem- |


~ Be EF


Effectueux. Effectuall ; to the purpofe; alfo, effecting,

working, doing, caufing, procuring ,difpatching.
mination: f. Az effemination, or effeminacie; a

' womanizing, weakning wantonizing; a making woma-
nifh,weake wanton,

Effeminé: in. ée:f. nimes met,
ee oreete ioe, delicate; that hath no bardi-
neffe,that can endure no bardnelfe.

Homme effeminé. 4 weakling milk(op fenfuall and
refined goofe,puling or faint-hearted cokes.

Effeminement, Effeminately, womanifhly; weakely,
tenderly delicately.

eminer. To effeminate, weaken,make daintie,tender,
nice quaint, womanifh.

Efferé. wild,skittifb,giddie,wood; al/o,proud.

Efhancé: m. ée: f. Affianced,betrothed.

Efficace : f. Efficacie, force, effectualneffe, vertue,
Prength,ableneffe.
ficacement. Forcibly effectually, frongly, throughly,
pitbily with efficacie, to purdofe.

Eficacicüfement. oft effectually,very forcibly with
much firength,to great purpofe.

cacieux: m.eufe: £ Moff effectuall, forcible,ftrong,
of much power,of great efficacie.

Efficient. Eficient,caufing effecting accomplifhing ma-

_, king, wholly freres onely fnifiene.

Effigial: m. ale: € Reprefenting, refembling ; alfo, be-
longing to an image,or fhape.

ie: £. An image picture, figure, counterfeit, refem-
blance,repre(eatation of a fhape,or feature.
Pendu en efiigic. Hangd in picture ; if an offendor,
whofe fault deferues banging, efcape, yet is be, by the
Nr sory of France,adindged to the gallowes, and his
pitture hanged thereon; A figne, that whenfoener be is
taken,he fhall be truffed vp in perfon.
zm. ée: £.Drawae,figured,pourtrayed,counter-
fran reprefented, . . 5

Effigier. To figure, dram, pidture, pourtray, counter it,
expreffe the forme, reprefent the fhape, make a true
refemblance of, (by painting caruing,or Nevis à )

lé: m.ée:f, Rauelled, unwound, looffened ; alfo,
weakened,or loofe-hangled, |

Effiler.T0raucll,vawind,looffe ; loofen ; alfo,to weaken,

or loofen the ioynts. À

Efflanché. (Cheval efflanché.) Swayed in the backe.

fHanqué : m. ée: f, as Esflanqué.

Eteurant.Deflowring ; alfo,skimming ouer,graxing a-
long vpon. P owe FAT OS flow

fflcuré: m.ée: f. Deflowred,or depriued of flowers ;
alfo, skummed, cone lightly over, grazed along on ;
alfà, razed a little; whofé beautie, or beft peeces are


gone. NS 2 .. Lé à
Effleurer. To deflowre; or, depriue of flowers; alfo, to
skum,or take onely the top of ; to graze along, as abul-
let on the fide ofa wall; to goe lightly ouer, as a flone.
on the water ; alfo, to picke out fleightly the beft, and
moft graceful peeces of a thing. .
Eñlorefcence : £. The outward face, or faperficies,
the upmoft rinde , pilling, or skinnt, of any thing;
whence ; Heat
_. Effloreftence du cuir. The (uperficiall,and outmoft
thinskin of the bodie; that which rifeth in blifiers af-
tera pre dr the skalie fubffance pilled from [cab
dryed hands, crc.
Etoncé: m. de : € 170/t bottome is bedten ont,
Effoncer. Te per beat out the bead,or bottome of x
lee. FR ATI
PIR ce FR


so teabane Bing ith a


without meafure, ee


LA Ld


ondré: m, ée:f Paunched, bowelled, or dy annie;


burft open ; flrucke through; alfo, as Enfondré,
Chemin ne A way ful of holes, ov myrie
ighes ; a verte deepe,and durtie way. :
E er.To bowel paunch,draw the guts,or garbage


out of.
Effondrer vn cheval. To firike, or thruft a borfè
through the bellie. =
drer vn huis,ou vn vaifleau. To burft open a
dore, to knocke, or beat,out the bottome of aveffell.
Effond ille.The grokd,botiome,lecs,or dregs of liquor.
rcé: m.Ge: f. Indeuored, labored, trauelled in with
utmoft force, flrinen. in with might and maine,
Efforcemént: m. kideuor, rc ; as Effort.(v.mot.)
orcément. Earnefily, vebemetly,rvith all bis might,
with great indeuour, with tooth and nayle.
S'Efforcer. To indenor,labor, inforce bimfelfe; to firiue
with might and maine ; to vfe bis utmoft firength, ap-
ly all his vigour, imploy bis whole power.
Efforcillons. 4 certaine difeafe,er diftemperature,in a
Hawkes tongue.
ort: m. Az effort ; indeuor ; labour, trauell, paines-
taking ; a [riuing for a matter with whole force, pow-
er,meanes,
Effort de gens de guerre. violent affault,a furious
onfet,or attempt. ;
Faire effort 3.70 offer violence,or do opé wrong vato.
Us font leur effort. They doe what lyes in them ; they
doe their beft, or wor ft ; they do performe their vimof;
or,they are at their beight of firength.
Effray. as Effroy.
Effrayable : com.Fearefull dread/ull,tervible,bideous,
horrible


Effrayablement. 774 farefall,and terrible manner.
Effrayant: m. ante: f. Hideous, féarefüll,borride,çaft-
lie,frighting,borrible; alfo,affrighting skariug, fraying.
Eftca ©: f. À Scricheowle, or Lycheforole ; anvaluckie

eee bignes refembles
a Cuckoe,
Effrayé: m.ée:£. Affrighted, frayed, shared, ftared; a
maxed,appalled,daunted,difinayed.
Effrayeinent.Dreadfiilly terribly after a fearefull fort,
in a borrible manner. 5
yer. To affrizht, fray, skare, feare ; alfo,to daunt,
appall, amaxe,difmay.
Effrcinte: f. 4 default of hounds.
nation: f. Varuliaelfe, unbridled beadineffe, im-
moderate libertie,headlong rafhneffe.
Effrené: m.ée: £. Vnbridled,rafh,beadie diffoluteuns
E re NS ele FR
enément. Rag, ily,diffolutely,diforderedly.
Effrener. To cnbridle 4


uermment. =
Effrité: m. éc: f. Frighted,agaf, afraid.
Efftiter. To affright,skare,affray. —
Effroidi: m. ie: £. Cooled,
Effroidir. To coole. à
Effrondille. The lees,degs,or grounds of wine,erc,
Eftronté: m, éc:f Shamele(fe, impudent, ouer-bold,
brafen-faced,who nothing can ah out of couitenance;
alfo,one that bath a great,and large forbead.
nté en putain. as impudent as a whore.
emént: ce, malapertneffe, Un-
fesenelfne. *
impudent fomeleenfoemefifiy,
| ye sa. Salgial
4


. Original tor
THE OHIOsS TAFE MIWMERSIPY


à <->


; fet at large,turn loft giue head
vnto,leaue wholly to bis ovone fivindge,direifonsor go- |


eee tt ste Eat, 0


CIE PTE VIT TENTE


Pe
=
ss


EGA EGY
Efftonterie. 4 Effrontemént ; alfa, rapenee or
oué A Crummed, crumbled, broken verie


or fpued out...
Egoziller. To cut the throat ofalfo, to vemitor fpue out. |
gratigné: m.ée :f. Scratched.féraped, rentor torne


de 4 . * fal A4 E with the nailes, - - $s
frouët.Te crum,crumble,breake v final. ationer.To /cratch,to fer ape,io rend.gr teare, wi
E im. A fright, feare, dread, fight, terror, afto- gras nayles. x :


Amaxement.


pole Ekfray able.
ablement. F derefilly, dreadfully, terribly, bide-


nc Soon, ghaftfull terrible, borrible,dread-
i ,fearefiull,a righting.
oyé: as Effrayé.
Effroÿ er. To fray, stare, feare affright;al/o,to daunt,a-
mate hanifh appa, difimay.
fruité : m. ée : £W'bofé fruit is cropped,gotten, or ga-
thered,
Effruiéter.To take,or gather the fruit of. D
Effucillé. Vnleaued ; firipped,or bared of leaues.
Effucillement : m. An valeauing ; a cutting,or pulling
off fuper uous leaues from plants.
Effueiller. To valeafe; to cut, plucke, or nip off fuper--
fluons leaues ; to ftrip,or bare of leaues, ;
Effucilleur:m. À pruner of trees; a puMer-of leaues
from trees.
Effusément.Profifely,extreamely, out of meafüre.
Efufon + £. 4n eff à fon feng piling spouring
Efelé : m.ée: £ Mild,calme,vamoued, without leene,


gall,
Beal: male: fEquall, (ec mblableenen, ell matched,


Egratigneure: f. 4 fevaping, or foratcking ; alle 4
feratch,or little skarre.
‘fin : m. A kind of Haddocke.
Egrege: com. Excellent, notable, fingular, principall, -
Pr [4 ET , of chiefé marke, of fpeciall woorth, one of
ic ch ME
Egremé :m, ée:£ Uncreamed; fleeted, or skummed,
as milke.
Egrette.as Aigrette ; A foule that refimbles a Heren.
rire m. ce: f. Crummed, crumbled, broken inte
pecces.
FEU ruger. To crum,crumble,breake into fmall agi:
rumer.To vnclufter or plucke from the clufie
Egrun: im, Any thing that angers, or aaerais, a dif-
eafe,or fore. *
Egual : male : f. Equall,euen, leuell; femblable , well
‘matched of a like eflate nature,a ge,condition,qualitie.
Egualé: m, ée: f. Equalled matched, leuelled, evened,
made like ; refembled,compared unto,
Egualement.Euenly,equally alike, femblably ; in enen
feria ines equall portions, indifferently,as much the one |
as the other,
nt «To equal, match ; euenslewell make like, re-
mble,compare.
se m. €e: f. Equalled, tiatived, or made euen


alike.

Egalement. as Egualement.

gales Nights-equalling ; or night and day mat-
chi
Cercle egale-nuiéts. The Equator, or Equinoétiall
circle.

Ecaler.To equal euen,leuell match,

Egalizement. as Egualizement.

Egalizer.Looke Egualizer.

Egaronné: m. ée : fTrodden, asa fhoce, done at the
beeles.


Aer. m. An equalling, leuclling, matching,
refembling making euen,or alike.

weir .To matchequall euen,lenell; make one thing

e
uillat: m. Akind of Dog-fifh,that bath two long and
lis prickles on bis backe. ehh -
Euilonn m. A pricke,or fling ; Locke,Efguillon.
al To pricke, fling, prowoke, incenfe : take


guillonner.


LS va foulier.Te tread a fhooe downe at the. vil To whet,or foarpen ; Seeke Efguifer.
c.A kind of white fines minerall, that hath 4
afsé: m.ée:f.set on edge,asa tooth, “haanos and red veins,or flreake


gau : m. The leffe kind of the shard Moslehi ora
‘yonzone, Marcillois. __
Egelfin: Hames Haddocke ; as Egrefin. !
gener le labeur, To run through their worke ; to dif:
wet or to rid away worke apace, (4 Ploughmans


gp m, An excelotibrsihferpe)etstént, or
a presenter correct the putrifaction, and morti-
fication of wounds, . and forçs.
Ehancé.as Ehanché.
Ehanché: m. ée: f whofe bipor since. bruixed, or
out of ioint.
Ehancher. To bruize the hanch, or put it out of ioint ;
alfo,to leaue banchleffe,or cut off a banch..
Ejaculation: f. An eiaculation ; a violent cafting,fling-
ing burling forth ; [purting,jerting,fpouting out,
Ejaculatoire: com.Eiaculatorie ; of propertie,or power
to caft.fpout,or fpurt forth sand bence ; ;
ifleaux ejaculatoires.Certaine affifiant, draëliue
part. ip heroes generation,
culatric ugh Der ting pain


nos £ Houghed ent of ly te bem
jart att
ic “oak hate pee about


ee ofthe Gamuth.
bg fommes au deflus d'la hors toute la Gam-


. meWe are cleane off the binges,or out ef all good cem-
pale; alfo,we arein very great extremitie. Ib
maolb-


Egettion: f, A voiding ewdcuation,callkigilt ofexcre-
-ments,and ordure.

pts eae eres or beafis like men, but footed as

. ts.


Epiptia uc.L’onguent Eg. A certaine falue,or oint-

ment,of a cleanfing facultie,and good to preuent mor-

tification.

glife: f.A Church; or
ile.


Originalfrom


BE UO STATE UNIVERSITY


ELE.


Elaboratoire : m. An Elaboratorie,or workebou/e.

Elaboré. as Elabouré, ml

Elabouration: f. Elaboration ; diligent labour,paines-
taking ; a perfector skilful working.

Elabouré: m. ée :£ Elaborated ; cunningly wrought,
ht done ; laboured painfülly, tranelled through-
ly in,

Elabourer. To elaborate ; labour painfully , trauell


Elambiqué. as Alambiqué ; Diffilled.

Elambiquer. as Alambiquers. To diflill,or extraët by
Lymbecke. head :

Elan. A certaine wild beaft; as Ellend.

Elancé :m. ée : £,Launced,cut,pierced,or pricked with

- a launcet.

Elancement: m. A cutting,launcing,piercingspriching
with a launcet; alfo,as Eflancement.

Elancer. To lauuce,cut,pricke,pierce with alauncet;al-
fo,to burt,paine,pinch as aflitch doth; Seeke Eflan-


cer.

Elangoré:m. ée: f
crelt-fallen.

Elargir. Looke Eflargir.

Elariné de pleurs. That can weepe no more ; whofe eyes

© are wholly drained with much weepin


Elatine : £ The hearbe called Preis D Fluellin the


Langeurous,languifbing,deiecied,


: le,

Elation :f. Leftineffe,bautineffe.

Elebore, Seeke bre. £

Electeur: m. Ait Eleétor,a chufer. \

Eleétif: m.iue :f. Elettine, fubiel unto choice; gotten,

__ or paffing,by election.

Ele&tion: f. An eleétion,or choice, a chafing,culling, or.

~ «picking out ; alfothe Prouince,or circuit of anEleaer

__generall affeffor of Subfidies. | :

Eleétorat: m. Aa Eleétorfhip; a chufing, or electing;

~~ oF the right,or porver of election, [ücb as the feuen E~
leétors of the Empire haue.. ry
eétre :m. Amber whereof beads, and bracelets ave
made ; alfo,a mixture of gold,copper, and a fift part of

* filuer,

Electuaire: m. An Eleétuarie; a medicinable compofi-
tion made of choice drugs,and of {ubftance betweene a

% owe and a confèrue , but more enclining to this then

. to that. ;

Elegamment. Elegantly, eloquently; neatly, comptly,
quainily, Gnehpebiely int minien-bte,

ance :f El , eloquence, daintie (peech, neat

< \ last fee re fJe,quaintnelfe, .

he HAUGAGIES BMEYES = tN

D pags mn ape à oken,choice in words,
neat in tearmes ; alfo, compt, quaint, fpr
daintie delicate;polites 9 7"

Elegiaque. Elegiäcall, belonging to an Elegie; lamen-


ting, mourne fill,


or Dittie.
Eleinent :m, 4» element ; as water,earth, fire,or aire;
alfo,a rudiment, or firft principle of Art; the ground,
“me beginning of seat oye
ementaire. Elemental; belonging to elements,rndi-
eh pane | RE
El a ara Rofen(as fome will baucit,
becaufeit melts before the fire) which is an excellent
er of head-wounds, - NT,


+ À pendant a pese of the


Drancy; to worke exaËtly, doe a thing filly, and |
mely.


Eliferlamonnoye, Topare clip, or cut,money round a-


Elegie if. An Elegie 54 mournefil verfe, Pocme, Song, 4


a ne à


E LI
+ fafbion of anegge. aa à
Eleomeli. À Pre and fat liquor that iffues from the


old trunks of certaine trees in Syria.
- hangines. Certaine pills (by Phyfitians tearmed fa,
or de atomatibus) good to fivengtben the flomack and
to belpe difgeflion.
er m. An Elephant,
_ Elephant de mer. 4 kind of great Lobfler.
Elephanteau : nt. Ayong Elephant.
Elephantin. Elepbamine ; of or belonging to,an Elc- |*
El hanti ue. Leaprous , infeticd with a Icaprofie. ‘
Ele A cenerall Afeffor of + Kings rh ENT
dies in euery particular Circuit Prouince, or Dioceffe ;
_ Looke Efleu. ;
Elevation: £. An clenation,lifting,beauing polding rai:
Jfing,or rearing up ; Looke Eflevation. -
Elevatoire:m. 44 Eleuatorie ; th'inftrument where-
with Chirurgions lift vp the broken, ant (unke-in parts
of the feull ; and draw out bullets, or baïle-fbgt thats
entred but a little way intothe flefh.or bones, :
Eleveur :m. A raifer,ov lifier up. 3
Elice. The figne in beauen called Charles waine or Vela
major. per ike
Elicie. A fierie vapour drawne from the clouds :Rab.
Elider. To quafh,dafb, breake, pplit, or hit againft; ta
pound,or {tampe ;to fqneexe or preffe; to flrike,or dap,
out ; alfo,to firangle,throttle, flifle.
S’ Elider de. To rift,or burfl,vp out of. |
Elider la produétion de la partie adverfe. Piuil to
. Conuey,or purloine from an aducrfarie bis chiefeft cui» |
dence,or proofes ; thereby te weaken bis caufe.
igible : com. Eligible; te be elected; fit, or like, to be


chofen.
Eliminé :m. ée:£ Thraf, éaft, burled’, or put ont of
doores ; alfo,divulged or publifhea.
Eliminer. To thruft,caft burleor put out of doore; alfo,
to divulge,or publifh abroad. :
Elingue. 4 fling: €Norm. 4
Elire. as Eflire ; To chufé.


Sede Obs >,


bout the bemme. :
ge Duinteffence; or the Philofepbers flone ; as E-
1xr, +
Elixir. Quiateffence ; or,the Philofopbers flones of one of |:
the names thereof, fome take it for the chymicall pow-
oe of. SR ee 3 (the word originally fignifies force,
or firength.) ,
Elle. (The feminine of i),or luy) fhe. eh.
Ellebore blanc, white An sah Lingwort , Necfè-
_ wort. : 4 |
Ellebore baftard. The hearb Oxe-eye ; alfo,the black
baftard Hellebore. aR |
Ellebore noir. Blacke Hellebore; whereof Gerard
defiribes foure kinds ; the true blacke Hellebore ; the
baftard,or wild blacke pet pe Net
great wild blacke Hellebore; and the ordinarie Oxe-
beele, Beares-fiot Setterwort; the two la]! are alfo cal:
led Lowfie-gralfe,and Lowft-worts. :
Elleborine : . Wild white Ellebore, '
Elle. bailler les ellées à vn cheval. To gine a borfe the
head; 10 gallopwith bridle laiden bis mecke,
Ellend: m.Th Elhe;a moft feare fill melancholike firong,
Swift, fhort-ncckt,and foerp-hooued, wild beaft; much
troubled with the falling [:knelfe,and(byredfan of the |
extraordinarie length of his upper lip) cuer going back=
. ward ashe graxeth; (fome report jictbu ferelegs are |.
+ Goyntleffe,and bs ficfh good venifen ; but Vigenere | :


Origiraltron
THE OH OST E DNIVERSLLY


PR + er VE re


VA "—


nal ; ST ae


ne


| EMA


'
(upon (far) denies th’one, and Gefner diflikes tb'o-
ther.)

Elocher. To looffen,or make looffe ;Looke Eflocher.

| Elocquer. Tofhake off, (a word properly ufed of things
that ave firmely ioyned together.) ;

Eloife:f. 4 lightning; alfo,, (metaphorically) a little
pace of time,

Elope. as Elopien ; Al/o,a kind of Sca-fifh whofe finnes
ave turned towards ber head; fhee lines ia the deepe
Pampbilian fea; when fhe is taken, (whichis but fel.
dome) the fifhers crowne themfelues with garlands,
and bring ber to fhore with iyfull applaufts, & found
of pipes, hoping they fball hane good lucke for a long
time after.

Elopien, A hind of barmeleffe Serpent.

Eloquence: f. Eloquence; gracefüll (peaking , fweet
viterance ; tearmes choicely forted , readily deline-


red,

Eloquent. Elsqueat, well-fpoken,of a fiveet deliuerie;
wbofewords are choice, vtterance gracefüll, (peech
moft plaufible.

Elourdé:m. éc: € Dulled,amaxed, aftonifhed.

Elourder. To dull ; dall, amaxe aftonifb.

Eloyle. as Eloife.

Elucidation. Aa elucidation; a cleeve manifeftation,or
expofition ; an outward fhining.

Elucidé: m.ce :f, Cleered, manifefied, made bright, e-
uident,apparant ; expreffed, expounded. hed
Elucider. To cleere, mamifei make bright , or perfpicu-

oxs; to expound, or expreffe; alfo,to shine outward.

Elue. The wild Pinetree. ©

Emaceration : f. An emaceration ; leaneneffe, or fal-

__ hing away in flefh ; or,as Emaciation.

Emaciation :f.4 pulling downe,or making leane;a fal-
ling away in flefh. .

Emacic:f Leanneffe.

Emacié: mée:f. Made,or growne,leane.

Email: m. Amell,or Enamell.

Emaillé : m.ce :f. Enameled,

Emailler. To enamell.

Emaillure : f. An enamelling,or worke enamelied.

rapa : € An iffuing,or comming forth; alfo,a pub-
lication of.

Emancipé : m. ée: f. Afranchifèd made free, fet at li-

bertie; alfa, alienated, made away, put our to ano~

ther, :

Emanciper.To affranchife,difmnife,make free, fet at li»

bertie ; alfo,to alienate, paffeaway, make oner an inte-

refior poffeffion. :

Emané:m. ée:f. Proceeded, iffued, flowed, or come

out from; alfo, publifbed, divulged, fpred abrdud.

Emaner.To proceed, ijue, flow, or come out from; alfo,

to publifhydivulgue, [pread abroad.

Emant: m. The Adamant,or Loadflone.

Emantellement. A mantle ; aifo, a bemantling, or co.

ueri with amantle.

(Esp as Emanciper; Or,to manumit.


é: m. ée: f Noted, or quoted in the Mar-


EM B


bring bimfelfe into a fioles Paradife; alfo,to be medling
with matters be hath little skill in ; ov foolifhly to wind
himfelfe into a bufinef[e which be w not able to get
well out of, s
S'Embadurnofer. To amnoint bimfelfe.
agué:m.ée:f, Beitwelled; firnifbed, inriched,
E oe ino 4 27 icon deck
aguer. To férnifb, inrich,or decke with Fuels,
Eebellionné : m.éc : F.Gagged,begogecd. A
Embaillonner. To gag,begag.
Embaler, &c. as Emballer, &c.
le :m. The packing up of ware, or marchan=


ife.
Emballé : m. ce: f. Packed up, made vp in paches.
aller. Topacke upto make up in packes.

Emballer quelqu'un d'untrouffeau, To play one a
fine tricke ; toferue one a prettie touch.

Einballeur :m..4 packer vp of wares,

Embaras.&c ; 4s Embarras,&c,

Embarbouillé : m.ée:f. Berayed, befmeared,bemired,
befpottcd,begrimca.

>arbouiller. To beray, befmeare , befpot , be- |

grime. | rp fe

Embarqué: m. ée:f. Imbarked,imbargued, shipped,
pat or gotafhipboord. *

Embarquement : m. 4n imbarking , taking fhip, go-

. inga fhipboord, putting into a flip; alfo , an imbar-


guing.
Embarquer. 70 imbarke, fhip, get or pat on fhipbocrd;
alfo, toimbargue; 10 für»ifh,or impley flipping. ;
S'embarquer. To take Jhip,or go on fliipboord.
S'embarquer en vnentreprife. Tovndertake ,en- |
ter into,or ingage bimfelfe in,an attion;to make one.
S'embarquer fans bifcuit. To vndertake an enter-
prife without helpes to begin,or meanes to fellow,it.
mbarras : m, A peflerment,intricacie,per plexitie,con-
fifion,garboile,trouble.
Einbaraffé :m.ée:f. Peflered, intricated, intangled, }
perplexed,troubled. | ;
Einbaraflement. as Embarras ; Or,a peftering,intan-
gling,intricating perplexing,troubling.
arafier. To ae intangle, perplex, con-
. found,comber,trouble. à
arafleur : nt. An intricator, peflerer,comberer.
Embarré. Heaume embarré. Sere bruÿfed,beaten in,
or faflencd to,the bead with blowes.
atrer.To rayle,or fet barres on;alfè,tocrufh,bruife,
ding or beat inward.
Embarter fon efpée en vn Atbre. To faflen bis
Sword ia a tree,
Embarture :f. 4 bruifng.dinging.er beating inward,
bas. Below,or beneath, « ‘
Trape d embas.Looke Trape.
Vent d’embas. The Weflerne wind.
Embafer . To give a Bafis, or botteme unto; alfo, to
ground,make a Bafis,baue a bottome; end at the Bafis,
or


Embafiné: m. ée :f Imbalmed; anncinted, or dreffed


baffade : f. An tmbaffage,cr me] tage safe, an Em
7 acccmpanied with bis ordimarie trame; as,
_ Voila ! embaflade detel Royaume.
4 en fladeur :m, An Embafiadour a (publicke)mef-
Egibalfemmedic; Looke Soubaflement. * “+
Embafté:m.ée:£ Sadled with a DT. Vi
 feifed, |


| El bafin er. Te imbauine 310 dreffe,or annointall ower |


Originalifrom


i THE ORIG STATE-UNIVERSITY


EM B


fifedsor put into pofieffion of.

Ar Tofaddle with a packefgddle ; alfo, to put
into pole (ion of (landiérc.) à

Embaftonné: m. ée : f. Armed with, or prouided of,
weapons ; alfü,cudgelled.

Embaftonner.7¢ arme,or frnifh with weapons ; alfo,
to cudgell ; belabour,bethwacke with cudgels.

Embatage :m. Tbe laying of fireakes about the wheele
‘of a Carroche ec,

Embatonner. as Embaftonner.
mbatre. To arriue,rufh,or come in vpon fuddenb.
Embatre les bandages de rouës. Towayle or fafien
the flreakes unto wheels,
Ie m’ embati fur luy. 1 fel upon bim by chance,1 met
with bim on a fudden, 1 light on bim ere 1 was a-


ware,

IJuy embatit I’ efpée iufques au foye. Hee thruft
bim into the liner.

Embattage. as Embatage.

Embattes. The Eafterlie winds which ordinarily raign
about the Dog-dayes.

Embatu: m.ué: f. Arrined, rufbed, thruft, caft, or
come in vpon on afudden; lighted, or flipt into,fallen
upon,ere he was aware.

Embauché:m. é¢ : £ Imployed,nfed, occupied,beftow-
ed in,or put unto,worke.

Embaucher. To imploy,occupie,vfé in bufinelfe, put vn-


to worke.

Einbaveté, ou Embavicté :m.éc: f.lmbibbed; that,
asa child, bath a bib, or mocket put before bis breaft,
to keepe him from driucling thereen. |
Embavieté de machoueres. whofe broken Fawes
hanging dowae, ferued bim, in lead of a bib,to flaver


q 07, =

Embaumé:m.ée : f. Imbaulmed ; annointed,or prefer-
ucd with Baulme.

Embaumement:m. Animbaulming. =

aumer. Toimbaulme; to dreffe, annoint, or pre-

ferue with Baulme. .

Einbecqué That hath bis leffon; infirutted before.

and.

L’ oifeau gazouille felon qu'il eft embecqué:
Prov.d man (peaks euen as bis bopes do moue,or paffs-
ons vige bim; It may be alfo applied toa Lawyer, who
according to the fee be hath receiued, pleads for bis Cli-
ent, better or worfe,

Embecquer:asEmboucher ; To give one bis leffon be-


forchan Ù
Embelli:m.ie:f. Imbellifhed, beautified ; garaifhed,
bedeced adorned fc out, onset
= To imbellifh, beautifie ; garnifb, adorne, be-
decke ; trimme vp, fet out unto the eye.
wo ci m. An imbellifbing, beamifying ; deck-
m arnifbing. . INRA .
Embe fiffement. as Embelliflage ; Or, an imbellifh=
ment, i sth : his
Embelliffement de maifon. A pleafant tuft, or


med [om Law. £
Emberni: m.ie: £ covered with,or clad inyug. @
ernir. Te coxer with,or clad in,rug. tar
1 rdc Bufied , imployed, occupied,
Embefongnement: m. A bufmeffe, or bufie worke ;
- loying,or bufing à
. To bufie , imploy , occupie , fet on


Ras:


nn —


, À


Bigitizèd by Go gle


groue of trees, growing neere, or about, aboufe; tear-
oe El .


: £'Buttered, adrelfed, or anmoynted |


EM B


. with butter. \
urter, To butter,or bebutters to dreffe,or annoint
: all ouer with butter,
Embezars, Aumes ace on the dice: €Rab.
Emblayé: m.ée : f. Sowen,as a field, with corne; alfo,
wee corne is put up a prettie beight aboue ground.
Emblavence de bled. (orne [prung,or put vp, a prettie
height aboue ground ; or tbe (pinging or putting vp of


corne.
Emblaver. To fow the ground with corne.

laveures. Corne; whether growing, or in fheaues,
Eunblayement. A trouble,comber ,pellerment.
Emblé :m.ée : f, Stollen, filcbed, pilfered, purloined,


eled.
le me fuis emblé de la troupe. 1 flunke out of the
companie, i
Emble-coeur. Alluring, winning,beart-flealing.
Emblée. à l'emblée. Prinily, clofely, by ftealth, with
two fingers and a reach. R
D'anblée. Subtily, craftily, vnderband , at vna-


wares.
Emblematurc:f. 4a emblemixing , or making of Em-


blemes.
Embleme : m. 42 Embleme; a Piflure,and fort Pefie, |
expreffing fome particular conceit.
Embler. To ficale, filch, lurch, pilfer, nimme, purloyne,
imbexel, conuey away.
Emblefite: m. 4 Cataplafine,or Poultis.
Embleures. Corne ftanding,or banging by the ygots.
Emblic..4 kind of round Mirabolan, a th’In-
dians, for want of other things tanne their Mather ,and
make inke and blacking ; neuer putting it, aswe doe,
_ (and as they all other Mirabolans) vate Phyficall v-


fes.
Emblocquer àla Cupidique; autant que, befong-
ner, é
Embobeliné: m.¢e : f.Botched,or patched vp; alfo,de-
ceiued, guked, beguiled whofe eyes aïe bleared.
Embobeliner. To botch, or patch up ; alfo, to deceine,
gull,beguile,bleare the eyes of. ‘
Emboëtture:f. Animboxing,or putting in a box;asEm-
_boiture,
Emboire. To imbue moifien, bedeaw ; alfo, to foke, er
drinke up. :
Lmboiftement. 4s Emboitement,
Emmboifter. To imbox ; inclofé, infert, faften, put, or
Shut vp as within a box;al/o,toioyne,or clofe together.
S'Emboifter.To enter ,or be included,as a lef[e thing
within a greater,or one thing within another, +
Emboifture : f. 4s Emboiture; Al/o,the ring, or plate
of yron,&rc, that keepes the box of a wheele from wea-
ring. s TR:
Emboité: m. ec :f. Imboxed ; inferted, inclofed,ente-
red,or put within a bigger pr other thing ; alfo,ioyned,
bound,or fafiened together. ;
itement: m. Az imboxing,or inclofing within a
bigger, or other, thing; any fuch faftening, ioyning, or |-


clofing.
Fsbo ar Enbodet: ; °
Emboiture: £. Az imboxing; inclofing entering,or ita
Sertion , (as of one bone into the bollow end of another)
anyfuch colligation, clofing , ioyning, or faflening of
things together ; alfè,the gts et bone, or thing fo
incloled, or clofed; alfoyas ifture,
Embolifmal: m.ale:f. Added,as a day unto a yere;


© orincreafedyas the yeare,by fo many dayes,
Embolifine


:m.An addition,as of a day(or more)onto


ayeare,


Original from |
*- THE OF OnSeATEsU NABER Suny


fe * gr ee:


—-. =


E M B E M B
Embonpoint:m. Fullneffe, plumpneffe, bealtbfull e- | Embouchure: £..4s Emboucheure,
‘fate, wood liking, end ro the Fer pmpouciés mc: f. Buckled,clafped, a
Vn embonpoint de nourrice, À fat, er fog gie con- ucler. To buckle, fifien, clajpe together.
fitution of a woman. ic : m. ce: f. Bemived, bedurtied, berayed with


Embofqué : m.ce: £.weedded ;fet with wood; fr ow-
ded in a wood,

Einbofquer vne terre. To plant, or fet wood in it; to
turne it into a wood.
S' embofquer. To fhromd himfelfe in a wood; toget
a wood on bis backe,to take into a wood.

Emboffer.To fwell,or arife in bunches ,bulches nobs;to
grow knottie,er knurrie.

Embottelé : m.ée:f. Imbottelled ; made, or packt up
in bundles, or bottles,


‘Embottcler. To make vp in bundles,or bottles.


Embouché: m.ée : f. Mouthed ; put into the mouth of;
infiruéted, fuborned, made, prepared, leffonned, be-
forchand ; aljo,bitted 3 fraife or fitted with a Bit;
alfo,entered into ; alfo, fraitned, or narrowing (as a
ariuer from the mouth upwards.

Bas embouché. wbofé mouth ftands low.

Fourteau de cuir embouché de velours. whofe
mouth,or top is tipped with veluet.

Homme mal embouché. A detrator, flaunderer,
backbiter ; a foule-mouthed fellow; one that bath bene
ill taught, le flonned,inflrufted. ;

Embouchement : m, 4 mouthing, or putting into the
mouth of; a fubornation,or fore-infiruction; a i gi-
44 conned beforeband; alfo,the bitting,or bridling
of a Worfe,

Embouther. To mouth,or put into the mouth of, hence,
to fuborne ; inflrnét,prepare, ormake, beforehand ; to
gine one his leffonaforehand ; alfo,to bit abor{e; to fur-
nifh,or fit bim with a Bit.

S'emboucher.To enter into; alfo,te firaiten,or grow
narrow,as a viuer from the mouth upwards.
Emboucher d’ vn menfonge, To put a lie into the
. mauth of, to teach to lie ; alfo,to face downe, or flap in
the mouth ,with an (apparant) lie. _ 5
Im’ emboucha de l argent qu'il me prefta. Hee
upbraided me,or caftme in the teeth, with the money
be lent me. 5
Emboucher én la mer. To fall,or enter into the fea,
(as a riuer; ) alfo,to runne, or enter, farre into thefea
(as the flreame of a violent, or fwift riuer.)

Emboucheure: £ 4 Embouchement; 4io,a mouth,

Or open palfage ; an entrie,or ouerture.


Digitizedtby Go: gle. :


Embo
Embo
Embo
b
b
b
Emb
Embo
bo
fi
Embo
Embourfé
Embo
Embo
fed.
Embouti


mud, befpatled with ordure.

ucr. Te bemire , bedurt , beray, bedefh with
mud,befpatle with ordure.

uqueté : m.ée : £. Befet, or bedecked, with nofe-


gayes. |

Embourbé :m.éc:f. Bemudded ; berayed with, laied
or flucke faft in,mud ; alfo,made or growne muddie ; 0
uergrowne with mud.

Embourbement: m. 4 bemudding ; a beraying with,
or flicking faft in,mud.

Embourber. 70 bamud;to beray with,or lay faft in gnud.
S'embourber. To flicke falt in, er be bérayed with,
mud; alfo,to corrupt, wax thicke, or turne into mud,
as 4 flanding water that wants a {pring to feedit.

mbourbeure: f.as Embourbement.
urré : m.ée : £ Stuffed bumbafied, or puffed vp
with flackes,érc.. - :

Embourrement: m. 4 fluffing, or bumbafing witb
feckerheire soe 3 alfoya cufhion,boulfier, ec, fo fluf-


Embourrer. To fluffe,bumbaft er puffe vp with flockes,
baire, rc; to make firout out.
urreur: m. A fluffer ,bumbafter, or puffer up of
things with flockes haire, crc.
:m.ée:f, Purfed, imburfed ; put into, or
laied up in,a purfe,
ourfer. To pur fe vp, to imburfe ; to put into, or lay
Up ina purfe. | |
Emboutcher en la mer. To runne,or fall into the fea;
Seeke Emboucher.
nboufé:m.éc:f, Bedunged; berayed with Cowes
ordure. :
Embouré :m, Éc : f, Plated, fliffened; or as Embouti;
imboffed.
Marteauembouté d'argent. Tipped,or trimmed at
the end, with filuer.
im.ie:f. Extended, retched, firetched out ;
alfo,puffed or dravene out with puffess alfo, raifed,im-
\ el gc ; 7aifed into, wrought with boultles,
utir. To retch extend, firetch out; allo, toraife,
or imboffe ; alfo, to drave out with puffes; alf, to flitch
with packthread; whence;
Efguille i emboutir. À pack-needle.


mboucheure d’ vn cheval. The barres, or part of | Emboutiflement : m. An extending vetching,firetch-
bis nether iam, whereon the Bit refleth; alfo,a Bit,or, ing out; alfo, a raifing, or imboffing; alfo, a puffeor a
the mouth of a Bit, drawing out with puffs.
Cheval de mauvaife emboucheure. Anill,orvi- | _ Emboutiflemens de foye. Silke thrummes.
cious, mouthed borfe. ‘ Emboutoir. as Boutoir.
Emboucheure de farines, 4 putting of the bef | Embouzé. as Emboufé, .
meale in the mouth,or at the top, of a pe (a cow. | Emboyfture. aEmboiture.
| ming tricke among Meale-men.) Embrabile: com. Broad beaded. (vieil mot.)
cheure de Montagne. A gullet, firait paf: | Embraceler. 70 firnifhor bedecke with bracelets.
age, or narrow entrie, at the foot of a mountaine. Embrafe.asBraife. (Barbarouf)
ucheure d’ yne Riviere, The mouth of a ri. | Embralé. Fired,inflamed, (et on,confimed with,a light
Mer; the glace whereat it runs,or empties it [elfe into | fre; alfo,skued.or chamfretted. er
LL thesez : ferent: m. A confiming with fire, a burning
Embouchoit : m. 4 Boot-laft,or Boot-tree; alfo,aborn | to afbes,or coles ; alfo. a hinlinginflamingsfring, fet
toa > a horfe with ; or,asEmbouchouér, | _ ting on es ala mbrafure,
Embouchonné: m.ce: f. Stopt with a flepples ‘Embrafer. To burne unto coales , or afkes, to confume
hauing a bufh(as a Tauerne,or Aleboufe) banging be with fire ;alfo, to kindle, inflame, fire, fet on a light
PROPRES - ERE fire; afo, toskue, or chamfret off the laumbes of a
Fr) a Big ef oa | BA tam pi in
 (generany) any thing that ferues to le :£, An imbracement; a clipping, bugging,
thing into à mont, DRE AE … coling imbracing in the armes. ae


Orig nal from


JHE OHIO. STATE-UNIVERSITY


a BS À


Embraflant.tmbracin: ing, fouldingin the armes.

Embrafleé: m. ée : f. ee RS PT
beld,taken,or infolded in ; put, or buckled unte, the
arme; alfo,comprebended.

Embraffée : f. Aa arme-füll,or fadome.
inbraflelé: m. ée: & Bebraceletted, bauing a brace-
let on; furnifbed, or bedecked,with a bracelet.

Emmbraffement. as Embraflade. À

Ewmbrafier. To imbrace,coll bug, clip, imbrace,or iafold
in the armes ; to intieat kindly jntertaine louinely.
Einbraffer fon efcu. To put his fhield vpon bis arme;
to buckle his fhield vato bis arme. q
Trop embrafler,& peu eftraigner. To meddle with
move vee then be can wield; to baue too many y=
rons in the fire; to loofe all by coueting all.

Embraffe-t0Ut Fate, immense acing al p-
prebending.

Enbisfie f #5 Embrafement; 4/0,tbe skuing,fp lay-
ing,or chamfretting of a doore,or window.

Embrazé. as Embrafé. F

Embrené: m.ée :£ Berayed,befhitten.

Embrener. To beray,or befhite.

Embretelé. lié ou ceinét avec
telles.

Embreuve: m.ée: f. Moiflened, foaked in, fofiened
with liquor ; al{o,died,indued,jmbued.

Embreuver. To moiflen,bedeaw, foake in, foften with,
liquor; alfo,to die,indue,imbue ; as Abbreuver.

Embridé: m, ée:f. Bridled; veftrained,beld backe,tas

_ med kept im, à -

Embrider. To bridle; veftraine, bold backe,tame,keepe


in.
Embrion. as Embryon.
‘ocation : f. 42 embrochation; a fomenting, be-


bretelles ; Looke Bre~


part, with a liquor falling from aloft vpon it in the ma-
ner of vaine. ‘Se iE xt ;
Etnbroché : m. ée :f. Spitted,broached, put upon a
(pit er broach.
Embrocher. To /pit,broach, put upon a fpit,or broach.
Embrocheure: f. À ppitting,or broaching.
mbronché:m. ée: f.Aflonied,amaxed,dixried with
a blow ; whofe bead hangs downe, or totters vp and
downe,after a blow recemed ; alfo,budwinkeds alfo,as
Renfrongné, .
Embroncher. To bow, or bold downe the necke, and
bead ; as one that is flonied with a rap on the fconce;
pk tohide the facesoï eyes with bands,a cloth,or any
matter, ’ À
Embroqué : m.ée: f.Gently bathed,ver,or bedeawed
with moift things; as in Embrocations
Embroquer. Gently to bath, wet ,bepi
with moift things; «s in Embrocation. ey
Embroué: m.ée:f. bedurtied, foiled,defiled. =.
Embrouillaffer. 4s Embrouiller, 7"
Eunbrouillé : m.ée: f.Imtricated.i
ded ; intangled,peftered.
Embrouillement. 4 peflering,intangling jacombring,
intricatene|fe, confüfionsambiguitie.
rouiller. Te pefler, intangle, incomber, intricate ;
‘confound, k
Embrouilleut :m.A confounder jatricater,incombrer,


s’ ve Li To indeuor bimfelfr ; alfo, to imbrue,or be-
dable bin with,

de | ée :f. Wainfcotted, feeled ; alfo , as

Embrunc er. To wainfcot,pr feele with wainfcor, 4


Printer gentle batbing of the bead, or aay other.


nkle, or bedeary


embred; confus.


E ME


Embruni: m. je: f. Darkened,ob{curedmadé browne,

or blackifh; growne browne darke,or blacke.
unir. To dayken,obfiure, make browne or blac-
kp 3 alfd;to grow darke or blacke.

Embryon. The infant in the mothers wombe before it
hath got pepe bape ; o7, the feed thats reccined into
the wombe before the infant bee fafhioued; any rude
malfe,or lumpe of flcfh.

us m.ue?f Fmbued imbrued wet,moiflened,im-
dued; drunke with ; died,or flained with.

Epnbuche, ne Embucher. as Embufche, & Embu£
cher,

Embufflé : m.€e: £ Deceined,coufened, guiled, befot-
ted; led(as a Bufle) by the nofe. 1

Emb To deceiue,coufen,gull befot; lead(as a Bu-
fle) by the nofe,

Emburelucoqué: m. ée : f. Turmoiled, blundered,
or pellered, as the braine about a troublefome bufi-


nelle.
Emburelucoquer l efprit de. To trouble, blunder, or
or pester the mind with , to beat the braines about :


@Rab.

Embufcade: £.4n Ambuftadoe,or ambufb; a way-lay-
ing or lying in wait for. j |

Embufche : f 45 Embufcade,

Embufché. Layed in ambufh; belaying, way-laying,

Embufcher. To belay,to layin ambufcadoe for ; 10 way-
lay; alfo,to take a wood ; or getinto a thicket, for fhel-
t


er.
S'embufcher. To lie in wait, or ambufh for ; or as
Embufcher.
s'Embufquer. as s'Embufcher.
Embut. 4 finnell; alfa pipe to fucke with.
Emedullé: m.ée :f Vnmarrowed, whereort the mar -
row is taken; depriued of marrow,
t. To unmariow, draw the marrow out of,
depriue of marrow.
Emeinbré :m.ée :f. Divided, difmembred, difioyned,
__ difioynted.
Emendateur :m: Amender, amender , reformer, cor-
rector vuler. — :
Emendation:f. 4a amending, mending, reformation,
correction.
Emendatrice :f. She that corretteth,amendeth, refor-
meth,redrefjeth; a correcterefe;reformereffe.
le: fas Amende,
Myo :m.ée:£ Mended, amended, reformed, cor-
rected, : %
_Emender. To mend amend ,reforme,redreffe,better; im
proue ; corred, À À
Emeril: m.The blacke hard mineral fabflancesor flone,
called an Emerod; wherewith yron-workes are furbi-
fhed.and precious ftones and glaffe,cut.
Emerillon: m. 4 Merlin, Marlin,
illonné : m.ée: f.watched narrowly , looked to
neerely; obferued, or profecuted withaquicke(&r cru:
ell) eyes , .
Emerillonner.To watch narrowly ,/ooke too necrely; to
obferue with a quicke(and cruell)eye. AE
Emetillonner à feu & à fang. To profecute with
fire and fword.
Emeute:£ A flirre commotion,rebellion vprore,
Emeute des chiens. as Meute,
Emicicle: m. 42 Hemicycle,or halfe circle,
Einier. as Efmier.
Emine : £ 4 meafre that containes three Poflons; and
comes to,in weight(about fèuen and a halfe of our mo-
| derneounces ; I call them moderne, becanje thaunti-
ent


Graret dar #om
THE OHICESTATE- UNIVERSE


Cp oh - -


EMM


ent Hemina was ten ounces.

Eminemment. Eminent!y,apparantly.

Eminence: £. Eminencie, excellencie, apparantneffe,
furpaffing of otbers ; alfo, a rifing up aboue,er bearing
out bepond,others.

Eminent. Eminent, apparant, bearing outwards, bigh,
or loftie in fight ; excelling, furpaffing, ouerpeering, o-
thers.

Emiflaire : m. 4 fluce,or floudgate to let water out of
a riuer,or pond.

Ki “Se A finooth-skind, and tootbleffe,kind of Dog-

1,9

Emmaigri : mie: f. Madeleane, flarued, pined.

Einmaigrir. To make leane,to fiaruc,to pine.
S'eminaigrir. To grow leane, waflia flefh , fall a-
wry.

Emmaigriffant. Making leane,

Emmailloté : m. ée : £ Swadled, fwathed,

Erminaillotement: m. 4 fwadling , 07 a wrapping in
fwathe-bands,

Emmailloter. To fwadle,tofwathe,to wrap infivatbe-
bands.


eee :m, ée:f, Houfed , fürnifbed with a

Of ee

Enuneifpnnes, To houfe ; toput into,or firni{h with à
ba


Emmnaiftrifé. Made, or paffed Mafler, that bath taken
the degree of a Maifter ; that is growne as cunning in
an Art as any Mafler.

E:mnaladi: m. ie: £, Made,or growne, ficke.

Emmaladir. To make ficke.

Eimmalicé: m, ée +f Full ofvancor,or malice; enraged

with Sigh serie defpightfill,

oun ant. Malicionfly raging,


—_—


ES =
S


or growing malici-
Bonéihés m.éc:f. Helucd ; 5 Seti into a baft,or ban-
dle.


Lafche emmmanché. Lazie,idle, flothfull,weake, fee-
ble,looffe ioynted, faint-bearted,

Emmancher. To belue ; ; to fee a bafisor bandle on; (and
ir alfo,to fet in order, bring i into fafhion, make as
it

noue: £ Aheluing , afetting on bleu 4
handle ; alfo, the upper part, or fetting on,


fleene.

* Emmanchoir: m, The bole, or eye of abatchet, ec,
wheremto the bandle is put.

Samer :m. ée: f. Full of, or bedeawed with,


Enananel rm.ée:f. Manacled pandfep,

Enarbenet. Tomanacle ; to handfaft, or tie the bands
ethe:

|Enanelé: m.ée : f.Becloked ; rors

ped as in,a cloke ; Seeke Emmentelé.

aroté : m. ce: f. Wearing a Scepter ; or, à fioles


| _ bable.
he m.ée: f, FOR A 8, = A-


ei es |
or perplexe witl rl pe

: f. Mated, amated ; ecoyeds @
Los


A tes


Emmatir. Ton rate ae


EM M


one apd of the vigor of af, tomortifie, make fade,
as :f, Piled , beaped, gathered toge-
Eimmateé Hoarfe troubled with a pofe, or fuffed


ee. ~f éc:f. Matriculated,
Emmatriculer. To matriculate; to fweare of an Vai-
verfitie,to incorporate or confirme,by oath, ix a Socie-
tie.
Einmayé : mée: f. Decked bung.or flrewed with May
mata Ot.
mayer.To decke,bang, fir rew or fianifh with greene
per es ashes May ers,
eché:m.ée:f. Furnifbed with match, or candle-
weeke; alfo, fnuffed.
Emmecher. 70 nifh with a match, or candlewecke ;
alist auf
Age uiet kind of | daunce, as the Pang Mea-
fare, rc: §
Emme ioré: m. ée: f. Bettered , iniprentli,, ave
ed,


Emmeliorer. To betierimproue amené.
Emmmené : m. ée : fa Amené,
Eshmener:Te bring,or lead vnto;to, felch à in,or to;Looke
Amener.
Emmener par force, Te bale, pull, dragge, force
to come away po bim.
er vne chofe à fon proffit. To make profita-
blevfé of athing; to derine,conney, or drawa thing
unto bis owne benefit.
Emmenoté. as Emmanoté, Manacled,
telé.cs Emmantelé; wrapped in a cloke,coue…
vedas with a cloke ; bemaniled, becloked.
Beufemmentelé ‘de noir. A blacke,or blackifhOxe;
a blacke-bodied Oxe.
Corneille emmentelée. The winter-crow, whofe
backe,and bellie ave ofa darke afb-colout ; we call ber
a Royflon Crow.
Emunenteler. To couer with, to wrap in, a cloke, or
mantle ; to cloke, mantle, bemantle.
nei rm, ée:f. Small, “or ct 3 peecem
_ mealed in little eces,or parcels.
Emmenuifer. Th make fmall, to peecemeale, to reduce
into little parcels,or peeces.
+ dé: m. de: f. Beturded ; berayed with or-
ure,
Emmerder. Te beturd,or beray with ordure.
sEmmefler. To meddle, to deale much; to bufie,pefler,
intangle bimfelfe with.
Enumefhager. To fet abonfe,or borfhold in good order ;
to play the good husband,
Emmeublé: m.ée : £Furnifoed with mouables, —
mmeu Furniture; or , a firnifhing with
mouables.
| eee fa maifon.To fianifh bis boufe with fuffe,
prouifion,mouables.
Emmeurer.


as Emmurer
Emmi. Through,or in the vide
_ Courrir Penctir cxranitles me To en,


fireets.

| Emmiellé: : m. éc: f.Honied made of bonie, feafoned,or
rt bonie ; fwect as benie 3alfo,inticed,in-
M lalarediales dravene on D frecl mecnes.
t:m. An allureæent, inticcmont, plea-
fant inducement, (weet preuocaticn ; alfo, a dvefing,

feafoning, fweerening, annointing with Lenie, Fe
Emmieller. Te bebonie; te fweeien ; drefes von
mingle,


mingle,or feafon with honie; aff, to allure, inueagle,

intice, winne,drawypr toll on; pacifie or appeafe with

feet meanes.

Emmielleure, or Emmiellure : f.sweetne(fe,bonied-
neffé; or, as Emmi ent,

Enunniner, To put into a mine.

Emmitouflé :m.ée : € Muffled,booded,budled.or bid-
den within fürres or furred clothes.

sEmmitouflereTo muffle, bood, bide, fhrowd, lap, or

keep bimfelfe warme in furres,or furved clothes.

Emmitré:m.ée:f. Bemitered ; crowned, or hooded


ter ; to crovene,or bood with a My-


ke Efinodler.

le #m.ée : € Heaped,piled,compatted ; ga-
theved, packed jor made vp together.
Emmonceler.7o pile,compatt,packe ; affemble,gather,
or makeup into a beape-; to beape together; Looke A-
monceler,
Emmont. as Amont; Vpward.
Enimorionné : m. ée: €. Couered, or armed, with a
Murrion,or Headpeece.
Emmorisque :com. Moorifh, Mauritanian, Moore.

SUike ; that founds,or fauors,ofthe Moore.

imortaifé :m. ée :f. Mortaifed; ioyned, or clofed
by mortaife.


aifer. To mortaifé ; to ioyne, or clofe by mor-


taife.
ninouflé : m.ée:f. Couered, or kept we, as the
band with a mittaine;,alfo,bemuffled,wrapped,or lap-
ped clofe within(vwarme)clothes. ;
nouifler. To put on bis mittaines ;tocouer, or keepe
warme bis hands with mittaines;al/o,te bemuffle,hide,
sr > or lap up bis whole bodie within (warme)
. clothes,
Ô :f. Immured ; walled about, inclofed
with,or within a wall; flanked,or defended by walls.
Emmuter: To impure;or wall about ; to clofe vp into a
wall, or betweene two walls; to flanke,or defend with
walls. À
Emmufelé : m.ée:f. Mufled.
Emunufeler. To muffle.
Emmufqué : m.ée =f, Bemusked, perfümed with musk.
Rue Te bemuske,or perfüme with muske.
Einolli: m.ie: f. Mollified, foftened. |
ollient: Softening mollifying, affuaging.
Emollir. To fofien , mollifie ; make gentle , or pli-


Emologation :f. Aa admiffion, allowance , approue-
bogs he ore fa a a
Em + m.Éc:f. Admitted allowed accepted ap-
proued of,affented,or confentedyunto, ©
Emologuer. To admit jatertaine,accept,approue, aL
low of; toconfènt,or affent,vnto. rs ca
Emolument :m. Emolument, profit, commoditie, be-
nefit,, gaine, SE
Emonétoire: m. An Emuntlorie; a kernellie place of
the bodie that ferues for the voyding offuch humors as
be fisper fluous imor offenfiue vato,a principall,or noble
part; fuch be under th eares for the braines, th'arme-
à a forthe heart, and the groine or {hare for the liner ;
_ alfo,a (nuffer.
ndé. zs Efmondé, Cleanfed,cleered, purged.
nondée. Naked Barlie ; whofe buske falls of
the graine,as foone asitisvipes ns.
To cleanfe,erc; Looke Efmonder. |
as Amorcer. To baite, inueagle, beguile.


Ren


oe EMM | E MP


Eïñorcher. To put powder into the touchabole ofa |
.


peéce.,
Emotté: m.ée : € whofe clods be broken.
Emotter. To breake clods,or turues on the ground.
Emoucé : m. ée: t, Dulled,blunted. ;
Emoucer. To dull, blunt; breake, or fpoyle the edge


of.
Emouchail : m. À flie-flap.
Emoucher. Seeke Efmoucher.
Emouchon :m..4 boly-water fprinkle,
Emoufié: m. ée:f. Rid,or bared,of moffe,
Emoufser. To rid,ôr bare,of moffe.
Emouvant. Mouing, flirring vp.
Empacqué: m.ée:f. lls’ eft empacqué.He is moft
_wulfiall obflinate,or obflinately fallen ; from the fhcepe
Pacos (whereon th’Indians, in fiead, ar for want,of
borfès., carrie their marchandife) which being an-
gred, lie done with tueir burtbens ; and will not
rif for any blowes,vntill their mood be fully paft, and
diféefed. ;


Eapacts rm. ce: f. or NE comipatied, or packed vp
c


ofe together ; alfo,crufied,or hard baked. .. à

Einpacter. To heape,compact,or pack vp clofe together
alfo,to cruftjor bake bard,

Empaillé : m. ée : f.Befirawed; filled made, fianifhed,
with flraw,

Empaindre. violently to affaile,or fet vpons to (irike,or

E bit with violence. ently aff ae
mpaint : m.te :f. Violently affailed, (bocked, fet on:
bed preffed; furioufly bit,or a sf hid
Etnpainten mer. Entred farre into the fea; a great
way inthe fea.

nue :f A violent fhocke,impreffion , affailing, or

iting on.

Enipalé :m. ée :f Impaled,or fpitted on a flake.

Etnpaler. To impale ; to fpit on a flake ; to thrufta flake
inat the findament and out at the mouth; (amanner
of death inflifted on offendors by the Turks.)

aletoqué : m.ée: £ Mufled,or lapt up about the
chinne, as with a Caffocke,or Gaberdine,

Empalin : m: 4 Empan ; 07,2 little fpanne.

Empalmé :m.ée: fe: Strucken with the paulme of the
ac 3 bit füll,or takenright (asa Ball) with an open

and,

Empalmer. To ffrike (or box) with the paulme of the
band ; to bit full,or ated a Ball, hes ihe.
pen sa 3 10 giue a found whirret, or fill blow there.
wil d


Empampré: m.ée:f. Decked with Vine brant
ches. | | 5 pt

Empan: m. 4 (panne. . FRE =

Panache. Het * feathered; decked, adorned,


fucke, or fet out with feathers, or plumes of feathers; |


wearing,or bauing,a plume; and bence;
Armet bien empanaché. whofe creft is beantified
with a goodlie plumes
anage.asAppennage. - | oles
Et eré. Pat pgues A TS baskets.
Empanarer.To put into panniers, or wicker baskets.
anné: as Empenné. Feathered, 330
Empantouflé : m. ée: f. Impantofled,or wearing pan-
tofles. . "
Livre empantoflé. .4 Booke with a thicke com
uer.
queté: m.ée:f. Made vpin,orinto, a packet,
bundle, or fardle.


Empaqueter. To packe vp,to make vp in, er into,a

de pal ee

“x Gg | as Em-
Original’ from 4


THÉ OHIOSTAFEUNMER


UE


\


op ey ase


+


xi a ill


mn equally maricd; no way difparaged by ber
mate /


Emparché: m, ée: £.2 d; put into a pound.

Emiparé : m. ée : £.Seifed,caught bold of laid bands on;
got into bis poffeffion,or got polfeffion of.

Emparement..A /tifing,or laying hands on ; a catching
hold,or taking poffejfion of.

Emparence:f. Defence.

Emparentet. To ioyne in kindred, to make one of inne
to another,

Emparer. To /éife,or lay hands on; to catch bold,or take
poffeffion of; al , to affemble, or gather forces toge-
ther for the performance of one pufh,or brunt.

Emparfumé : m.ée : f.Perfumed, fweetned with odors.

Emp liner. To per fume, or fwecten with edors:

one homme bien etnparlé. An eloquent or wel-

oken man.

“rep + À dumbe fhew, or fpeaking by
fignes.

ae = : Connfellor, Barrefler, Pleader jmparler.

vi mot.

Einpas: m. Shackles,fetters,or paflernes for umrulie, or
vabroken borfes.

Empafté : m. ée:£. Crufled, or baked bard ; kneaded,

put or made into paf ; impafled.

ae ke m, €¢:£, Crammed (as pullein) with rolls
of pal. 9

Empatteler. To cramme pullein with rolls om

Empaftement: m,Paf; or, a pafling , or bedawbing
with dough ; or,a making of dough into paf.

Empatter. To knead,or make into dough,or paf; to paf
to bedawbe with dough,or paft.

Empatement, as Empiettement.

Etnpatenoftré : m. ée : f. Full of, loadenwith (Pater-
noflersyor) Beads; hypocritical, fuperftitious ; that bath
a paire of Beads,or is neuer without a paire of Beads,
banging at bis girdle. 2

Einpatronné. Seifed on ; made Lord,or Maifter of.

s'Empatronner de, To fife on, 10 make bimfelfe the
Lord,and Maifler, to take on bimfelfe the Seigniorie,

commaund of. 7

: Empatté.« Efpaté. é

npatteinent.as 4 ’ 3
aulmé:m.6e : ge A 3 fully griped, feifed,

or taken into the bands. :
aulmer. To impaulme ; to gripe, fa full band


07 ; 10 take into bis band; alfa À
d,fhielded,couered, or


| Empavoifé: m.ée: £ De
| fhrowded a Targuct,or Tar guet-fence. .
À sEmpavoifer.T0 defend, fhield,or couer themfèlues as
with Targuets,
fer.To grow natural to,or inward with;to thriue,
or profper,in,as one of,a countrey, Er


shies the Lori of a peece of caske.

he within the teeth Les
>. atched combe (| (Rab. as

ie er 3) alfo,pinned,as “ca of a peece


} ae 2 = . ub À x
en to pricke, rub, fevatch, dreffe,


Je bou d'vne douve. To pinne the bar


si me


vd


E MP E MP
Empaqueteur : m. 4 packer up of: Empennaché. as Empanaché,
Emparigé . That ath bis due part,or portion, Empenné : m.ée: f. Feathened ar an arrow.

Fille emparagée fuffifamment,ou deuément.Fitly |-Empenner. To feather,as an arrow.


a + L de.


+


t mY) >


Empennon : m, The feather ofan arrow.
Empereur :m. 4 Emperour ; alfo,the Sword-fifh.
ier: m, ere :f. Imperiall; belonging,or bke;vn-
10 an Emperour.
Grandeur emperiere. The bighe/t greatnes,or grea-
tefi dignitie,a moft fupreame autboritie.
Emperierc:f. 4nEmprefe.
rlé : m.ée: f. Impearled,bepearled ; inriched,a-
dorned,or fet thicke with pearle. ae
ler. To impearle,or bepearle shiek, decke, or
fet thicke,with pearle. ‘Be


Emperruqué: m.éc:f. Imperiwigged, that weares a

criwig, or Gregorian, = ù

Empefché: m. ée: £. Impeached ; let, bindered ; pef
tered , incombered ; alfo , bufie, bufied, occupied, im-
ployed ; alfo, feifed, entred upon,or taken into b& owne
bands ; alfo, withflood, or kept backe; alfo, fut, or
dammed vp.


ché de fa perfonne. Veweldie, beauie-bodi-


ed, purfie,eveffe. L
Porn Lu chée. Stopped ; obfiru£ted, or trou-
bled with obfiructions ; (more particularly) asi
Poiétrine.

Faire I’ fché. To be (or feeme) verie bu

to beflirve bimfelfe bard , in a matter ; alfo, as

in;

Vous faiftes bien de I empefché. You make

though.

Empesche-maifon : m..4 trouble-houfe; a lazie, un-
profitable;or comberfome gueft ; one thats good for no»
‘thing,or fit for no imploymeat,in a boufe.

eschernent : m. An impeachment ; a let, flop,bin-
erance,impediment, obflacle; difisrbance, comber,
trouble; difficultie ; bufineffe ; alfo,a withftanding;al-
Soa fhutting or damming vp.
Empefthement de fief. 4 feifing,or féifire of,anen-
trie made vpon,a fief.
Empefchement de perfonne. Varweldineffe of bo.


ie.
Empefcher. To binder,let,barre, flop; impeach; pefter,
trouble, difturbe,incomber ; bufie, toyle, bold +,
keepe imployed; alfo,to withfland,ov keepe backe ; alfo,
to fhut,or damme vp. -
ne peut empescher le fief mouvant de luy. Hee
Cannot feife on,or take into bis poffeffion, the ec.
Qui peur, & n° Che;peche :Prov. He fianes,
that may,and will not, binder euill.
€:m.ée:f, Starched; alfobauing a wherle, or
ioyned to a wberleÇas a fpindle bath,or 4.)


Empefer. To larch.
pe m.ée i pe vifited with the plague;
al/o,plaguie ent pefiiferous. :
Empeler. To info, wifit with the plague ; to fet the
plague on, gine the plague vnto..
c: £.4 pefterment,incombrance,intricacie, trou


Emopeftré : m. ée : £ Impeftered,intricated, intang | led,
Empeftrement sm. 4 pjlerngintrcatngintenlig
Empeftrer. Topefter, intricate, intangle, trouble, in-


4 É : f. Looke Impetuoñté.
sf. ; Da
nr ee, ur
ation


Original-from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


ss


EMP


fication of an all 3 4 fignificant force in either,

an Emphajis ; (bence) alfo, vigorous, forcible, earneft,
expreffe. "

Emphatiquement. Empbatically, effeétually. ;

Emphyteofe: f. The making of a thing better then it
was when.it was receiued; land improued in goodnes,
oï,an eftate upon condition to improue it; animprone=
ment. 0

Emphyteofien. À Farmer,or one that taketh land, or
a commoditics,on condition,to better,and impronc
them,

Emphyteote. as Emphyteofien,

Emphyteufe. as Emphyteofe.

Emphyteutique. hence ; inne
Scigneuremphyteutique.That raifés,or improxes,
bis rents, ~

Empiece. Not of a great while. ;

Empicgé: m. ée:f. Exfñared ; taken,or intangled in a
fnare,

Empieme. as Empyeme.

| Empienne de foulier. T#upper leather of a fhooe,

Empierré : m. de: f. Turned into flone.

Coeur empierré. An obdurate,bard, ftonie,or flintie
beaït.

Empierrement : m. 4 turning into fone.

Empierrer. To turme,or transforme,into flone.

‘Empieté. Paved,pounced clawed, talented ; that bath

. pounces er csal/o,feifed,beld,griped in clawes,or clou-
ches; alfo,vfirped ; al[o, intangled, or fettered by the


“thy jeer:
| Empietement.4 (eifing,griping holding, as in clawes,
clouches ; cre; an vférpation of another maus right ;
Looke Empiettement. : ;
mpietement d’ vne montaigne. The foot,or bot-
tome ofa bill.
eter. To feife,gripe,hold within the pawes,clawes,
pounces,talents clouches; to fet forward the foot ther-
by to catch at a thing; alfo, to vfurpe another mans


right.
s'Empieter.To fetter,enfnare jatangle bimfelfe by the
et, ;


as


PERS ea


. re


—


. Empietté. as Empieté.

Empiettement. + Empietement; 4/0, the foot, or
bottome of; and hence ;
Emipiettement de colomne, The Bafis,or foot of a

pillar.

Empieture: £ The footing,or bottome of a thing;the part
whereby it lands on,or us fetled into,another thing.

- illé: m.ée : € Piled,heaped on.

Empillier :m.ere: £. Bepillered ; fet on pillers; made


x".


….


4


th pillers.. «
| Empiné: m.ée:£ Turnedinloa Pine tree,


lojje,or decay of 2thing by vfé, or wearing; alfa, the
poker: of allay,or fallen coines of id, or
Jiluer; which is,in peeces of gold of 23 Carats fin
‘| , a foure and twentieth part of filuer jc copper, or of et-
ther; and in peeces of filuer of 1x. d. fineneffe, a twelft
part of copper.
Empire: m.An Empiresor Emperie ; alfo empire; Impe-
_ riall domimon,Seignorie,Soueraigntie; preveminence;
- durifdiction yule,gonernment ; the big heft dignitie, the
* greate/i (way, the mop fupreame power, pars abjolute
é itie. +534 * a à
Emnpire.al empire.Jmpairing,decaying waxing worfe
- C 7% as fowre Ale i the pese. He


sr
de:

1) ite gt

f *


+


ey,


Emphaftique: com.£mphaflicalls pr donéwith |


of.
: Emplette. as Emploiéte.


“Emplier. as Employer.


_Einpirance : f. Amimpairing or impairement ; the waft, .


E MP


Empiré: m. ée : f. Impaired wafled, decayed, grovne
* worfe for the ko ; imbafèd. a :
icement : m, as Empirance; Or, crowing wor,

Dee fe P 1 groming worfe

Eimpirer:7o impaire,imbafe,or make woi{e,alfo,to waft,
weare, decay in goodnefle, grow worfe and worfe, or
worle for the wearing,
nel empire en rien. He is ewen as good as be.
Femme mauvaife qui n' empire, encore n’eft elle
pas la pire : Prov. A bad woman that paires not is not
the worft of women.

Empireume: m.4 marke of fire, (corching,or burning;
re ges of warmth > or beat ; afparkle, or {mall

fire. es

irique : com, An Empiricke; a Phyfition which

without regard either of the caufe of a diféafè,or of the

conflitution of the À pic 3 Applies thofe medicines

whereof cri bad experience im others, worke they


bow th

Empiftolé Armed with aPiftoll,

Empiftoler. To arme,or farnifh, with Piftolls,

lacé : m. ée :f Placed,planted; feated, fetled.

Emplacement d’ vne ville. The feat of a towne, :

Emplacer. To fettle, feat place plant.

Emplage: m, 4 filling.

Au feur  emplage. Looke Furemplage:

Emplaidé: m. ée: f. Impleaded, fued.

Emplaider. Tofüe, to implead, to bring an aËlion a-
gaint.

Emplaftration: £ 4 plaifiering, or dawbing; a laying
of plaifter ; alfo,an emplajiration ; a grafting by inocu-
lation without a Scutcheon ; and,in Phyficke, th appry-
ing of a falue,or plaifler.

Emplaftre : m. À plaifter.

Emplaftré:m.ée: f. Plaiftered, beplaiftered, couered
with a plaifier. q

laftrer. To plaifter, o beplaifler ; to couer with a


er.
laftreure :£ A plaiftering, or beplaiflering; alfo,a


ifler.

Emp aftreux: m.eufe :F Full of plaifters; alfo,belong-
‘ing to,or feruing fora plaifier.

Emplatement: m, A flatting ; a laying flat unto; a
making broad, or flats alfo, a flat, or broad, part


E:npli : m. ie: f Filled,replenifbed;, complete ; top-fil,
up to the necke,wiouth,or brinke. eae dt


Emplir. To fill yeplenfo gorges make, or fff up to


the tops >. ” ‘
E fic vne femelle, To ferue, bag, make ber great, .
fil ber panniers, gine ber ber paiment, get ber with


ng, | ening
Dire d'emplir. To performe, finifh, fulflaccom
E pee complete. of ie 2 pl :
im. V/e,or imployment of a thing; as Employ.
Emploidte: fas Employ mn nec
fickestrade,commerfe ; alfo,a bar gaine made,purchafe
bought ; or,a thing whereon monty bath beene, or may |
be,well imployeË ; alfo,utterance of commodities.
_ Femme qui eft encores de bonne emploiéte, That
is yet of a tollerable age , that hath yet fome good
Jupe in her; with whom,as yet, prettie (port might bee
made. ET ;
: Marchandife d'emploiétc. ware that fells well,that
utters quickly, that goes away apace ; marcbandable


Paré 51" LR : a3


~”


.


‘Original from-


HES HIQ“SPATE UN PE ns Re


be! “EER, © ee a


ee


+» "dE sd


EM P


Emploiéter. To traffique,trade ; bargaincchaffer for ;
bejlow or implop money in,

Emploite. as Emploiée.

Emplomber, To lead ; coner with lead ; fetimlead.

Emplotonné : m.ée: f. wound vpon.a clue, made in-
to a bottome,conglomerated.

Emplotonner. To wind upon clues, to make into bot-
tomes,or to make bottomes of; to conglomerate.

Employ: m. imployment,ufe, dailie occupation of, ne.
ceffarie bufinef]e fora thing.

Employé: m. ée :f. Imployed , applied , uftd, bufi-
ed, occupied; beflowed, conferred, difpended, layed
out.

Employement : m. 4n imploying, applying, vfing, oc-
cupying ; a beflowing, difpending, difiribution, laying

ut


oul.

E:nploycr. To imploy,applie ; ufe,occupie,bufie ; con
by od dipend tific, lay out. Ch i
s’Employer. To indeuor, labour , be earneft upon,
to fet binsfelfe about ; to giue,applie,or addiét bimjelfe
vunte.

Emplumaffé : m. ée :f. Beplumed ; decked, adorned,
aie fet out with, fiucke full of,plumes, or plums
of featbers, :

Empluiné : m.ée :f, Feathered,be feathered ; fet, fluck,
adorned, garnifhed with feathers,

Regnard qui dort la Matinée n'a pas la langue
emplumée: Prov, The fleepie Fox barb jeldome Ra-
thered breakefujts,

Emplumer. To feather,befeather; flicke, fet, garnifh,
or dre{Je with feathers.

Emply.as Employ.

{ Empoché: m.ée: f Impoaked,impauched.

Empochet. To impouch,to put into a pouch, or budget ;
to bag,poake,or pocket vp.

Empoigné : m.ée :£ Seiad, griped,caught,got into the

ft, layed hold of.

Empoigner. To feife,gripe,catch,lay bands en, attach,
réte À bold of.

Empoignure :f. Abandle ; or the part whereof hold is
taker cea ua
Empoinétant. Pointing om ; making a point for, gining

a point vnto,
Empoinéter. as Empointer.
int. bien empoint de faire &c. About, readie,
or likelie, to doe ec. ;
Mal-empoint. Vihandfome, untrimmed, foule, flut-
tifh,in ill plight,put of array.


Empointer. To point on; make a point for, give or fet,a
oat unto, + 2
mpointet les doigts fur le luth. To finger a Lute;
a bandfamely tofet,couch,or place ends
thereon, :


Empois: m. Starch, Smit

Empoifonné :m. ée: f, Poifoned, impoifoned; veno-

( mea, ;
Empoifonnement: m. À poifoning, impoifoning; ve-
~_ noming,


AS er. To poifon,impoifon ; venome.
= ‘Empolomerle“e ef, a woman that


‘Emmpoifonneur: m. 4 poifèner impoifoner.
Empoifonneufc: f. « Empoifonnerefle.
Empoiffé: m.. ca ee pr deg»
_ dred with pitch; alfoflarched.
Empoifler. To bepiteh ; todreffe,or couer with pitc;
a oT ie PATS CA


<r


Ç if 2 >

at « : : ES


"=


l'E
E


EMP.


Empoiffonnement. 4 flori ond rc with fifh.
sagen To aoe re Jerue pre
SD.


:m, 4 Mart towne; a place wherein an vniuer-
fall Faire is kept.

Emporté :m.ée:£ Carvied,borne,taken, conueyed ax
way ; alfo,woon.gained gone away with.

11 a emporté à la chandelle.He bath(ont-fit all com-
peyerped all cuflomers; be bath gotten it ,by bidding
é H,

Emportement: #. À carrying bearing,taking,or con-
ueying away.

Emporte-piece. See Cautere.

Emporter.To carrie,beare,conuey.or take away; to win;
gaine, get,or goe away with ; alfo,as Importer ; a/fo,to

ring,or beare unto,
Baporter la balance, oule poids. To beare downe
the ballance ; to enerwcigh,or weigh more then,

Autant en emporte le vent. So much breath is loft ;

(vfed, when one, baning fpoken to fuch as beare, or

beed, brm not will fignifie, tbat be bath lofi bis labeur.)

Ife Jaiffe emporter du vent. Hee runnes on freely

without flopping; alfo, be x inconflant, flitting, varie
able,unfleadie,light ; or fiers bimfelfe to be fwayed
altogether by bis owne giddie humors.
Leventreemporte la tefte: Prov. Said of Apofla-
taes, whoin bope of eafe and preferment abandon a
knowne truth; [aid alfo of thofe,who aboue all things
ai their bellies ; or by an exceffine dict ruine, or
, their under flandings.
oudré : m.ée : £. Bedufted,or powdered; filled, or
efiled, with duft.
uldrer.To bedufl; to fill,or defilewith auf.
oule : f, A little wheale,blificrpx fh,water-powk;
avifing of the skin, fucb as comes after netling,érc; al-

[0,a fall bubble on the water.

Empoulé: m. ée : £.Bliflered,pimpled,or uncuenly puft
up in many places as the skin after netling; bubblie; or
err rifing,in bubbles, as water in a great {buwre
ofraine,

pe. ip . Swellingly, bubblingly, puffe-like , or
pufh-like. :

Empoulure : f. A4 bliftered part of the bodie ; a place
full of wheales, pores pi es,

Empouppant.Being,or blowing,as wind in the poope of


E


a
Empouppé. Hit in the poope;drinen,or blown forward
Reis the vod d ;


E . To bit the popes  be,or blow,as wind in
"the poops oft fhip ; to fev sg og eave forward asa
fill wind doth a fhip.


Vn vent empouppe mon navire, My fhip goes with
a füll,or fère wind. s'
D eupré-vperpi clothed,or decked with purple.
à wai empourpré de fang. Died, diftained, im-
brued with bloud, —
urprer.7o cloth,adorne,or enrich with purple.
Empraignant. Printing,imprimting,preffing in.
rainte: f, as Empreinte.
Empré. Medowie, turned into a mecow, growne a me-
and fit to beare bay.
Empréer. Tomake a medow of; to ane so or
__ corne-greunds,into medowes ; to turne .
mpreignée. with child conceined ; bagd.
reingt. The Palfie, wherein any one of the fides lue.
e :


i


m
fe at
E
Esp


both fence,and motion.
ce


£
mn er D ahrint fi Er prcintes
ar ;
#1 inet


: Original from
IO-STATE UNIVERSITY


te


git THE OH
ee gat Ks


sr à


ha wha ad,
ef ie wr rar » + ‘
; rer

t ré


Emul


EM P


Empreinéte. Bagds fall, with youg,that hath taken.
Empreindre.To ses lampe, fet,preffe,or thruft bard
in; alfa,to affaile,or (et on with violence. |
inpreint :m. te : À Printed, flamped, preffed, thruft
hard in; alf, violently affailed, furioufly fet on,
Einpreinte: f 4 flampe, aprint’, imprefion, bard
Setting in; aviolent affault, a fisrious and forcible on
Set :


Emprendre. as Entreprendre; To undertake.

Empres. Hard-by , neere-hand , clofe adioyning. (va)

Empreflé: m.éc :f. Preffed,fqueexed,thruflcrowded,
or (trained together. mats
Fort empreflé. Verie bufie, forward, fawcily intru-
ding into matters ; bard layed to,or put extreamely to
his fhifts,to his plunges, 4

Empreifer. To prefe, (queexe,thruft, crowd, or firaine
togeiber.

Etnpreut.Onesthe firft word of reckoning,or numbring;
or as we fay, Imprimis.

sImpris. a6 Entrepris; Vadertaken.

Einprife.as Entreprife.

Emprifonné: m. éc : £ Imprifoned , layed by the
hecles,

Emprifonnement:m. Aa imprifonment, a fhutting
upya fill rejtraint of libertie.

Emprifonner. To imprifon, to cafl in prifon,to lay by the
beekes,to {hut up.

Emprunelé : m. ée: f. Belonging to the apple of the


oe
: Emprunt: m. 4 borrowing.


Mis à l'emprunt. charged with a priuie Seale.
Emprunté : m. éc :f. Borrowed. ’
- Iw eft pasemprunté en fon difcours. His fheech
is naturall,or bis owne; bee ws bebolden.10 no bodie


for it.
Enaitietes, To borrow.
Inprunter le nom d'autruy. To ft, or abufe ano-
_ ther mans name ina matters sang
Il ne choifit pas qui emprunte : Prov. Borrowers
(we fay beggers)are no chufers.
Emption:f. 4 purchafing,a buying,
Empuanti: m. ic:f. Befluake, filled or defiled with
tench, perfumed or annoyed with ill fauors.
Etnpuantir. To beflinke; to fill with flinke annoy with
loathfome fines ,per ame with filthie odors.
sEmpuantir. To wax vnfäuorie , 10 beginne to
finell.
Empunaifi :m. ie: f.«s Empuanti.
ifir. zs Empuantir.


Émpurés m.€e:£ Appeached , accufed, complayned
of. mât
Emputement : m. Animputation, afperfion ; accufati-


on,or bill of complaint. erase
Emputer.To appeach;accufe,complaine of; to lay anim.
putation,caft an alherfion,on. =. Se
Emputeur:m, A(ecret accufers a pickthanke ; sell.
tale,complainer apeachersinformer. RES
eme:vo. An inward collection of corrupt matter
in any part of the bodie, but efpecially betweene the
breaft,and lungs.


Empyré. ciel empyré.Th'Imperialor bigheft heanen;
nine, and dwelling place of God,and his elect.
Empyreume :m.4 driesand accidental heat,or fierie
qualitie ; or,as Empireume. di
Emu Looke Emonétoire : Rab, 1


Emulateur: m.An emulator jmitator,or enuier of ano-
thers ae itor,concurrent,or corriuall, yaad
tion, counter feiting, imitation with


aa


Emulgence : f. or flroaking.


En. A Prepofition; bath diners fignifications , as in,jato;


ar im. ie: f, Sharpened; exafperated ; angered;
ma ns:

Enaigrir. To make,or grow fharpe; teanger,exafberate,
… s'Enaigrir. To grow wonfe and werfe.


(ne Pesca
nanerer, Toma er.
Enamouré


E NA


« defireto excell; alfa,enuie.
mulgeant. Milking; Looke Emulgent,


gent. veine ernu gente. One of the two maine
branches of the bollow veine ; which goes to ihe reines,
and there is diuided into diuers others; fome call it


the pumping veine.
EmufGon : Ê. An emulfion ; any kind of feed &c, brayed
inwater,and then flrained to the confiftence of an Al-


mond milke ; alfoyany kind of creame, ov milkie bumor.

Emut.as Efmeut.

mutiffement : m. The muting,or droppings of birds.

Emyne. 4 kind of meafure; as Emine.

N. (Relating to a thing meant,or mentioned before, fie-
aifies) thereof ; as, m’ a fai& tort, il s'en repenti-
ra; alfo,any,or none,tbercof; whence ; vous parlez d’
argent,en avez vous ? ie n’ell ay point.

En avoir ; whence; En as tu? Haft thou that I asked
for ? haft thou the thing linquived after ? alfa, a: in;
l'en aura. (blowes being underftuod) 1 fhall be well
beaten ; my skin coat will be foundly curried:

Y'en ay bien avallé :&; Ie m' en fuis bien donné, 1
baue taken in my liquor freely.

T'en ay trop.(at Bowles,c>c; ) 1 am too bard throven,
lly en a en ce monde à qui ne chaule. there be fame
in this world thst care not,

En eftre; wbence ; En voulez vous eftre ? will you
make one ?

C'en eft fai&.(The bufineffe is)atreadie ARCS
finifhed; (the man is) vtterly undone, or but a dead
man,

Cela n'en eft pas. (21 game)That is no play.

l'en fuisainfi. 1 am in this taking; fuch ismy cafe, it
à cuen fo with me,

Qu'en eft il? wat of that ?

: Que yous en eftil ? What is that unto you ?

Nous en venons tout maintenant. We come from it,
or from doing it,but cucn now, CHER

En.(Relating to a place before mentioned, fignifies) thi-
ther ; as; Il vaen France; vous en allez vous? alfa,
thence,or fiom thence; as,le viens du temple,en ve-
nez vous aufsi ?

En. Set before Verbes of motion (as in the laft example)
without reference unto a place certaine , or [pectfied
beforespath little or no fignification ; as in, le m’ en
vay; en quel lieu m’ en fuiray-ie ? , hanes


at,onsor ~ pon. à k
En amont. Vpward; en bas; Beneath,below, dowa-


Ward. :* j


En apres. Aflerward,

En ce difant. The while or wbilef he [aid this. -

En outre. Moreouer, ove, |

En pour. (Vulgarly) in lieusin flead. ;

En tout adveneme: focner happen;howfocuer |
it be, i 2 ;


ee n

Cell faicen homme, cnbefle. This is dune like 4

man,like a beaft, |
le,0r growne worfe and wor{e.

make a matter the worfes

if, Made bitter.


de. Enamoured of,in love with,
Gg


Original. from. |
THE OHIO;STATE UNIVERSERY =


> 7 Le — € -


ENC


s'E cer vi de. To grow enamoured of fo fall in loue


with. ,

ren A borfe to rife (0 bigh that be is like to fall
backward,

Enarché: m.¢e: f Arched ; couered with an arch.

Enarcher. To arch,or couer with an arch.

Enarmes : f. The handles of a fhield,or targuet.

Enarthrofe: f. 4 full, and perfect union, or uniting of
bones , the bead of the one being wholly receiued, and
fhrowded , within the bollow end of the other.

Enafé. Nofélefe ; Looke Efnafe.

Enafer. To cut off the nofe ; to deprine of anofe.

Enafpri : m. ic : f. Sharpened made eager , exafpera-

d


ted.
Nr rN Sharpen make eager,exafperate, burt with
arpenelfe.
Encacqué : m.ée:f. Incagged ; put into a cag.
Encacquer. To put into a little barrell, or cag.
Encadené: m. ée: f. Chained , tied in , or with,a
chaine.
Encadener. To chaine,or tie in a chaine.
Encagé: m.éc : f. Incaged,imprifoned,
Encager. Toincage; 40 fhut within a cage; to impri-
on.


sEncaillouir. To become bard,or flintie,or, as bard as
int.

Encaiffé: m.ée:f. Put into a cafe,or chef.

Encaifler. To put into a caféor chef. ;

Encaloché: m. ée:f. That wears bigh wooden fhooes,

Encaly: m.ie: f. Hardened or kernelled,- as the skinne
of a mechanicall,and toyling band.

Encant : m. vendre aI en. To fell by Portfale, or Out-
rope ; Seeke Incant.
En vn encant tiens la bouche coye: (Prov.)vid.Be
not baftie to ouerbid another.

Encapé :m.€e: f.cloked,booded; couered with a hood,
or cloke,

Encapeliné. wearimg a little, flat, narrow-brimd bat;
or armedwitb a [eull of yron.:

Encapeluchonneé:m.ée:f wearing a Cowle , as a
Monke; incapuched wearing a Capuche.

Encaper. Te hood,or cloke ; to firnifh, or coner witha
hood,or clo


cloke.
Encapitonner. Ta bood,or couer the bead.


Encapuchonné.as Enca ; Or,booded.
ncapuchonner. To incapuche; 10 beod with a Ca-
puche,érc.


Encarené: m. ée: f.Carried-in; or layed onthe fide,(as
. Afhips } 441 at

; Encarener yne nef. To carrie-in a fhip,to lay ber on ber
fide. aah *

Encarné:m.ée: f. Incarnated; made or fat.

Encarner. To incarnate, fatten, or je.

Encarré.nefencarrée. Grauelled ;or,as Encarené,


Encarrer. Toleuellat ; or,as Acarer, +.
Encaflé:m.ée : . Caféd,inchefted ; made-up in, put vp


intoa cafe,or chef... © > =:
Encaffet.70 cafe,or incheft ; to make vp insor put vp in-

. 10,40 ¢ ad, fi x PARA ih):
Encaftelée, m.ée:£ Incaftellated, or narrow-beeled,


clure :f. 4 being incafiellated, or growing nar-


E N'C


Encavé : m. ée : f. Hollaved,or made hollow ; alfo,lod-
ged in,let downe,or laicd into,a Sillar; alfo, frequen-
ting,or dwelling in,Sellars,e>c.

Encaver. To bollow,to make hollow.

Encaver les nids des poules.To make places in walls
bennes to lay,or fit im.
caver les vins. To /ay,or let downe, wines into a
Sellar. '

Encaveur: m. A bollower,or maker of things hollow,

Encaveure: f. An bollowing, or making bollow ; alfo, a
concauitie,or bollowne(fe.

aunché: m. ée : f.Peflered,intangled(and thereby) | .

Stucke faft, ov bindered from going on: €Orleanncis,

caufte: m.Enamell or varnifh ; any fib fourifting,
wrought with fire.

Encaustique. Enameled, varnifhed ; wrought with


re.

Enceinét : m.ête:f. Girded,enuironned,compaffed.
bon! femme enceingte. .4 woman great with
cbild,

Encein&e: f, lesenceinétes d’ yne efglife. 4 clo;
or the wall or circuit of, or the pillers fet round about,
the clofe of a Catbedrall,or great Church ; alfo,a: En-


ceinte,

Enceindre.To gird compaffe,enuiron inclefe,bemme in,
fet about with.

Enceint. as Encein&.

Enceinte: f. asEnceinéte ; Alfa,the walke of a Deere,
the place of bis ordinarie baunt,or paffage.

é. as Enfellé.

Encens:m. Incenfé ; Frarkincenfe.
Encens Amomite. 4 kind of whit'fh Incenfe wbich
in handling becommeth {oft like Mafircke. E
Encens d’ Arabic. Arabian Incenfe ; the fecond, 07
next in goodne[fe,vnto the male,
Encens blanc. white Frankincenfe.
Encens d’ Inde. Indian Incenfe; of a faint, ond wi-
thered red colour, is made vound by art; ( And this is
held to be our ordinarie Frankincenfe.)
Encens mafle. Male Incenfe ; the whitefi, and beft
car all others ; of it felféronnd ; and,brcken, fattie
wi


Herbed’ Encens. #ormewood. |
Manne d' Encens. Looke Manne.
Encen{é: m, ée: £ Cenfed ; perfimed with Incenfe.
yn hae m, Aceafing ; 4 perfiming with In-
cenfe.
ar ri cenfe,or perfume with Frankincenfe.
Encenfier : m, A flarreinheanen; called the Aliav,or
Cenfer ; placed vader the fling of the Scorpion.
ncenfier:m.erc :f, Cenfing,perfiming.
Herbe encenfiere.Fleabane,Conixa,Fleabane Mul-


let,

Encenfoir: m. A Cenfor  acenfing.or perfiming pan.
Souffler Yemen To drine pen 3 the
pot; (for they that zfé-to blow the Cenfor, becomming
drie, fleale often to the wine-pot prouided fir the Com-
rate ri intl much wine, as before


Encentrer. (Sometimes vfed fir Entrer)tograffe.
E moe lecture à with
pertain in the flocke oc ss alfo, toclapyren apyrens cn the
celé: m.ée: f.Incircled,encompalfed ; bound a-
ut with boopes,as a wine Oe.

Encerclé: m. éc:f. dancin 5 encempaffed ; hooped,


about,


sLipeeert


En-


o


Digith ee by Got gle


Originaltrom


PTE ONI0 STATE UNIVERSITY


EN C ‘BYN € z
Encercler. Toincirele, or incompaffe ; alfo,to boopeor | Enchardonné:m. ée:£. Weeded, vid, of thiflles,
\ hind abo. fy af ? rs Enchardonner. To weed ont thiflles. Ft
nchargé: m. ée: f. Bid, commaunded, charged, in-
ioyned ; given in charge ; alfo,eloyed,or ouer-charecd,
charger. To bid, commaund, inioyne,charge, gine in
charge to doe a thing.
lichargerl'eftomac. To furfét; to cloy, or ouer-
charge the flomacke with too much meat.
Femme qui encharge . ‘That growes big ont ; who
burnifhes, or whofe bellie increases.
Enchatné: m.éc: f. incarnated, flefheds whereon flefh
is bred, or made grow.
Encharné au coeur. ‘Rooted,or flefhed, in the heart.
Encharnelé: m. ée: f. Propped, vaderfet, vpheld, as a
vine,
Encharneler vne vigne. To 4 he vaderfetavine.
Encharner. To incarnate, flefh,breed flefh on make the
fle{b grow; A tearme of Chirurgerie.
Enchaffé: m. ée:f. Enchaced, fet into; aff, drinen, or
bunted away, :
Enchaflement: m.4n enchacing,or enchacement ; at.
fo,a driuing,or hunting away. ~ ‘
nchaffer. as Chafler ; to driue,or bunt away, Pic.
Enchaffer en or &c ; to enchace , or fet, in gold,


Encern ie Enuitoning incompalfing; incircling booping
in,or about.

Encerné: miei Enuironed,incompaffed ; incircled,
hooped in,or about. t

ouiné:m. ée: f. Out of tune, out of temper,

{curnie,as one that through cold burkles like a cator is
know not how.

Enchagriné: m. ée: f Made melancholike, filled with
melancholie ; grieued vexed,affutted,

Enchagriner. To vex, afflidt, make melancholicke, fill
with carefilnefe,
nchainé: m, ée: f. Enchayned, chayned; bound or
tyed in,decked or inriched with, chaynes.

Enchainement: m. 4 chayning ; a binding in, or be-
decking with, chaynes,

Enchainer. To enchayne, to chayrie to bind, or ty in
chaines; to decke,ov iarich with chaynes.

Enchainure: € 4 chayning; a chayne ; chaynage; alfo,
as Enchefneure.

Enchalaflé: m.ée:£ Propped,under{et, beldvp,as a
vine,by poles,erc.

Enchalaffer vne vigne. To prop, or underfet avine,

Enchambré: m. ée : f. Inchambred ; lodged as in a
chamber; alfo,mortaifed enclofed within.

, Enchampre: f A chizell; a cutting, caruing, or gra-
uing toole.

Enchancré:m. ée:f. Cankered, @/lered, crowne to a
canker,

Enchancrer. To canker,or fefier,as an old fore.

Enchanté : m. ée : f. Charmed, inchaunted ; bewit-


Ce
Enchaffeure : f, Am enchacement ; an enchacing, or
Setting in; and particularly, the locke of a band, or


CHITCS.
Enchaffillé de menuiferie. Compaffed, bound, beld in,
bya frame, or band of wainfcot; fet in a wainfcot
ame.
Prefle enchaffillée. .4 Printers Preffe with a Tym-
ched, pan.
Enchante-coeur. Heart-charming , beart-inchaun. | Enchaffiller. To (et in; to enclofe,compatfe, bind, bold,
i in with a woodden frame.
Enchaffure. Looke Enchaffeure,
Enchatonner. as Enchaffer ; to enchace.
Eee rm.ée:f. Chaced, purfued; (An old


word.)
Enchauliné : m. ée : f Thatched, or couered with
raw,
Enchaulmer. To thatch,or cover with firaw.
Enchauffeure: £. 4 hooing; alfo,the meafure of a foot,
taken to make a fhoor by.
Enche. as Anche; al/o,the Pipe,or gutter whereby wine |
falls from the Preffe.
Encheinure. as Enchainure. ;
ncheminer. as Acheminer; to fêt in the way,
Enchemifé: m.ée: f. Covered,or clothed withsput into,
a fhir't,or fmocke. è
Enchenard: m. Part of a womans re.
Enchepé: m. ée : f. Set in the flackes.


ting, ;

Enchantelé: m.ée:f. Supported, vnderfet, borne or
propped up by flakes,as a vine rc.

Enchanteler. Tojüpport; beare, fay, or prop, up with
ftakes,as vines. ra
Enchanteler du bois. To 8 up wood.

Enchantement : m. An iachauating,or charming,

Enchanter. To charme, inchaunt,bewitch; bleare the
eyes ,deceiue the underftanding,

| Enchanteries. Charmings, inchauntments ; deceits, de-
| Lufions, ingling trickes, fubtill conueyances, fleights of

| _ legerdemain. ï
Enchanteufeinent. charmingly, incbauntingly

Enchapelé: m. ée : f. Crowned, or decked. with gar-

| = lands ; alfo,batted,or coucred,as with a bat.

Enchapeler. Te decke,or crowne with chaplets, or gar-
lands ; alfo,to hat, or fer abat ti À

Ench td’ une cheminée. The head, or broad

top,ofa chimney. Simi


‘ 31 : makin Encheper. To fet in the flockes ; alfo,to cla S,
Enchaperonné :mée:f Hooded; or attired ‘with a boules on the 4 of. LS ‘ tPectesre
French-hood. ~~ | Enchere:£ 4 bidding,or oit-bidding ; the making or
Enchaperonnement : m. A booding ; aalfo; the out- offering the raifing or enbauncing, of a price;
iutting, or oucr-banging of the eaues, or bottome of a Portfale, Ontrope, or bargaining, Men that bide
Roofe. moff for a thing is to carrie it.


Enchaperonner. To bond; or couer the bead with a |
E Seated gee eos . tion
Nchappe. Wearing a coape; attired in a c
Enchappcier. as Enchapeler. | Ae
\ sits : = ée:£. Incharatiered, written, or
_ Printed in charaëters, *
Encharagterer.70 incharaéterto waiter print in cha


r +
Encharbouté: m. ée :f. ( crumpled; ruffled
| on knots ast psc: hap ein bog AE


Folle enchere. re oy re bid to much fora
thing and then would go from gaine.but cannot ;
Br 3 Droiétde folle enchere; See Droi&.
Ilen payera la folleenchere, He (hall fmart forit; -
Le fhall deer ely abuy bis being fo bufie ,tuflie, foole-bar-
a | Teh f
Mettre enchere für. ‘To outbid ; or, bid money for
what another is about to buy.
Mettre à Penchere, To raife, or enbaunce the price
~ of; to make deere; to fet, or bold, at avery bigh rate ;
to


=
L


Originalirom


© Digitizedbÿ Go. gle . “THE OHIO-STATE*UNIVERSIEY


a wee.


.‘déprs : = RS nait:


_


ENC


to let goe unto bim that will bid moft.

Encheri: m. ie: f. Raifed,or enbaunced (alfo,rifen) in
price ; made, held or growne, deere, alfo,let goe,or paf-
{cd ouer unto [uch as haue bid moft ; alfo, endcered, or
deerely cherifhed. 5
Elle ne faifoit de l'encherie, She played not the cut- |
throat ; {he fet not the dice on ber cufiomers ; fhe held
not her ware very deere,

Encherie: fThe Preparatine ato Melting, ov Extratii-
on; the firft part of Alchimie.

Encherinent: m.4a ouerprifing; a raifing,or enbaun-
cing of a price; a rifing in price,a growing very deere;
alfo, an out-bidding ; alfo, an endeering, or deere che-
rifbing.

Encherir. To raife, or enbaunce the price of ; to ower-
prift, or make toodcere ; alfo, to rift in price, or grow
déere; alfo,to out-bid,or bid more then another; alfo,to
let a thing gownto out-bidders; alfo, to endeere,or che-
rifh decrely.

Encheriffeur: m. 4 high-bidder, or out-bidder of o-
thers; a raifer or enhauncer of the price of things,in an
Outiope,or Portfale,

Encherner. as Encharner, To flefh.

Enchetre. as Encherir,

Enchefneure: f. A chayne, or chayning ; alfosa rew,
cour(e, or fucccflion of things linked together.

Enchet: m. A falling, or dropping; as of water, or of
mettall that melteth,

Enchcvallé:m.cé:£ Set, or lapped, as ome foot ouer
another.

Enchevaller. A borfe to fet, or lap,one foot ouer ‘ano-
ther.

Encheveltré: m. €¢:£. Haltered ; tyed, or fettered in
ahalter , or horfée-coller , infnarled, intangled, as a
ho: fe with his owne coller; alfo, inueagled; infna-
red.

Encheveftrement. A haltering, or fettering; a being
intangled with his ovwne balter, or coller; alfo, an in-
ueaghinz,

Encheveftrer, To halter, fetter,tye in a halter, put ina
coller; to infnarle, intangle, as a borfe with his owne
coller ; alfo, toinueagle; or any way,to infnare, ;
ncheveftrure: f. À baltering, er tying in a borfe-col-

« ler; a fettering infnarling, intangling. :
Encheveftrure de cheminée, The Mantle-tree of a
chimney. of

: Enchetix. as Ançois; (vicil mot.) ;

Enchiftré: m.ée: f. Cyphred; expre[fed,or fet downe in
cypiie’s. 7

Enchiffrené: m. 6e: £ #hafe mofe is flopt with a cold,
or a rhevome ; that bath the murrbe, or poze... ;

Enchiffcer. To cypher. sats


» , vit É 4 of oe ,
ré:m. Ce: f, Wixed, waxie; mingled, couered, or
feared with; made, compoundedar| of,wax.


Encirer. To wax; 10 coucr, or doe ower with wax ; to
make,or compound of wax. :
Encis: m. The murthering of a great-bellied woman,or
of the infam poe


t within ber bellie,
im, Gc: f: Cut vpsor into,
] into; to ma.
A mortaife, or inlo

ig 4 ying one
‘erritorie,or lur


ean incifion,
ng 5 an entrie into,or


PE Los de 25


AT TIN VE PERRET ©


Try op

RE à

im À =
a


ENC


Sed,or entered into,or within, anotber ; layed, or lying
within another ; alfo,within the marches,or limits of,

Enclavement: m. An inlocking, or mortaifing ; a clo-
Jing,or fhutting ; alfoan cntring within another; alay-
ing,or Lying one within another.

Enclavemens. as Enclaves,

Enclaver . To clofe, mortaife, locke, fet, or flut one.
thing within another ; alfo, 10 enter mto anuther ; to
Lay, or ly, as peeces of feucrall mens land, one within
th’ other. :

Enclaveure: f as Enclavement ; or, a mortaife, or
mortaifed clefure.

Enclin : m. An inclination difpofitionaddiétion natu-
vall affeélion,inflinét,or bumor unto,

Enclin: m.ine: f. Jnclined,bent prone,giuenaddidled,
or difpofed, unto,

Encliré: m. 6e: £ ?nclined, declined ; bent, bowed,
crouching,or ficoping downeward ; bumbled, readie,or
likelie,to fall.

Encliner. To iacline, decline ; bend, bow, looke, floope
downeward ; to decay; to begin,ov be readie,to fill; to
bang to the ground-ward.

S'encliner. To crouche,ducke, lout, make low courte-
fies ; to bumble bimfelf before another.
nclorre. To include, inclofe, compaffe, bedge, imparke,
infould ; [hut in,or vp; alfo,to comprehend, containe,or
comprife.
los: m. An inclofure,or inclofing.

Enclos: m. fe: f. Incloféd, enuironed, fout vp, kept in,
on cuerie fide; imparked, infrulded, compaffed, bed-

. gedinonall parts ; alfo, contained, comprehended,
comprifed,

pid ny rm. ée: £ Incloificred, flut vp within a
cloifter.

Encloftrer. To incloifier, to fout vp withina cloifter.

Enclofture: £.An inclofiere,or inclofing; a clofe,or place
hedged in,

Enclotir. To earth; to drive a Fox, or Conny into an
earth,or berrie. ; 4

Encloucher. To prompt, or tell one what be fhall fay ;
(an old word.) pri

Encloüé: m.ée: £Nayled; faflened, pricked,clayed with
a nayle. ; F
Je m'y fuis encloüé.1 am ingaged therein to my great
burt,or difaduantage. ;

Enclouér. To nayle, to drine in a nayle ; to faften with a
nayle,

Enclouér artillerie, To clay a peeee of Ordnance ; to
driue a nayle, or yron pinnesinto tbe touch-hole tbere-


of.
Enclouér vn cheval. To'pricke a borfes foot in the


Loving.

Enclouéure : £. 4 pricke in a horfes foot.
Ily a bien de l'enclouêure.There is fommbat amiffe,
or fome notable flav inthe matter.
Il fe doubta bien delencloucure. Hee mifirufled,
that all was not well, that there was fome mifchieucus

loy choake,or fi.


.Toc dkesor flop up. is)
f. An Anuyle ; alfo,a little bene feated with-


re, and ferning together with other parts.as a

ii rames sci fingsifo tefoaglee brought

Couch eatbetenclimne, & lea artt ux. Lodged

— ‘two extreame dai culties ; per-
Pci iced ots ae +
A l'encluine lemarteau: Prov. Aq


tkirehim,
tinows, or litigious fellow flould be matched


uarrcÜing,rru-
withene
thats


| ; Original'from
= AHE, OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


_—~


ENC


thats worfé then bimfelfe ; or, bard beart needs ham-
mering.

‘A due enclume marteau de plume: Pro. By gen-
tleneffe, and patience we firmount all difficulties : So
doe skilful Enginers oppofé bags of wooll, and walls of
Soft earth unto the furie of the Cannon,

Enclumeau: m. 4 little Anuile.

Encoche: £ A nscke,or notch; as Coche.

Encoché: m.ée:f. Nocked,or notched, as an arrow;
a fF faftened,tyed faft ynoored,as a cable,or a {hip with
cables.

Encocher vne fleiche. To nocke an arrow; to put the
nocke thereof into the bow-ftring. -
Encocher les gumenes, To faften,or ty them ful, to
mooré'a {hip with them,

Encochure : £. A nocking,notching, faipping, nicking ;
alfo, a nocke, notch, or nicke ; alfo,a fafteming,or moo-
ring.

Encoeur. as Encueur.

Encoffré: m. ée:f, Incofred; layed, of put, up in a


copper.
Encoffrer. To inclofé, lay, or put vp,in a chefl,or coffer,


Ce
Encoigné: m. ée:f. Made corner-wife thruft into
a corner ; al(o,wedged,or faltened in with wedges,
Encoigneure :f A cone, or corner; alfo; a corner-
Sami part,of.
ncoigneure de chemin. fhort,or narrow turning
of a way; a ftrait corner whereinto one winds before
be be aware, .
Encoleure: f. The neck-peece ; or, a neck-like peece of
any thing; alfo,the part wherein one member or peece
i ioyned unto another ; and, [uch a ioyning ; (whence)
alfo,the fetting on of the bead,necke,or creft,érc ; alfo,
the countenance, gefture, or bebauior of a man ; the
reyne of a borfe, or,the pofture.or carriage of his creft
4lfo,a barre, necke, or narrow pecce, of land lying be-
tweene two feas. ÿ
Encoleure du bras. The wrif?, or part of the arme
thats next unto it.
Encoleure du pied d'un arbre, The bottome of the
flocke,bodie,or trunke ; the fetting on of the foot, or of
the root,thereof; the necke of the foot.
Encollé:m.ée: f Necked; hauing a faire ptiffe,and big
necke ; alfo,put about the necke of,
Long encollé. Necked like a Crane.
Encol a To put about the necke.
Encollure: £. 2s Encoleure.
ncoloré : m.ée:f. Full of colours,mucb coloured,co-
loured all ouer all in colours.
Encombre: f. as Encombrier ; affo,the rubbifh,or ru-
ines of falling,or decayed buildings.
Encore oubled, peflered, incombred ; difquie-
ted. eal à
Mariage encombré. Looke Encombrer ; or; Mari-


age. a
Encombrement: m. 4x incombring, peflering, mo-
sefing, troubling; an annoyaxce ; or, as Encom-
ri


er.
Encorgbrer. To comber,incomber, perplex, pefter ; bin-
der, trouble, gine much bufinelfe sde ÿ toafflidt, vex,
+ annoy ; difquict, moleft; put unto great labour, toyle,
“trouble, :
pondre le mariage de fa femme. A husband to
mn his wines land whether it be with,or without, ber
confent s See Mariage. ;


ncombrier:m, 4 comber, incombr ance, peflerment
binderance trouble; mlefition, prise is


Digitized. by Go: gle


ra


annoyance; mifchiefe; misfortune.
coiniaftique : com.Praifing,commendng,extolling
to the skies, »
coinmencé : m. 6e : f. Begun,commenced,underta-
ken,gone about or in hand with.

minenceméent, À beginning ; an undertaking,or
taking in band.
rapa To commence,begin,goe about, fall in


Encommenceur :m. A commencer, beginner, under-


taker, ;

Enconché: m. ée : £ Trimmed, drefl, arrayed; Nous
voilà bien enconchez.; we are fairely dreft, we are
eucn well handled.

Eucontenancé: m. ée: f. Bold, audacious; well be.
baued ; of a fetled countenauce ; feldome or nener out
of countenance ; that bath put a good face on the mat-
ter. | ;

Encontenancer. To geffure it; t0 fera face on ; to put
on a geflure,or bebauior. ;

Encontre: f. (a Subjlantiue) An encounter,a meetin 3
an encountring, or fhocke of enemies ; alfo, bap, lucke,
chaunce, fortune.

Encontre. (aPrepofttion) Towards; againft, oppoftely ;
right again{t,oueragain{? juft on the other fide.

Aller encontre quelqu'un, ou luy aller à l'encon-
tre. To goe meet one.

Encontré: m. ée: f. Incountred, or met with ; lighted,
or bappened,on.

Encontrer. 10 incounter,or meet with ; to light,or bap-
pen on.

Enconvenancé: m. ée:f. Couenanted, conditioned;
contraéted indented with.

Enconvenancer.To covenant condition indent or con
tract with; to promife unto,

Encoqueluché: m. ée: £. Sicke of the Coqueluchoe, or
new difeafe; alfo,booded.

Enc ueluchonné. Hooded; wearing a hood, or Spa-


ñ he,
Encoquillé. Poiffon en. Shell-fi(h.
Encorbellement, # Corbeau ; or, a fhouldering, or
{upporting,by Corbels,or Brackets,
Encordé: m.ée: f. Becerded,bound with cords,
Encordelé: m. ée: f. Corded, firung,or fringed ; fafte-
ned,or made up with cords,or flrings ; alfo,caught, fet-
tered intangled or infaared therewith,
Encordeler. To ftring,or becord;; to bind, fafien, pacte,
or make up; to. catch, fetter, intangle, or infnare, with
ftrings,or little cords. ‘
Encorder. To cord, becord, firing ; to bind, faften, or
make vp; to fetter.intangle,or infaare, with cords,
Encordonné: m. ée: f, Twiffed of many firings ; ty-
ned; plaited. ; .
x en To twift, plait, or twyne of many
rings.
Encore. ret,2s pet,euen yet. |
ncore lors. Ewen then, even to that time.
Encore pas. Not yet,or,not that,neither,
Encore de prefent. Ewen now,as yet,untill this very
time.
Encore que. Albeit that though that,
Mais encores. But for all that,
Encoremes. The fignes of Vrine ; efpecially thofe that
{wim on the top thereof.
Encornal: m. The Hounds of a Mafle.
Encorné:m.ée: f Horned ; trimmed, nocked,or tipped
with horne ; alfo,put into a borne,or cornet ; alfo,put in-
to the nacke of; alfo, wearing,or baning bornes.


Original-from
THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


An


Encorner. To haftnocke, tip,or trim, with bornes; alfo,
as Encorneter ; alfo,td put into the horned nocke of.

Encorneté: m. ée: f. Jucorneited ; put into a borne ;
wrapped upyas (pice crc, in a coract,or coffin.

Encorneter. To pat into a borne; alfo, towrap vp in a
cornet, or Grocers Coffin, spice, oe.

Encornure:f. A bafiing, tipping, or trimming with
borne + alfo,the bornes;or "borned bead,of a beaft.

Enconty. Lieu encorny. A place thats bard (and
Jimoot) as borne; Or, as Peloufe.

Encoronné: m. ée:f. Crowned,

Encoronner. To crowne; to decke, or adore with a
Crowne,

Encotonné : m. ée: f. Bumbafted, or fluffed with cot-
ton,

Encotonner. To bumbafl, to fluffe with cotton.
Encotonner de barbe le menton, To firnifh the
chin with foft,and lender baire ; to make it bud, fhoot,
or pat out abundantly,

Encottardé: m.ée: f. Made cowardlie, bereaued of
couraze.

Encoüarder. To make a coward,bereaue of courage.

Éncoüardi: m.ie:f. Growne cowardlie, become da-
flardise, faint-bearted, white-liuered.

Encoiiardir. To wax a comard, prouc a dafiard, become
faint-bearted, grow white-linered.

Encouleure.ss Encoleure.

Encoulpé: m.¢e: f Accufed,or blamed for.

Encoulper. To appeach,accuft, blame frs lay the fault,
caf? the imputation,of a matter on,

a em tape m. An accufer, appeacher, promooter,ia-

TIC «

Encoultré : m. ée:f. Furnifhed with a culter.

Eucoultrer. Tofürnifh (a Plough) with a culter.

Encouragé: m, ée:f, Incouraged, heartened, imbol-
dened. -

Encouragement: m. 4 heartening, imboldening, in-
Couraging, mcouragement,

Encourager. Te bearten, imbolden, incourage ; to put
mettall into,giue flomacke unto.

oc: A pumifhment , or penaltie incur-
ved,

Encourir. To incurre ; to vunne, or fall into; to get, or
LA unto bimfelf ; ; toundergoe a danger difgrace,
penaltie, dc.

Encourrayé: m.ée: f. Bound, or firnifbed with lea-
therne thongs.

ar rer To bind, or furnifh, with leatherne
thongs

Eocourdingh im, ée:£ Becurtained ; ouer whith a cur-


by, bidden bebind, a curtaine.
Encourtiner. 70 becurtaine ; to draw a curtaine ouer
to couer or bang with, to foadow by, agg Mebind. x a
curtaine,
Encouru: m, ué: f. Incurredrunne into.
utelaité: m.ée: f Armed witha Juort fvord,or
cuit AE


elafler. To fisnifh, or arme with a curtleax, or
6,


Encraffé : € Bedawbed,
| 7 ee | à


taine is dravne; covered cor banged with, diurne


~ both fides of the nofe.

Encrefiné. (reamie, creamed ; fill of de of
creame,

Encrefmer. To fill, or furnifh with creame.

Encreté: £ Bitterneffe; aifo,inkine(je,or blackneffe.

Encreufé: m.ée:£ Hollowed; alfo,boorded, or layed
up im beles, or bollow places.

eufer. To bollow ; aifo, to boord, or lay vp,in beles,

or bellow places.

Encrier: m. 4x Inke-maker.

Encrier: m. ere: £. Inkie ; of,or belonging to,Inke.

Encrou.« Efcrou.

Encroüé: m. ée: f. Ledged,as a cudgel i ina tree ; ban.

 ging on, or ledged in. @Norm.

a, To lodge,as a cudgell ina tree; to bang on,or

ein

Encroutté: me: £, Pargetted,rougb-caft; becrufled,
or whereon a {cab is et.

Encrouftement: m. A pargetting rough-cafting,a [et-
ting of a crufl,a bringing of a [cab on.

Encroufter. To parget, rough-cafi; make cruflie, bring
a {cab on.


nu m.ée: £ Put into am earthen pot ; aifiyae


Encrucher. To put into an earthen pot.

Encrudi: m. ie: £ Made,or le
Encrudir. To make,or become,rav.

Enqueur: m. The Stithies (a diféafe of borfes,and cat.


tell.)

Encuict: m. Ge: £. Raw,vndifgelted not yet concoëted,
not fil boyled, not throughly baked; alfo, bavdened
through heat,

Ebcuirallé: m.ée: f Hardened,growne hard, thicke,

ee ser harfh; elfeereund hard,
n linge encuiraflé. 4 linnen cloth growne fife
with nafline[e,and ordure.

Encuirafler. To harden, thicken, make vouch, haïfb,
thicke, or fliffe (with ordure, crc.) as leather ; alfo, to
bind bard.
nculé: m. ée:f. Set,or fétled vpon the tayle; nether,
or lower part ; poffed downe ; 3 aljo, planted, or fiucke
dovene with the bottome turned up, or doubled ; 3 fet a-
flope,or with an imbowed bottome.

Encufé:m.éc:f. Accufed, eppeached ; detected, ré
wrayed.

Encufement : m. À detebtion difelefing,berorayingsap-
peaching, accufing. .

Encufer. To appeach, accuse, informe again; bewray,
detebt difelefe

Encufeur: m. A deteéter, difelofer, appeacher, accufer,
betrayer,b wrayer.
ncuvé: m. ée: f. Put into a er tub.

Encuver: To pat into a fatt,or tub.

ied aie 9 die:f. The = er on of el evoledge and

ei ences an art that comprebends all ae A
or learning that one r Ans,


Enter eo


i : ‘,.


Original from


Se THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY
= SRE


Endebtetnent: m. A debt ; or being indebted;a bria-
cig inte debt.


Endebter. To bring into debt.
cbter. To be indebted; to owe, .


a
Endelechie: £. Afiduitie, contimAineffe, perennitie,
perpetualnef[e, or, perpetuall motion ; as, Entele-


c.

Endemené: m. ée : f. wantoh, liuelie, firring, wag-
£ifb, lafcinious, that loues to be hing, fidging,or frig-
ging.

Endementiers. 17 the meane while,in the meane time,

fpace,or feafon; (an old word.)

Endenté : m. ée: £ Indented, fnipt on theedges,notcht

in the fides. i

Endenter. To indent, {nip notch, iag on the edges; alfo,

to fèt,or make teetbin. -

Endernier. The laft,or,the later end.

Endefvé : m. ée : f. Mad, farious, raging ; earnefi, ve-
bement, fill of ardor.

Endefver. To rage, be mad after, or moft bot vpon, a

" thing ; to long for vebemently, luft for exceedingly, de-
\ fire moft Ernenth «fees moft immoderately.

Endetter. as Endebter.
Endiablé: m. ée:f. Poffe(fed with a diuell ; full of di
rr uellifhne(fe ; diuellifh,borrible ; damned,bellify.
| 377" To poffeffe with a diuell, to fill with diuel-
ifbneffe.
fl ‘ Endlarenté :m. ée : f. Set with Dyamonds.
1 Endicté: m, ée: £ Inditted accufed,informed,complai-
‘ id ned of.
xy Endiétement: m. An indittmentyaccufation, jnforma-

P tion,or bill of Complaint, k
\ Endiéter. To indiét, accufe appeach; informe againf ;

à comp laine vpon, charge with an offence.

4. Endiéteur. 47 indiéter accufèr informer.

42 imanché : m. ée: f. Attired for bigb-dayes, or,
e that hath bis bollyday face on. ;
% Endité : m.ée: f. as Endi&é ; alfo,demonflrated mani-

É féled, [hewed,er pointed at with a finger.

> Enditement. # Endiétement.

Enditer. as Endiéter ; alfo, 10 demonftrate, maniféfi,be.

, wray, declare, fhew,or point at with a finger.

* Endive: £ The hearbe Endiue.
= * Endive crefpe. (urledEndiue. _
7s Endive grande. Great garden Endiue.
Endive petite. The leffe Endine, bitter garden En-
diue, -


Endive fauvage. wild Endive (whofe flalke u full of


a tice.)

Endizeler les gerbes. To flonke

j an rat nh ar a «ay amet À
loraues. ‘


oétrinable: com, Docible, teacheable, infruëta-


ble. d Sa Ge

Endoétrine : - ée: oe infirufied; nurtured,
trayned up,in learning, rc. Ra

Endoétrinement: m. 1nféruétion,teaching,uurture,a
trayning up in lea Ce

Endoétriner. To teach, infirutt; nurture; to traine,
or bring,vp in the knowledge of Learning,or Arts.

oille. as Andouille.
Endommagé :m, €e:f. ladommaged,incommodated,


| Bn ment: m.A loffe,dammage,indommage-
0 oe ‘ st : :


a


bring,


loffe unto.


eigitized by. Go: gle À


mentor
End . Toi à date, binder; | End
Ses 0 indommage, incommo. » binder


Endoré : m. ée:f. Gilt all ouer ; befet, inriched, a- |


ŒND
dorned with gold. Hu


Estrer. To gild all ouer ; to befèt, inrich adorne with
gold.


breeds rottenne(fe,and a continual fleeping.
ndormi: m. ie: f. Sleepie,drowfie, beaute,lazie.flug-
gi, euer aflecpe, that fleepes as be goes; alfo,afleepe,
ufht, quiet, calme, appeased, at cafe, at ref.
Eau endormie. 4 calme, fil, or flanding water.
Fol eft qui fe fie en eau endormie : Prov. Men of
a fill, fad, fleepie, melancholicke difpofition ave not to
berelyed on; for either they can doe littie,or that which
they doe is full of trecherie, and diffimulation.
Membres endormis … .4flonied, benummed > 4-
eepe, LN ' ?
ndormi comme vn Envent. Looke Envent,
a a ah, enfeueli: Pro. There is as’
much vfeof a corfe, as of a drowfie creature; or
a drowfie bodie is little pgp fs: a Fis i
Endormie:£ ‘The bearbe Henbane ; or Poppie,
Endonmir. To Lay, or lull afleepe ; to cafe into à fleepe;
to calme ,quiet,appeafesbring toreft ; alfo,to alone >
benumme,
Endormir fur Pune & l'autre aureille.To gine much
cafe unto, beflow all wifhed contentments on ; to bring
a-bed (fay we.) .
Endormir vn trompe. To fet a Top.
sEndonnir. To fall afleepe ; to be fifi, or found a-
gen 3,to gine bimfelfe vo fleeping. «
s Endormir fur les iniures. To be unfencible of
wrongs ; dully to foreflow, or cowardly to delay, the
reuenge thereof.
s Endonnir fur lemieftier, See Meftier.
+ sendormirfurle rofty . To fleepe vpon the offer of a
great aduantage, faire opportunitie; or laxily to neg~
leét,or foreflow the acceptance of them,
s’endormiren-fentinelle, To fleepe when he hath
moft caufè to watch ; to laze it when be bath moft need
i looke qu bim. Je Ji
ndormiflement: m. S/eepineffe,drowfine e,or flug-
gifneffe ; alfo, a bringing, laying, or Tae


:


fleepe.

Endormiffon de membres. Numueffe, unfencible-
nelfe, benumming, afionifhment, or flupiditie of the
Members. -

Endl Tab barge putin of lp por
ndofé. That bath bis fhare,or portion of ; whofe part is
limitted or prefcribed vnto He
ndoffé: m.ée: f. Indorfed ; a y the backe; alfo,
backed,or haning a backe ; whence ;

Vn banc endoffé. A Bench,a Forme, having a backe,

or flay for the backe; alfo, the Bench thats next, or ioy-

ning to,a wall,

El : bien endoffée. 4 fivord thats well,er firong-
ackt, , »

Endoffement: m. 4» indorfing, or indorfément ; alfe,

a putting on the back; alfoya backing,or fètting a backe

vat


0.
Endofler. To indorfe ; alfo,to backe,or put a backe vn-
20 ; alfo,to put on the backe;wbence: ,
vnharnois. To arme bimfelfe; to put on bis
harne[fe; to get an Armor on bis backe. , ;
Endofseure: £, The backe, or backe-part of any thing;
alfo,an indorfement, a
Endoiiairé : m. ée : £ Endowed; indued with.
ndoüairer. To endow,toinduewith, :
ndouille : f. as Andouille. 4 inke ; a chitter-


En-


Originattrom


THE. OHIO:S#ATE- UNIVERSITY.


pa Re TE A SRE &——


Endormant. The Serpent Cenchtis, bé finging.


à
4
|


FAIRE SN VOL ert


EN D.


Endouiller: m. The Browankler,or samp of 4
Deeves head, 5
Endoulourt: m, ie: f. Grieucd, pained.
Endoubté: m.éc: £7 ncertaine, flaggeringsdoubtfüll,
in doubt.
Endroiét: m. The Superficies, face, or fies of a thing;
alfo,a Coajt, Ouarter ,Placeor Part; and bence;
En cet endroict. Hereabouts.
Robbed deux endroiéts. À gowne thats made alike
». on both fides, or is as good on the one fide as the other.
Chafcun en fon endroiét. Ewerte one in bis quali-
tie, late, place,ranke ,euerie one to bis power ;as much
: lyesi ia euerie one.
Nas ar PRO To fivim on the bellie.
endroiét fans fon envers : Prov. No outfide
nie Lx an infide.
Endroict: m. ête: f. Diredt; and hence ;
Parjure endroïét. 4 plaine oath-breaker, or pal-
a, faith-breaker ; a moft falfe man. (An old
phrafe.)
Endroict.(Prepos, ) By; neere,or nigh to; ceemenvea
about ; alfo,with,tewards,in refpect of.
Endroiét moy, For mp partyas for me.
Endroit. as Endroit. M
Endtie. vne femme bien endüe en lafain&te Efcri-
ture; a woman thats sklfüll,or well [oene,in the Scrip-
ture.
Endui®: m.L1 coke Enduit.

Enduiét: m. ies f. Dawbed, plailered; alfo,annoin-
ted,bifincared, rubbed ouer with; alfo,as Enduit.
Enduire. To plaifter eaearliare déc,

or couer ower with ; afüsto indue,or difgeft,as a bam
doth her meat. :


Enduifement:'m. 4 plaiflering, dawbing ; annoyn-
ting bifmearing sdfjding, rubbing, or conering over


Enduieur m. A plaifterer, dawber, annoynter, finea-


| Énduffon: f. aj Eaduttociesie, or,Enduit.
Enduit: m. Plaifter; aifosa bed,or lay of plaifter; alfo,
a plaiftering,or couering ouer, as with plaifter ; alfo, a
; dawhbing ,annoynting, (mearing,or bifine. Lire 9
| Enduit: m.te:£ Plaflered oc; as Endui ; als in-
| _ dued,or difefied,as meat by a bawke.
| Enduite:f as Enduit; 4 plaifiéring; alfi,a bed,or lay
of per
Endurable: com. Indurable , beareable,tollerable,iuf:


Bra. daring patient, ring abiding bearing
with
Endurci: :m.ie: f. Hardened jndurated,confirmed,ob-
durated.


| Endurcir. To indurate, barden cbdurate, con-


SE rc. To wax hard, grow fliffe, abide lon
-taine with conflancie; beare Li tb bead and and
té: m.ée: :f Dured, contiaued ; borne, in-


cane Si ;
dés tolerated one | ;


| est LOUE


‘te, ARR ET GS ,
= % stl 7”. dl Td
Re ee ee

- EN FE


636)


‘bly, beave with much at bis bands.
Endurer faut pour durer: Prov. ‘uch abide
mufi indure.


hie. endyre: tout fors quetrop ) d’aife: Prov. Looke


Le papier de tout: Prov. as, foule blurres, file
reckonings all kind of bard, or ill words, }
uvetter. Tobedawne; to fill,or fluffe,with kane

Eneaiié. watered ; 5 feafoned with , turned into wa-
ter.

Encauër. To turne into water ; to mingle,or feafon with À -
water. :

Enenda. 17 faith,in truth,in footh,truft me,on my word,
in verie deed.


meee f. Energie, effectuall operation, force, efica-


Baatvition, An eneruation,weakening,enfeebling; al-
fo, the : [ynewie feperation of the Mufcles.
ervé. Eneruated,weakened,enfeebled ; alfo; feeble,
weake,tender, effeminate, without force, without pith,
without vigor.

Enerver. To ces pers debilitate,enfetble ; to
bereaue of force,of pith,of vig

Enfagotté: m. = f. Put into a Fée, made vp in the
forme of a fagot

Enfagotter. To put into a fagot ; or gmake vp in the
forme ofa fagot.

Enfaiflé: m. ée: f. Made vp into a bundle, or truffe.

Enfaiffer. Te packe, or truffe vp; to make into a packe,
bundle, truffe.


7 wee m. A Ridge-tyle, Creaft-tyle, Roofe- |
Enfaié: m. ée: f. Rooféd ; or,as Enfefté ; in Maifon


Enfeftée.

Enfaifture : £ Aridge, or aridging ; or the frame of 4
- ridge,roofe or boufe-top. ai

Pieces d'enfafture. iSperfissnifia, ridge-peeces of À”

timber.

Enfance: £ Infancie,childbood. is
Enfanchonnets, Nephewes; or , the children of our
children.


Enr m. A little infit ; a babie, or fucking


Enfangé: m. ée: £ Bedurtied,bemyred,bemudded,

Enfangement. A bedurtying;bemyring;bemudding.

ser. To bedurtie,bemud,bemyre; to fpatle, beray,

or durtie all ouer with myre.

Enfanfon. # Enfançon.

nfant : m. An infant; a child.

Enfant de choëur. A Quirrefler. L

Enfant de choéur dela mefle de minui&t. A os

hellie night-walker.

$ de famille. Yonkers of account, yonthes of

‘ood houfes children of rich parents (yet aline.) :

“Enfant fant de France. The funne of a as of Frente

eee la se ae mr rh mckler,

er; alfè, a cut-purfe.
conoid and 3 pe
and expofed vite,


a icy. An unthrift, ffend-geod, care-
companion ; alfo, a a JuglersBuffoone or. er


dela terre, Licentionssdiffolute, fnpillger-
+ fo fe ave wholly fwayed by their: os males


vs) Original trom
crMéonLO STATE UNIVERSITY
PET ee


= heauer,or bane their heauenonearth
~Enfans trouvez. The name of a Parifien ant,
wherein children, fond by chance,are nourifhed.
Bons enfans. The name of the moft auncient Colledge
a= in the Vaiuerfitie of Paris.
Vafaitd'enfant. A trifling, fimple, boyifh, or childifh
art. >
nfans deviennent grands gens: Pro. Children, in
pp grow men; or (as,we fay) boyes will be men one,


ay.
à Enfans fontricheffes de pauvres gens: Prov, Chil-
dren are poore mens riches : (In other Countries whofe
people are induftrious they may perhaps be fo; but in
ours, forthe moft part, {lore of children make poore
men plaine beggers.) hi
Ce que l'enfant oit au fouyer,eft roft conu iufques
au Monttier: Pro. What children beare at bome foone
fives abroad,
De petitenfant petit ducil: Pro, 4 little mourning
Lèrues for little children,
1] faut laiffer fon enfant morveux pluftoft que luy
arracher le nez: Prov. Better a (nottie child then a
nofeleffe. ,
Qui voit enfant, il voit neant: Pro.He that fees an
infant, fees nothing (belike becaufe it alters fo quickly.)
Soleil qui luifarne au matin, femme qui parle La-
tin, & enfant nourry de vin, ne viennent point À
i bonnefin: Pro.
Enfantant. Bringing forthachild, |
Enfanté: m. ée: f, Bred, brought forth, or, brought to
‘bed of a child,
fantement: m. A bringing to bed,a birth,or bring-
ing forth of children ; the time of awomans trauell. :
Enfanter. To bring forth a child, to be deliuered, as a
moman,of child. SA


woman that lyes in child-bed,


Enfandil: mil : € Chi, bp rifling ip


fond.
Enfintilement. chi/difhty, findly,boy-like * |
Eafantillage: m. Childifoeffboyifime fe childifh bu-


mors,
Enfantiller. To play the child,or play as children doe ; to
triflesto toy it.
Jp, as nc ibe sonia sets
infantinément. Cchildifbly boyifhly,infant-like,
Enfardelé: mée:f. Packed,or made vp into a fardle,or


ma” bundle, +> :
Enfardeler, To packe ; to make vp intoa fardleor bun-


Enfariné: m.ée: € Bemealed ; whited,or firewed,ouer
with meale. à RE RP OPA ST
Bieneufariné. Flufh,mellowcupfhotten,that hath bis

_ beadgeere foundly; (a metaphor taken from flower caft
on meat,that it cleaue not to the Gridiron, fo bu
for bere his dvinke is as flower to keepe his liuer fiom:
burning bis meat.) , eye tae

Enfariner. Fo bemeale; to white,or firew ouer with

» meale. eet oK * 17

~ Qui entre dans va moulin il convient de neceflité

-quils’enfarine: Pro. Hèthat goes into a Mill mu
ee: be bemealed; be that touches pitch muft needs

Enfeconder. To fertilize ; to make fruitfull,or fertile. :

Enfelonni:m. ie: f. Become fierce, waxt curf, growne

\ €7¢Clbs -


s Enfelonnit, Tabecome fierce,ywax curfi,grow cruelly
ret a ge y F > ” ”


“orintemperate, humors > thofe that make earth their | s'ki 4 ne Becomming fierce paxing cur{t,grow=


Enfantiere. Femme en. 4 child-bearing woman,or


k light fre. | UV 39 a
| “Amendeeriflambée. Looke Amende,. sf
‘ te RS En


| ing cruel.

sms Hell,

Couleur d’enfer. À darke,and finoakie brovene.

{swag hiya Lara mort d'enfer attendre :
tov. The theefe that reflores not,or is not punifhed in

this lifé,bath caufe to expect damnation in dhe ae :

Enferger.To fhackle,or fetter.

Enferges: £ Shackles,fétters yrons for the legs.

Enfermé: m. ée: f Shut,kept,locked vp clofe; under
locke and key; alfo, inclofedshedged,or hemmed iz.

Fe me: com, Lafirme,weake, feeble, unable; crafie ,
REN, «

Enfermement: m.-A fhutting, locking, or keeping vp ;

an inclofing,bedging,or bemmingin.
timer. To fhut, locke, or keepe clofevp ; to inclae,
hedge,or bemme in. Ke mere ;

Enfermerie: f An Hofbitall,or Spittlefor fickesor mai-
med people ; alfo,a Cloifiey,or Fryerie. == = *

nfermier: m. Az ouerféer of the ficke in Hofpitals ; al-
füsthe Porter of a Fryerie. CRAQUE

Enferré : m.ée: f. Shackled, layed inyrons, Up;
alfo,pierced,or thruft into,with an yron blade; ass —
Ils'eftenferré. He bath run, or fallenupon his owne
Sword ; be bath run bimfelfe quite through, =

Enferrer. To  fhackle, chaine up, or lay in yrons ; alfo, to
Sirike,runne,pierce,or thruft intoywithafword,erc.

Les Enfers. Hell; Seeke Enfer.

Enfeftau: m. A Roofé-tylesor,a Ridge-tyle,

Enfefté: m. ée:£. Keptholyday ; or,folemnhixed with a
bolyday ; alfo,roofed; whence;
Maifonenfeltée. whofe roofe is furnifhed,or tyled. *

Enfefter: To keepe bolyday; to folemnixe with a bolyday;
to make bolyday for the fake, or make a bolyday in re-
membr-ance,of,

. Enfefter.vn edifice. To tyle aboufe, or, to firlifh the
roofe thereof by tyling it. k :
Enfueillé: m.ée: f Couered with, or hidden among,
-  leaues. 1 A °
s’Enfueïller. To cower bimfelf with, or bide bimfelfe a-

mone, leaues.

Enfiellé: m. ée:f. Made bitter as galt; filled, or ming-
led,with gall. -

Eofieller. To make bitter; to for mingle,with gall,

Enficri: m. ie: f. Growne; rond ofie farcie. 4

s'Enfierir. ‘To wax proud, grow flatelie, become loftie,
take much upon hi : ven

Enfievré: m. ée: f. Drinen,put,or caftinto anague. |

Enfievrer. Toput,or caft into an ague; to dinette


feauer. Me: “eo
Enfilé: m. ée: f. ‘Threaded as a ante + 6 on |
_ @ thread, as pearle, &c ; alfo, intangled, infrared,


4


cauebt faft. ta
Enfiler. To thread ; alfo, to intangle, or infnare /alfo,to
per pieréeinte. des FES À
nfiler la venelle. To runne away. RO
Ilen cuida bien cnfiler fon aiguille. Hethoghtto |.
baué gotten much by the bargaine, he meant-to feather | ~~
bis neaft well byit. es iad À
Enfinceux


— % ic: E.vantonlafcinions petulant, ;
Roses m. éc : f. Zafifulated; that bath gorten a
Enflambant. 1nflaming, firing, or, fetting on a light |:
Enflambé: m, 8: € Inflameds kindled, fet où a)


ENE |
Enflambement: m, An inflaming, firing; incenfing,


inkindling ; an inflammation.

Enflamber. To inflame, fire, fet on a light fire ; blifler
with beat; incenfe,inkindle ; fill with ardor. °
senflamber de courroux.Te fiune cha fe wax as bot
as a toaft,

Enfant Inflaming,inkindling, firing.or fetting on
alight fire.

E ammé : m.ée: f. as Enflambé,

Enflé: m. ée: f. Swollen; vifen ; puffed vp, routed


out,

Enfle-boeuf: m. The long-legd Beetle,or Ox-fly.

Enflecheures: f. The ratlings ; the cordie fleps whereby
Mariners climbe vp to the top of a Maft.

Enflemént: m. A fivelling ; rifing ; raifing ; puffing vp,
ftrouting out.

Enflément. Swelingly ; puffingly, ftroutingly.

Enfler. To /well,raife,blow,or pub up; alfoyas;
senfler. To fwell,rife,wax big, rout out.

Enflefcher. To pierce,or hoot into with arrowes.

Enfleure: f A fwelling, rifing, inflation, puffing up,
ftrouting out.

Enfleurer. as Enfleurir,

Enfleurir. To beflower ; to fpread, firew, fet, or decke,
with flowers. i

Enfleuronner. as Enfleurir.

cs f as Fr Le 4

nfoiri:m.ie: f Ber, quattered,befbitten.

Enfoirir. To Par pet ptr

Enfolaftré:m, ée: £. Foolifbly enamoured, or doating
on, fondly in lowe with.

Enfoncé: m, ée: £.Suake ps aa farre, into ; fallen
into the bottome of; as Enfonfe.

Enfoncement: m. A fiaking ; a bulging ; a driuing,or
dinging farre in; a beating, or forcing downe ; a brea-
king, going, or working deepe into; alfo, a ding, dint;
bole,bottome,bollow,

Enfoncer. as Enfonfer.

Enfondrant. Sinking,drowning owerwbelming (as in a
puddle,or mire;) alfo, yeelding, as a foft thing to the
force, or violence of a bard. ,

té: aie f. Sunke, drowned, ouerwhelmed,
© plunged into the bottome of (a puddle, or mire) alfo,
extreamely dinted.or beaten farre in.
ondrer. To finke ; drowne, ouerwhelme, plunge into
the bottome (of a puddle, flough, or myre.)
Enfondrer vn Semin fo weare or make great holes


in,a way; to make a deepe way.
poet ack Pt toe 2 To make a great dint in an


ar
Enfon
Enfo


ral
*


7


u:m, ué: £.. Mucke-wet,wringing-wet,

é:m. €e: f. Sumke, gone ppt Fy SETRR

fallen, downe into the bottome of; b 3 beaten

farrein; broken open ; wrought decpe into. _

Il a enfonfé la matiere. He hath thruft bim/elfe very

|. farre, be hath runne bimfelfe ouer bead and eares, into

à Enfer. To driue, or force downe to the bottome ; to
© beat deepe, or thruft farre, into; 16 b


~ senfonfer. Tof or 0€ deepe ; to ull downe into

2 rhone eurent rm our ed
 Enf onfer vn ni: To bend a bowe very bards or, to
Enfonfet vn huis. To beat in, or breake open, a


| Enfoné vali | Fa


TERME


LT. | © terne tue


k Enfrain@: m.


Digitized. by Go: gle 5 = =m —
Oe wie


"PES aie EURE
|


ENF


acke up wares into Dryfats,or Tunnes. ;
atone le rae. To greafe in the fift, to corrupt
with gifts or bribes; alfo,to gaine or grow rich,by fac


Ce sory

Enfonfitre: £ A beating or dinging, a finking or thruf:
ting farre in ; 07,as Enfoncement.
L'enfonfüre d'un chalit. The boorded bottome of a


Bedftead,
i + aad du teft d'une noix. The bottome ofa

ut} .
Enforcé: m. ée: f.Strengthned, confirmed, giuen force
unto; or whereunto force is ginen. :
s'Enforcer, Alors s'enforça la fefte.Then did the feaft

increafe.
nforci: m. ie: f. Inforced, confirmed , flrengthe-

ned.


Enforcir.Toinfürce confirme. flrengthen; add power,ap-
ply force, gine flrength, unto.
senforcir. Te grow [lrong, become luflic,wax coura-
em es vigorous ; take beart;recouer bis force picke vp

is crummes.

Enformé: m. ée: £ Formed, fafhioned.

Enformer. To forme, fafhion, add fhape, or making un-
to


Enforti: m. ie: £. Strengthned; faflencd'; infirced,for-
tified; alfo,thickned(as cloth us by filling.)
Enfoüé: m, 6e: £. Conuerted,or turned into frre,
‘Oller. To conuert into fire,to turne to fire.
Enfoui: m. Digged in ; buried, interrcd.
it. To dig in ; to burie, interre, bide, or Lay,in the


ground
Enfouiffement:m.4 digging ; an interring,a burying,
or biding inthe ground,
Enfourché: m. ée: f. Forked, made forkewi(e.
Enfourchir. To befôrke ; alfo,to befiride.
fourchure : m. as Fourcheure.
Enfourné:m. ée: f.Put into,or fut vp in,an ouen; alfo,
begun, fet on worke, taken in band.
Enfournement: m.4 putting into,or fhutting vp in,an
ouen ; a fetting in ; alfo, the beginning,or firft part,of a
matter. ;
urner. To put or fet, place or [hut up, in an ouen ;
alfo, to begin,{et in band,or on worke.
s'Enfourner en. To undertake, enter into, imbarke
himfelft in. 3
Il eftaufli fage qu’oncques puis n'enfournafmes
_ nous, He is enen as wife as he was at firft ; a coxcomb
be was, and a cokes he is.
‘A l’enfourner on fai les pains cornus. Pro. 4
bnfineffe  fooneft marde while it is abeginning; or,
at the fetting in is burt done ; for then ave faults
mof eafily committed, and (a little ouerflipt) bardly a-
mended ; of a like fence is ;
ui mal enfourne tire les pains cornus, Pro, He
that begins (a matter) untewardly, ends (it) ilfauored-


| Digged in; buried, interred; layed, put,or bid,
in the ground.

res Enfouir. |

Eux: m. eufe:f. Intricate, maxelike, inuol-
; perplexed; that bash many turnings, and win-


BikeQuolite:é A manifold winding,turning inuolu-
tion, intricacie,compaffe. oat
de: f. Infringed, violated broken,
Enfraindre. To infringe,violate ; breake in peeces,
Enfrangé :m.éc:f. Befringed; edced with fringe.
Enfianger. To befringe ; to edge, ov Jen frange
no


BA


’ 2
Originalsfrom -


FHBOHIOSTATE-UNIVERSITY


LL + .


E N’ FE


Shiubs,or weeds ; for want of tillage cc.
s’Enfricher. To grow wild or be ouergrown with forubs,
or weeds as land for want of tillage rc.
oiduré. Te füis enfroiduré. 1 have gotten a cold,
1 haue taken cold. “
s'Enfroidurer. To take cold,to get a cold.
Enfroqué : m.éc :-f. Attired in, or couered with, a
Monks bood,or Cowle ; and hence;
Cerveaux enfroquez. Monkes,Friers érc.
nfroquer.To attire mor coucr with,a Cowle;e>bence,
to make, orinffitute a Monke,drc.
Enfruité: m. ée:f. Stored, filled, or garnifbed, with
fruit. © +
Enfruiter. To flore, fill,or garnifh,with fruit,
nfucillé : m.ée: € Leaued, flucke or fet, flored or
farnifbed, with leaues. ! © > ie
Enfüciller.To beleafe; to flick or fet, lore or furnifh,with


leaues.


s'Enfuir. To fly,take bis beeles,run avay,cet packing as
full as be 4 shew a faire paire of toe FR
s’enfüir en cacherte. To give the flip, flinch away pri-
wily, flinke out of companic,
: Levin senfuit par deflus.The wine ppils,or runnes o-
uersat the top of
ws ; enfuit on l'enfuic : Prov. Men follow thofe
that fig.
Enfumé: m.#s Canthare. 4d
upon (lyme, and ordure. > }
fumé : m.éc:f. Smoakerl, or befinoaked ; perfumed
vor finothered, with finoake ; hanged or dried, in the
finoake ; alfo, finoakje; and, of a {moakie-browne, or
duskic-ruffet colour ; fimoakie-coloured,
nfumement: m. A fisoaking,or befimoaking; a per fie
ming with finoake,or hanging in the finoake.
Enfumer. To fizoke,or befionake 3 10 fmotber or perfime,
with fmoake ; to hang or dry, in the fmoake,
Enfurié:m. éc: f. Inraged, inflamed with furie, flark


iefea-fifh, that lines


maa. ;

Enfufté: m. ée: f, Inpiped,or incasked ; iayned or fafte-
po vnto,eatered or put ito,the flaues, or fide-boords,
of Cask. F

Engage: m. A pledge, pawne, gage, ingagement.

Engagé: m.ée: f. Ingaged, impledged, pawned.

Engagement: m. A pawaing,mgaging,impledging lay.
ing to pawne. :

Eng; et. Tepamesimpledge;ingeges to lay to pavne or

topledge,

Engageur: m. À pledger, ingager, pawner.

Engageure: fas Engagement.

Engaigne: f A le, deceit, fleight,craft. fraude,

re Engigné. Pic: alfo,egced urged, pro-
uoked, = * ~ PTE

Engaigier. To cofen, gull; decciue ; alfo, to charme, or
inchaunt; alfa, to eg, incite, fet on, prouoke, |

Engain:m. Anger, choller; Pic: alfo,a deceit, wile,

ï eich cofinin LUS be es TN,

Engainé:m.c€: £ Sheathed; put into a fheath.

Engainer. To fheath,to put up into the fheath.

anc-paftre. The little bird called, a water-wag-


Enganer. To deceiue; and (more particularly) a nurfe to
concealeber being with eid ober fe defiauds ber
charge of due nourifbment. a te


: anté: msée e:f. Begloued. - ete
i PR nteés. Mittaines like gloues.
“Engarber. 45 Encontenancer (but with more bold


Digitized CFO gle


Enfiché: m. ée:f. Growne wild, onergrowne with


s’Eufueiller. To hide,orflrowd himfelfe among leaues. -


neffe, and brauerie;) alfo, to couer.

Eng zm. €e:f, Kept, withheld, lested, bindered,

opped, flayed from ; probibited, forbidden, tinted, re-
preffed,refirayned.

Engarder. To withhold keep from; let, flop hinder,fay;
probibite, forbid, flint,rcfirayne.
mn es la hardicffe de. To bridle the faucine[fe,

the boldneffe, keepe downe the flomack, of.

E aftricnyte. That [peaks out of the bellie,as one that

pe effet, (eemes to doe.

Enga imythes. (The fame) crooked: backt-men arc fo
termed becaufe,commonly, their voice is holiow.

Engaunché. 4 Encaunché.

Enge as Engeance,

Engé: m,ée: f.Stored, fumnifhed, filled with tb'increafe,
ov kind of; alfo, growcn.increafed.fpred farre sbroad,
De poules, & de pauvreté on en eftbien toft en ge.
Pro: Chitkens and poucrtie come onapace.

Engeance : f.4 breed,race,brood ; the feed,or off-fpring


à
j


of. if
Tr ps A breeding increafing,continuing tbe
raceof. .
Engeancer. To breed, grow ; increafe in growth.
Engclé: m. ée: f. Froxen,congealed.
Engeler. To freexe, congedle, fet anice on.
Engeleure: £. A chilblane ; or, the bloud-fhot whith
cold fettles, and congeales, vpon the fingers.
endré : m. ée: f Ingendred, À ns ga begotten,
bred; made, canfed, procured, begun.
Engendrement : m. An ingendring, procrcating, be-
getting, breeding; a caufing, making, procuring sbegin-
ning,
Engendrer. To ingender,procreate,beget breed ; caufe,
make, procure, begin. :
Engendreur : m. An ingenderer, begetter, breeders
amaker, procurer, beginner of. ; *
Engendreure: or Engendrure: £. .A procreation ; or
as, Engendrement. ;
Engeolé. as Enjaulé ; aifo incaged.or ingcoled.
Engeoler. To attrad, intice sallure,winne, inveaglesbe-
Sot jathrall (by faire and deceitfüll words; ) alfo, to in-
cage, or ingaole; to put in a cage, to lay in gaole.
Enger. To produce, or make to grow ; to fore, furnifh, or
ll with th increafe,or kind of; alfo, to grow,increafe,
extend, or fpreditfelfe abroad. ‘ à
Engerbé: m. ée:f. Bound vp together in a fheafe, as
Corne. : i
Engerber. Toÿheafe, or bind up (as corne) inafheafe:
Engeronné : m. €e:f, Dandled on,or bugged in, the
p. | .
eV cor ane the lap, as anurfèsor mo: |
ther;ber child. LES |
Engigné:m.ée : £.charmed,bewitched,inchaunted ;al- |"
fo, coufened,beguiled.gulled. '
Enpgigner.To charme,bewitch,inchaunt; alfo,to coufen,
gull, deceine, beguile. 30
D m.A deceiuer,beguiler, coufener ; alfo,an |.
Engi See in,toole infirument ral:
: m. An engin,toole,inflrument ;

Tone policie, aes of wit ; alfo, futtletie, fraud,craft,
seilenee, deceit. *
Vn homme fans malengin. À fncere, uprights

plane-dealing


RAT. ‘
Mieux vaut engin que force. Pro: Better be wife
then firong. SR int
Enginé: m. ée: f. Bewitched, incharmed,inchaunted,
coufened, guiled,beguyled, ;
Enginer. as Engigner. :
A


Original from


THE OHIO:STATE. UMWERSERT À


a — af + =
et «oe


"ts


_—


oS, Ke :<+5#as CPP Lee ee) 177,
L >
,


EN G


Engiponné : m. ée: f. Clothed,muffled,or lapped
pr or fort caffocke ; alfo,ragged,or snrags.

Englacé: m.ée:£ Growne cold as ice.

s’Englacer. To wax as cold as ice.

Englantine. An €glantine; Seeke Anglantine.

Engle: f, as Angle; a corner.

Enylentier. 4 Sweet-brier tree.

Engler. To fhut vp in a corner ; Seeke Angler.

Englet. Seeke Anglet. . é

Englobé: m, ée: f. Inglobed; comprebended, or con-
tained within the circumference of. l

Englober.To inglobe ; to comprebend,or containe with-
in the circumférence of.

Englobure : f. An inglobing ; alfo,a globe-like circumfe-
rence,or compal]e.

Englouti: m.ie: f Inglutted,ingulfed,greedily deuon-
red, fivallowed up.

Engloutir. To deuour, mglut, ingulfe, fwallowwp.

Englué : m. ée: f. Belymed ; caught, or dreffed, with
birdlyme. 4

Engluer. To lyme,to dreffe,or catch, with birdlyme, … :

Englume. as Enclume ; an Anuile, 4

Engolfé : m. ée : f. Ingulpbed, fivallowed vp in a


gulfe.
Engolfer, To ingulf. Fair
Engoncé: m.ée: £. Rinn'd in by,or fet fap in; fraitned,
wanting libertie, not able to flirre for; (a Metaphor
from doves , which turne not well vpon their bind-
ges.)

Engorgé: m.ée: f. Ingorged,rauened,deuoured, fwil-
ie = fwallowed downe ; alfo,choaked. .
Engorgement: m. A glutting, rauening, deuouring,

ingorging ; a wallowing up, as of a riuer by the fea;
alfi,a choaking,or flopping the throat of; alfo, a giuing
of a full gorge unto, ;
Engorger. To ranen, ingorge, deuoure, glut, fwill vp,
[wallow dove.
orger Je cours d'un moulin. To choake, or flop
, à mill with too much water.
Engorger yn oyfeau. To give a Hawke a full
gorge. ER,
orgeur: m. À ravener, glutton, , ingorger ;
one that, to eat the fafter, fvallowes downe bis meat
whole,
E ux: m. eufe:f. Ingorging,rauenous,greedie,
pc fwilling vp, toys yee .
Engoiié: m.ée: f. Choaked, flifled, firangled with too
great amorfell. ;
Engoiier. 2s Anouer ; or (altogether)to choake,or flifle.
Engouffrer. To ingulfe. ‘
sengouftrer. A little thing violently to fall into, and
utterly be loft in(or deuoured by)a greater; as a brooke
when it meets with a Riner, or a Riser when it comes


to Walt: ae fee denser Rs prie
eu là.


Le vent s’eng e, & Ss entonne en ce
‘The wind whirles, and whixxes terribly; or bath a
= eed ate and makes a great noïfè in that hollow


ENG


Enginier: m, An Enginer ; Engins. rdir, 7 b , flupi
nginier: m,n Enginer ; «maker of Engi ap Pope it. To numme benumme, flupifie,make fence-


.  Leffe,aftonif;alfo,to be,or grow numme,fionied, fence-
- leffe.

Engourdiflement: m. 4 benumming,or numneffe; an
Somme or fencelefneffe, a flupiditie, or dullneffe ; a

eping of any limbe,or member.
ngourmelé : m.ée:f. (urdedor curdled thicke,
_Sangengourmelé. Clotted bloud.

Engourmeler.To curd,or curdle much ; alfo,to thicken,
or clat,as bloud when it growes cold.

Engoufté: m. ée:f. Put in taf, brought vato a flo-
macke ; alfo,inchafed, inclofed,or fet into.

Engrais de terre: m.The manuring,or dunging of land,
whereby it growes the fatter,and fitter for any fe.
a de volaille, The franking, or fattening of

le


Beufs d'engrais. Fat Oxen,Bceues alreadie fed.
Tenir {on ventre à l'engrais. Tofeed, franke ,or fat-
ten bimfelfe. |
Engraifsant. Fattening, franking, feeding.
{Té: m, ée: f. Fed, fattened, franked ; crammed;
alfo,mayled,ov manurcd. à
En ement: m. À franking, fattening,feeding,bat-
ling ; a putting,or growing into flefb,and fatneffe
raifler. To feed, franke, fatten ; to put,or bring,in-
0 flefh,and fatneffe. ,
eryn champ. To marle, manure, or dung a
field; to battle itor make it fertile.
Le tems s'engraifle. The weather growes thicke.
Engraiffiffant. as Engraiflanc.
Engraiz :m. Looke Engrais. ;
d. Tues bien engrand de trotter. Thom
wouldft faine be packing; thou longef} much to be gad-
ding, thou bafl a moncths mind mn gone.
rangé: m. éc:f. Inned, or put into a barne, as
corne FC. |
Engrangement: m. An inning of corne ec ; a putting,
or fhutting up in a barne.
ne To inne corne rc; to put, or fhut, vp ina
arne.
Engrayé: m. ée: f. Ingranen,carued, intailed.
Éoÿraver. To Pb; eg ra
Engraveur: m. 4 caruer,cutter,mgrauer,intailer.
Engraveure: f. An intailing,cutting,ingraning ; ingra-
werie; al(o,a figure ingraued.
s’Engre er. To grow worfe, become forer, wax more
E pitch, em or troublefome. 2
ngreivné. Porc enoreigné. A meafeld Hog.
Bree: m.ée: f. 1 erie ; filled, or farnifhed with
ecd,or (orne.
Engrener.To ingraine; to fill,or farnifh with feed,corne,
or graine.
Engreflé: m. ée:f. Ingrayled,or inuecked (a tearmeof
Bla


Engreflure: £ Am ingrayling,or innecking ; a kind of
small idence Em a coal of Armes.

Engreffement: m. as Engraiflement.

. To biggen,increale.grow greater.

né: m. €e: f. Sullen,powting lowring,grun-


CRINE,


Engroin: m. Sullenne 2, powting ; lowring, frowning ;


_ malice effe.
' ieee eatmeds made rome big.
i Clotted,cluttered,curded thicke; gaihe-
Engroffi: m. ie: f. Greatned, increaled, inlarged, well
iuen, batled apace ; growne large, become groffe,
waxt great,made big, 3 En.


|: ed into knobs,oï knots,


Originalkfrom


= THE OHIO: STATE UNIVERSITY


EN" H


Engroffir vne femme.To greaten,make great,or groffe;
to get with child. : .
s'Éngroffir. To thrive, increafe, become groffe, grow
large.w1x big; to fatten,or battle apace.

Engroffiflement. A growing ,increafing;tbriuing ; (de
femelles) à bigging; a being great with child, or big
with young. <

Engroüé: m.ée: f. Stopped, cloyed, or choaked up, as
the courfe of a water-mill, by weedes, ec; or as An-
goue, \ À
Pie engtoiiée. Awariaagle ; or a (inall Woodpecker,
white aad blacke of colour,and but balfe as big as the
or dinarie gveene one; called thus about Tours.

Enguigné :m.ée: À Deceiued, confened, gulled,be-
guiled.

En guigner. To deceiue,coufen, gull, beguile,

Enguipponné. as Engiponné. | ;

Engnitlandé: m. ée: £. Adorned, or crowned, with a

| _. garland; wearing a garland.

Enguirlander . To adorne, or crowne, with a gar-
land. ;


| Engyronner. To iauiron,incompaff; as Environner.
ngys. as Aupres. @Rab.

| Envhaillonné: m.ce: f. Tattered,ragged, full of clouts,
| __ ov of patches ; wearing torne,or patched clothes.
Eahair. To bate, loath, detef.

Enhanné. Toyled hard, laboured extreamely, wrought
| unto fiveating;toyled unto fighiag,

| Enhanner. Totoyle hard, labour extreamely, or vebe-
|. mencly; worke till be fiweator figh withall.

| Enhanté: m.ée: £ Hawing a fiaffe, or bandle put unto


it. | |
Enhanter vne pique.To put the flaffe into the bead of a
P .% tite A


thes. yin ni |

Enhardi: m. ie: £ Heartened, animated, imboldened,

 éncotraged; grawne bold,hardie,confident,

- © Teme fuis hard EME fo bold as.

+ | Enhardir. To hearten, imbolden, animate, incourage;

"make hardie,giue heart vato,put mettall into,

s enhardir. Torbax hardie,get beart,grow confident;
alfà,to prefume,or venture on,

Enharnaché: m. ée: f. Harneifed; farnifhed, fully
trapped.

: Enharñachement : m. The baraeis, or fürniture ; alfa,
a te a horfe.

Enharnacher va cheval. To barneis a borfe; to put on

À. all bis furniture, !

\£ i eens Es : as Enharnachement.

Énhalt:: m, ée :,f. Spitted,put vpoma pit.
Enh utter: To (bit, to put on the pit...

Es =, agi Ven it, From aboue.
nhaz£: m. ée: iV ery bufie “eager at warke ;
fall of imployments that hath many yrons in the fire,or
much to doe, @Parifiens ns et
Tet tout enhazé à plouvoir. It is féttoraine. | "|

Enherbé: m.¢e: f charmed, bewitched or impoyfoned,
with hearbes.. à 0 : i :

Enherbement: m. A bewitching,or impayfaning with
hearkes, HOUSE : ‘

Epherber. To charme,bewitch,or poyfon,with bearbes.
Hheriter aucun. To make one his boire. à

dé : m.ée:f.Fetteredor tethered.

der. To fêrter, tether, faften the legs,or faften by

rt . :


reti. \


Enh otip,or nocke with horne,
à exhortationsper[uafion;requelt; incite-
mont, incauagement, NPA
Enhorté: m. quired; perfuaded,ad-


+"


.… Enjamber fur les marches d'autruy. To v/urpe,in-


E NI


uifed ; incited animated, incouraged vo. :
ortement.as Enhort; al/@,an exhorting requiring;
perfuading,aduifing ; inciting,incour aging unto,
Enhorter. To exhort, require, defire ; mouc, perfuade,
aduife ; incite, incourage animate flurreyor cheere vp,
vato, e
Eohorteur: m. An exborter, perfuader ; mouer,adui-
Ser; inciter incourager,cheerer vp,vnto. —
jotté: m, Ée: € Stucke faf (as a coach,éxc) in the


- mire.
Enhui, To day,this day.
Enhuilé: m. ée: f Oyled; annoynted ymingled,or feafe-
ned,with oyle. ° aXe
nhuiler. To oyle; to dreffe, annoynt, feafon, mingle, bi-
fneare,with oyle, At |
Eohuiler vu homme qui meurt. Te minifler the Sa-
cramicnt of extrcame Vnétion, ‘
Enhydrer. To breed many mifchiefes by the cutting off of
one ; or many mifchiefes to breed by ee.
Enhydride. 47 Adder,or water-Snake, qRab.
Enjablé: m. ée: f. whofe (rowes are made; or,whefe
head is fitted for the Crowes, # Et
Enjabler. To rigol! a peece of caske; or, to make the
Crowes ; alfo,to make the bead fit for the Crowes,
sEnjaloufer. To grow icalous, à
Enjambé : m.ée: f. Strid ouer ; alfo,incroached on,
Enjambée: f. 4 firide ; or, as much ground as ohe can
ffride oucr.
Enjambement : m. Az incroaching vpon, or, firiding
ouer.
Enjamber. To firide ouer ; alfa, to incroach vpon; and
hence; -


nie,


trude vpon.or medd!e with,another mans right,

Enjambeure: f. 4 Enjambée; a fhride.

Enjambure. The fame.

Enjavelé: m.ée: f. Made, or bonnd up, as coine, into
Tauels,

Enjaveler. To make up corne into lauels or Gauels.

mors m. A maker} or binder, vp of corne into

quels.

Enjaveliner. To arme,or firike with a laueline.

Enyaulé: m. ée: fi Attraëled,inticed, allured, inuea-
gled,befottedinthralled by faire, (but deceit fill! words,

Enjaulet. To intice, attratt,allure,befot,inueagle,winne,
intbrall by faire,(and deceitful) tearmes ; to cog ex-
treamely with... :

Enjauleut : m. 4 beguiler, inucagler ; guller, a foifting
companion, cog ging marchant coufening mate;one that
by faire (beech deceines thembedeales wnb. : ~

Enjauleufe: € Am inticing bufwife. : 3}

s'Enjaunir. To wax yellow. ;

Enjeoller. as Enjauler, oF Engeoler.

En-jeu. vn en. A flake at play. st À

Enig-with. qAlleman. (Rab, 2 |

Enigmatique: com. Enigmaticall; objeure, mfücall,
hard to be vnderftood. DE TELE

Enigmc:m. A riddle; a darke queflion, an obfcure,and
myfticall demiund. "|

Enjobeliné: m. ée : f. Befôtted,gulled,abuféd;brought
into a fooles Paradife. Ve

Enjobeliner. To deceiue,be/ot,bring inte a fooles Para-

_ dife; to gull, toabufe, : ;

Enjoinét: m. &e : € Inioyned, commaunded,appointed
to be done. a s $


Donne f.Basenjoinéte. Low iaynted.


inde. To ivioyne,or duine appoint,or commaund «| ‘
re to be done. f tape
ot


Hh iÿ


“


VS AP Origifial from: pase
=> SHE QHIO:STATE UNBERSEFY à


eta oe


Re ARE yea :
PAR pede EE re “


ee


 —_ +


— en à à


Enlaidir. To make
defile difizine,


Pure a hingor (leek
Enliffeure: f. A finonti Le
Art i: m. ie: f Growne dull,


.


EN L


, {


nyonché: m.ée: f. Strewed,
greene rufhes,frefh bearbes,or prettie flowers.
Enjoncher. To firew,imbellifh,or deck; as with greene
rufhes, prettie flowers, frefh bearbes,
Enjoüé: m. ée: f. Chuffie, fill-checked, fwolne-chee-
ps 3 alf0, lecherous, laftiurous, wanton ; blithe iocond,
olic
Enioy
iewels,
Enjuvencé: m. cc: f..Made young or youthfill.
Enjuvencer. To make youthfull , young, luflie, fro-
licke, 1
Enixe: com. Earnefl, indeuoring, labouring bard.
nlacé : m. éc: f. Suarled,intangled,infnared.
Enlacer. To /narle,intangle,infnare.
Enlaidi: m. ie: f. Grawne fe ouglie, ilfanored, fil-
thie, fluttifb,desfigured,out of favour. '
Putabeaiie: ilfauored; to disfigure,


Enlaidiffant. Diafiguring defiling making foule.

Enlaidiffement: m. A düfiguring,or defilin
hing foule,ouglie, loathfème to the eye.

Enlanguagé. Bienen. An, eloquent, or well fpoken


man.
Enlaflé: m, ée: €. Hard-knit , firait-bound ; af, in-
[rarled,intangled. ;
Enlaffement: m. A firait knitting,or binding; alfo,an
intangling,in{narling in{uaring,
Enlevé. swollen; lifted,raifed up ; alfo,conueyed,or ca-
vied away. : L
Imagette enlevée. A fall imboffed image.
nlevement: m. A lifting, raifing,or beauing vp
aconueying or carryingaway,
Bnlever-To Ufi, heaue,raift vp ; alfo,to take conuey,
carrie away (by force Ge.
nleveure: f. 2s Enlevement; 4
ng raifing vp of.


nieveure d'un ès.


2 great boufe.


f. Smoothed, fleeked,


me Seeke Parer.


‘Enluminem 2 A burnifber of bookes ; (ove call
one that colotreth,or painteth vpon,Pap


» }


Enjolena Enjauler. To deceiue, or befat with faire
words.
Enjolivement: m. Neatneffe, fineneffe, comelineffe,
bandfomene(Je,gallantne(fe,curiofitie(in attire.)
Enjoliver. To decke,adorne,pranke,trim; to make neat,
ne,gallant,handfome,
Enjoliveure: f. À decking, pranking, trimming; atti-
ring; alfo,an attire,
njolleur : m. 4s Enjauleur. ”
bedecked,or fet out,with


€,
cr. To beiewell ; to decke, furniflyinrich with


B34 ma-


5 aff,


frblling, rifing,puf:


An extraordinarie,and unnatu-

rall {welling of a bone in any part thereof.
Enlié:m.eé: £ Bound,or knit up together.
Enlier. To bind,or knit vp together.


Enlignagé.Bien en. Of a good kiared very well allyed,


tmp, bea-


nie rede obit . ie
Enlumniné: m.ce:f. Cleered, brightened inlightened,il- |.
laminated ; fleeke j al finned.
Vilage i ,0r fierie countenance of


ts Pate
Beekng a aline


pi Y Digitized by Co: gle rs ° EU
Te - A = ge


3 2mportune oucr- ,
Ennuyeux : m.eufe: ££ Troublefime;difpleafng,offen-
fine} grieuouss lsathfème,wcarifomestedions,n kfime;


dé md. et L'ot à À A


ENN
Ennaffé: m..€¢e f Intrapped,inclofed,imprifoned, or


caught,as filbinaweele. | te
s'Ennafer.To be inthralled,imprifoned,intrapped,inclo-
Sed,or caught as fifh in aweele, (wobich is eajfily entred,
but bardly got out of.)
ze: m.€e: f. Put on the nofe.
Hnazer.To put on thenofe. °
Honeige: Full of fnew.
Ennelé. Iambes ennclées. Baker-legs.
Ennemi: m. An enemie,a foc,an aduerfarie.
In’eft nuls petis ennemis: Pro, Noenemie can be
Re little:the leaft enemie is too great for bim that
peace. ”
Qui paffe vn iour d'hyuer ; il pafle vn de fes enne-
mis mortels: Pro. Looke Pafler.
nemuc : f. À fhee-foe. LD
Ennicroché: m.ée:f. Hooked, intengled, imyrapped,
or wrought one within another. Rab.
Enniellé. Blafted, as corneserc.
s’Ennieller. (ornevines,or fruits,to be blaffed. dy
Ennobli: m. ie: £ Ennobled,nobilitated, made noble,
made a gentleman (moft properly meant of one that
bath bought bis Gentrie of the French King, who makes
mac ho Gentlemen when he wants money)
Ennoblir. To ennoble,nobilitate make noble.
Ennobliffement: m. An ennobling, nobilitating, ma-
_ kingnobleor of gentleblud, ==
pr rm, ie:f. Blacked, growne blacke, made
acke. jt
Ennoircir, To blacke; to make blacke ; alfo, to wax
ac


r


nbré: m. ée: f. Enumerated,numbred out; told,
or counted oucr. l
Ennombrer. To enumerate, or number out; to tell, or
count ouey, F
Ennoffé. 4/moft choaked with a bone; Seeke Enoff£. _
Ennoiié: m.ée: f. Tyed vp,or on aknot. nest
Ennoüer. To make a knot,or ty on a knot, core
Ennoye:£ Acertaine venemous worme, which going
both wayes, and hauing (as a ground-worme)ber bead,
and tayle of one bignefft,is (aid to hane two heads.
Enntadé : m. ée: f. Ouerclouded, onerfhaduwed with
a cloud, | :
Ennuager.To overcloud;or as with a cloud.
s’Ennuër. To wax cloudie, = the skie before ill wea-


thcr. k 7 r
Ennuiété: m. ce : £. Benighted; turned into nigbt.
Ennuiéter. To benight, make night, turne into night;

Looke Anuiéter. —_

Ennuicti:m.ie: f. Benighted. :

NUY: m. Annoy; vexation,trouble,difquict, molefia- |
tion ; forvow,gricfe, anguifh; wearifomenelfe, tediouf- |
neffe, irkefimeneffe; importunitie; a loathing ov facie-
tie,of a diftontentment or offence,at, à ,

Ennuyé: m.ée:f. Aanoyed ; vexed difquieted molef-

ted, griened,affiitled ; weavied loathed, ouer-much im-

portuned ; offended at, or diftontented with, |
er. To annoy; vex,trcuble, difquiet, mole; dif |
mient, grieue, afflict, LH om Menge aif-

( mi + py pte


a
ouer:


a ; moft importunate. FA
Les mauvais Mufciens ne fontiamais ennuyeux
à eux mefmes. Harfh voices neuer are raplcfing
to themfèlues ; or, mien feldome grow wearic of their |
one iarring. ' wie


Enny. # Ennoye, PE


Original"from
THE OHIO:STATE*UNIVERSITY 2


+


ENO.
4 Enombeage :mée:f. Ouerfhadowed or as Enom-
Enombragesstlefhadinw ener, cloke, bide, caft a mift


outer,
Enombré. Shadowed, ouerfhadowed ; coutred,or bid-
den,with,or vader,the fhadow of.
En ombrer. as Enombrager.
Enonce : m. ée: f, Signst ed dachived dense et:
lifhed,pronounced. 5
Enoncer. as Annoncer, i
Enondé : m.ée : waned; wrought, floating,or fhining,
likewaues, | :
iw), Enordi: mae: f. Defiled,polluted berayed,
… © | Enordir. To defile, pollute, beray bimfelfe.
: Enorgueilli: m.ie :f. Made loftie become proud,
Enorgueillir. To make loftie, or proud ; to puffe, or
{well vp the mind; to gine, or bring prefumption vn-
10. j
Enonne:com. Huge, exceffiue, unmeafurable, enor-
mous ; excceding great ; difordered immnoder ate ; bai-
nousmost wicked.
Enormément. Exormoufly, bainoufly, onmeafurably,
exceffinely,without mealure,much amiffe, farre out of
À fquzre.
| Enormiffime. Moft enormous,or bainous; moft wicked,
x mofl excefiue. é
> 4 Enormité :f. Ax enormitie bainoufnelfe; great iniqui-
ei 4: De ch extreame wantof meafure, mode-
27 ration order. 1
_ * | Enortié:m.ée:f. Netled,benetled ; flung,pricked;rub-
| _ bedouer, with nettles. :
| Enortier.To nettlesor benettle;to fling,pricke,rub oner,
with nettles, > z
Enoffé. Choaked with a bone ; alfo, bauing a bone in his
throat ;alfo,hauing a bone taken out of bis throat;alfô,
rooted,ar fetled in the bones, Sh st
: er m.ée:f. Fed with,or flefhed vpon, birds, as
a Hawke. as ;
| Enperruqué. Looke Emperruqué,


4 #


4
—


a chef. |

Enquaifler. Toinchef}; to put into,er pack vp in,a chef,
or cafe.

Enquant. #r Inquant.


{ Enquantellé. bafton bien enquantellé de fer. A
| flaffe well piked,or well grained with yron,


Enquenouiller de filace. To draw a diftaffe. .
pee To inquiresaske,dcmaund, make fearch , or
inquifition after. Shin de.
Il ne faut pas enque ou foit l homme , le
ic mais qu'il foit bon. Looke Homme,
/in,&;Dit,.. 33 MORE SR OR
Enquerquenner. To yoke fivine. Sur


Enquerre. « Enquerir. PPS. Durs
Enquefte: f. An laqueft, laquifition, earch, inquirie,
cxaminationyn queltioning with; alfesthe teflimonie,or
depofition of witneffts, ==.
Enquefte d’ eftabliflement. A requeft, or a writ,for
the eflablifoing of apoffeffions + 2 à
_ Les chambres desenqueftes. Looke Chambre.
sEnquelter. To fearchyexamine,inquirc, queflion,aske,
Make inquifition after,


En im. .Afearchet, examiner , demaunder,


| quel inquifitor ; à Iuror,-
Enracinable: com. Rootable, fit to take root.
Fnraciné:m, ée: f. Rooted, grounded, or fetled in.
Enracisement:m. Avooti re pet.
tEnraciner, To 20 root in a thi 3 foinracinate;


1


“barre GOvgle


PL 4


ig ee a a AR


: Eurayer vnerouë. To flay,or bold a wheele backe with


| ‘Enquaifsé: m.éc: fi Inchefled ; put,or packed ~, into


Eole se secrnon: M mes ES
SMIC : ; ae"
=


EON R


‘
Se ee


alfo, to rout,ov take root. :
mage: m. Éc: f, Enraged, raging, madde , wood, |,
| franticke, farious, outragious, befides bimjclfe, out of \
bis little wits.
Chi é ne peut longuement vivre: Prov,
Amadde Dogge lives not , violent humors laft not,


+ ARR LL Ar


Ag: :

Vn fol wnenragé : Prov. Once a fiole eucr madde ;

or there's little difference between a fiole & a madde

man,

Vilain affamé,demy enragé: Prov, Barre a clowne

of bis vidtualls you belfe mate den,

Nragement: m. Rage, invagig; madneffe, firie, fren-

ales flies outragroufiefe bs re

ae 9s Ragiagly, madly, woodly, frantick'y, fa-
rioufly,outragioufly, Bedlam-like. + — À

Enrager. To rage ; raue, ftorme,play the Bedlam , fare
like a madde-man, be flarke madde. c

Enrailler. as Efrailler; To flare.

Enratné: m, ée:f. Stucke,or (et thicke with boughes;
alfo,pearched,mounted,or got vpon a bough,

Enramement: m. 4 laying,or (reading of boughes ; a
prarcbing, leaping, skipping,mounting, or climbing on :

oughes. 3

Enrainer. To lay, fficke,or (bread boughes.
s'Enramer.To pearch, or take a fiand ina bough; to
leape,mount,or climbe x pon boughes.

Enranci:m. ie: f. Growne mufiie, fifliesreflie,

Enrancir.To grow mufie, fiflie,/cflie.

Enraqué: méc:f. Bemired,, er flicking in the mite:


«Pic. À

Enraffé. as Enragé. Starke madde : €Rab.

Enrayé: m.ée: f. Stayed,or beld backe,asawheele by
a Trigger.


aTrigger, ».
ayoir:m. The wheele-gate, or beame, that floppeth

the'courfe of awater-mill; alfo,a Trigger , the flaffe

thats put before a cart-wheele, to kicpe it from ouer-

throwing,or ouer-haflie going.
Enregiftrable: com. Fit to be regifived,or enrolled,

nregifiré : m.ée:f Regifired enrolled,
Enregiftrement : m. A regifiring,or enrolling,
Enregiftrer. To regifter, to mroll.
Enrencé: m. éc:£ Growne mufie, fiftie, reflie,
Enrethé: m. ée: fCaugbt,intangled, infnared,imwrap-

ped.in a net, J ft
Enrether. To catch, intangle, infnare, imrap ina


net. ; wash, i

Enrheumé : m. éc+f. Troubled with the rhewme,poft, |
ormurte. à à

Enrichi: m. ie : f. Inviched, madewealthic. ©
II n’eft orgueil que de povre enrichi: Prov. No
mais fo fuilie as th'inriched begger, ae (3
Vilain enrichi ne connoit parent, ni ami: Prov, |
Looke Vilain. DER

Enrichit: To inrich,to make wealthie. ur
Enrichit vn conte. To amplifie, enlarge, adde unto,


it, ’
Qui s acquite s' enrichit : Prov. Looke Acqui-
ter. Te
Enrichiffeure: f. Aninrichment ; an i
Enrime : m.ée: f. as Enrheumé, |
Enrimer. To get the rhewmie, the murre,the pofe.(v.m.)
Enroché: m.ée: f. Made ruckie, turnedintoarocke. | .
Enrocher-To make rockie, to turne into arocke, |
wrocheur. tonnelier enrocheur. as Encayeur, _


L ing. .


.
+


<


i\ ep Orr...
Wi is SERYS =


FE!


ENS ENS


? s'Enroidir. To grow fliffe ; to become obflinate. Enfaquer. To putup into a fecke,cr wallet,
Enrollé: m.ée:f. Imvlled, regifived; muftered,among | Ent monn : m6: f.Befcaped ,wefied,or done cuer,
others, . with foape. :
Enrollement. An inrollin Enfavonner.7o befoape; to wafh or lather ir,10 anneint
Enroller. To enroll,to ot. 310 mufler, enter sor put or bifmeare with, fope. | “8
: names,crc,iato a booke,or bill. Enfceptré : m.ée : fveaving,or bearing a Scepter; pof-
Enroollement : m.as Enrollenient. feffed of a Scepter.
nrotulé : m.ée: f.1nrolled; fer downe ina roll. ionné: m, ce:f, Coifed, wearing a cawle,or
x Enrotuler.To inroll, to coucher paffe in a roll among o- coife.
| + thers. Enfeigne: m. An Enfigne Auntient Standard-becarer ;
Pr = be : £. Hoarfe,whizxing,or wheazing, of a à gg maire, carries the Colours ef a Con panie
ronca jound, .
Enrouémént : m. Hoarfeneffe, wheaxing. Enseigne :f. A fiene,token, marke, note, badge, argu-
: Enroüément. Hoarfly,or as one that wbeaxes. mentor prefumption of a thing; a printstracesor wadl
- s'Enrouër. To grow hoarfe, to get the Murre, or Pofe | to find it out by; alfo,an Enifigne, Standard, vi Banner;


the Colours under which a Band, or Companic of fiot-
men [crue ; alfo,the Band, or Companie ut [elfe ; alfaa |
Signe bung out at a doore ; alfè,a Fewell(gmen.) —
«A bonnes enfeignes. Truely, throughiy, fir a cer-
taine, in good earne|t, not onely in [bew. À
‘A faufles enfeignes. Faincdly, falfly, counter feitly,
forged makes or tokens ; onely for a colour.
ral enfeigne de I cRoille, To ke without
* . doores all night. J
Enleigné : m, ée: f. Taught,infiruéted, leBoned ; orde-
red, fafhioned, trained up; dire fied, fhewed, pointed


to wheaze to yceld a broken,and vnpleafing found.
Enrouéure : f. as Enrouëmént,
Enrouillé : me: f. Ruftieyufledcankered.
s'Enrouiller. To raft,to canker.
Enrouilleure. f. Ruf!, canker, :uftineffe of mettalls.
Enroulé, Secke Enrollé,
Enrouler. as Enroller,
Eoroullir les yeux. To roll the eyes; to flare, gaze, or
looke about bim amaxedly.or madly.
Enroupié. Snottic,befnineled,dr opping at thenofe.


a


ee Enrousé. as Arroufé..


Be. Enroufer. To water, tobedeaw; as Arroufer. » _ out Unto. at P
Enruché: m.ée:f. Jabimed,putinto hines, abidi nernent : m, A teaching infirultion, document,
a biue, ; precept , inflitision, dotirine ; leffon, or examj le fet;


“a difciplining, or dering , fifhioning,direéting or tray-
ning Up.
Les Enfeignements d’ vn procez. Infiructions,
Bookes Euicences, Inftruments Authorities.
ipner. To teach,to infirud ; to gine precepts, to [et

_ lefsons to;to dircét, fheve marke,point,or trace cut un-
to; alfo,to fafhion,or traine up.

Enfeigneur : m. 4 Teacher or Infiruéter ; and , (more
particularly.) the Vfher of a Free-{choole ; alfo,the fief
Finger pointing finger or fore- finger.

Enfeioneurié. inftignorixed, made Lord.or ovener of.

Entel: sword-like of a fword. =

A ensel. See Cautere. |

Enfellé: m. ée : f. Saddle-backt ; alfo,fadled.

Enfeller vn cheval. To faddle a borfe; (a word feldome

Enfemble: Ali, lihewife ; with, withall, iqyntly , toge-
ther,one with another one in companie of another ; al-
en againfithotber.

ous fommes bien enfemble. we are goed friends;
or well met ; alfo(angvily) 1 care as little as you. ;

emblement. Together, one with another, ioyntly;
all,or both at once; as well th’ one as th’other.

a age m.éc: f. Swed, feeded; firnified with

eed, Or <5 seal

Enis pease A faving, feeding,or firnifting

low ;tofet,or furnifh with feed.
fe; as Saat toe ee :

Encenfement.. bs rae


; fe clir. TETE ‘- ;
ect Buried, intombed, laied ina


% vena
slturer To lay in a Tombeor Seche.
penté. Full of Serpents, contred will Serpents.


Enrucher. To inbiue, ov put into a bine.
ie s'Enruiffcler. ‘Torwme outing orto dinide it felfeinto,
5° little flvcames, brookes, channels, Di:
1 NS, In,withinymward. * un |
Faire venir les deniersduRoyens. To gather, and
fend up the Kings money inte th’ Exchequer,
Enfablé: me: f Filled, firawed, or conered with
and ; alfo, vunne,or fplit,asaa fhip, onthe fands, _
Enfabler. To fll,couer or flrow with fand ; alfosto split,
_ or runne on the fands,as a fhip.
Enfablonner. To be/priakle, rs or fill with gravel,


ov, gent Jandy 23: saa
eos : foe ée:f. Re 2 À intoa
bag, fachell or poake. ad ee ae ad
ébder. To pag Up; toput into a bagge, Jacke, or


ane, “à ; :
aan :m. é¢ : £.Bcfaffroned ; mingled or feafoned,
fiained or coloured, with Saffron. #2.
Enfafranner.To mingle, feafon,dreffe.or fienifh; to die,
flaine,colour.or paint ouer,withfaffron,
Enfagi: m.ie:,f. Growne fage male wife. |
Entagir. To grow fage,or wife ; 10 wax a
1 Lan NP Er , Fully feifed ; put into abfolute pof-
ê, n Of. d 0 TIR ; Ÿ
à PETER m. An infeifining sa deliuerie of, or
| patting into,poffeffion, 0 Le
sina gine feifin ,or a feifure 54 put into fill


m. ie: f, Defiled,fauled,polluted, made nafie,
re. aay ME


ferré : Breen sr pue ur 1
Ups kept © din; firaitned, 1 firaincds(ove
res gt ; |


se Enferrement:m. clofingser Soutting fof vpsakecpir 7 pir [A
-


~
LL


ae; (Original trom :
Sami E-OHIO STAT E“UNIVERSITY -


a Li £. Lee


E La bold clofe in, fil op; ke
errer. To clofe, inclofe,locke, or up; keepe
clofé, bold bard in; skort ah an rs 4 À fore,
pinch verie neere. ;
Enfeveli: m.ie : £. Buried intombed, interred, layed in
graue,


vn sie endormi corps enfeveli: Prov. Looke En- |.


ormi.
Enfevelir. To burie,nterre, intombe, lay in a graue ; al-
fo,to wrap up a dead coaife in a windine-fheet.
Enfoigne. .4n Effoine ; a lawfull excufe for an abfent,
or, good caufe of difcharge for an impotent, perfon.
foigner. To Effoine ; to excufe an abfent,or difcharge
animpotent,perfon : Wallon.
Enfoing;& Ensoingne. as Enfoigne.
Enfoitte. À Shooe-makers tacbing-end ; or bogs br:
L


Ile.

Enfoitter. To dre(fe,or furnifh with bogs briflles.

Enfongnie,& Enfonie. as Enfoigne.

Enforcelé: mée :f, Charmed, inchaunted, bewitched,
forfpoken.

Ensorcelement :m. A bewitching ,inchaunting, char-
ming, forfpeaking.

Enforceler. To ss aoe cite: bewitch, forfpeake,
hie 2

Enforce erie: witcherie, Sorcerie, forfpeaking, eye-

itin y
Eos leur :m.AWitch, Charmer, Inchaunter, Sor-


cerer.
Enfouffle : m.ée :£ Blowen,gently puffed, or breathed;
alfo,breathing, gently puffing, or blowing.
Ensoulfré : m. ée : f. Infulpbured ; mingled, perfimed,
or dre[fed,with Sulpber,
er. To infulpher ; to dreffe, mingle, fill, or per-
fume with brimftone,
ouple: m. 4 Weauers Yarne-beame,
Enfoupleau: m, A weauers (loth-beame.
Enftocatte. 4 field enclofed with pikes, and appointed
Sor a ingle combat, by permiffion of the Prince, or of
bis Lieutenant General.
Enfuairé :m.ée : £ Wound up,as a coarfe in a fheet.


Enfuairer.Towind a coarfe in a fheet;alfo,to wipe with,


or lapin,a bandkercher ;@rc.
Enfuble de tifleran. 4 Weauers beame ; that wherwith
x makes bis threads to clofé together ; or , as Enfou-


> é
Befiocré rm. de :f. Sugaric, befugared ; fiveetned, or
Seafoned with fugar. 4
Vne enfuccrée. A nice,coy, quaint wench; one that
euer minces it, euer makes it goodlie,


Enfuccrer. Tobefugar , tofweeten, or feafin with fa-


gar.
Enfué: m.ée : f, Sowed we
Enfüer: To fow vp ; or,as Enfuerer. ;
: Enfüerer. To wind a coarfe in a fheet, dre; as Enfuai-
rer.
Enfuyvant. Following, fucceeding,nextafter.
Enfuyvi :m.je:f. Followed, pur/ued, runne after; or
come next unto ; alfo,imitated,or emulated,
Enfuyvre.To follow, purfue,runne,or chafe afier;alfo,te
imilate,or emulate,
S enfuyvre. Te infue, fucceed, follow,come immedi-
ately rer upon, |
Qui s’ enfuic on l’enfüit :Prov. Such as flie are fol-


Entablature: £ An Intablature ; or , as Entable-
ment. -
Entablé: m. €e:f, Boorded, planked ;feeled.


Digitized: by Go. gle


E NT


Entablement :m. 4 boording,or planking ; a ioyning,
or clofing of boords ; a conering,or feeling with boor ds
' alfo, feeling, wainfcot, boord-worke ; any shing made
(onely) of boords; or a clofè lay, courft, ov frame of
boords upon, or ower a thing; alfo,as Virefon.
a gg @ vn pilicr.The( /quare) foot,or Bafe
apiller.
Entaché :mée :£ Spotted, flained, foyled; polluted,cor-
rupted, tainted; touched with, ov guilsie of, an of:


fence,

Entacher. To fut ; laine, defile, taint, in felt; pollute,
corrupt.
ml vne befongne.To vadertake,or take upon


nn Oe.

Entacheure: f. A por; alfo,a putting ; alfo,a flayning ;
tawmting,or taint ; a vicions marke,

Entail :m. 4 mortaife,or incuiting,

Entaillé :m.ée :f. Intailed,carued,pranen,cut.

Entailler.To intaile,graue,caiue cut in.

Entailleur: m. 4 caruer,grauer, cutter ,iatailer.

Entailleure :f, A caruing,grauing,incuiting,jntailing ;
alfo,a cut,gafh,or garfe.

Entalenté : m. ée: f. Much defiring, affecting,or long-
ing afier,bauin£ a great mind,or appetite unto.
Malentalenté envers. 11 affected towards, fpigh-
ting, bearing a grudge unto,

Entalenter. To breed a longing, imprint a defire in; be-
get an affection, gine a great appetite,unto,

Entamé: m.ée : f, Cut,opened,or broken,vp ; (alreadie )
begun, or tafled of; alfo,exulcerated, wounded burt ;
vielated ;marde , fpoyled.

Entamer. To cut,open,or breake vp ; to begin unto ; to
tafl,or take an effay of; alfo, to violate, marre, fpoyle,
wound, burt, ,
‘Entamer l honnefteté. To difgrace, deprane,or de-
tract from; ty burt the good name of.

Entamer le pas. To begin ; to lead the daunce, or
breake the yce, unto; to make an ouerture unto,
lepeau. To exulcerate, breake, or cut, the


skinne.
Entameute: f. A cutting, opening, breaking up; a be-
ginning or onerture;an alfay taken of; alfo, an exulcen
rating,burting wounding; violating ynarring.
Entant que. Seeing that,in as much,or forafinuch,as,
Entant qu’ en moy eft.with all my meanes,as far as
1 can,as much as lieth in me, se
Entafsé: m. ée :f Heaped,packed,piled,laied vp toge-
ther or one upon th’other.
Entafsement :m, 4 heapinespiling, packing,laying vp
another,


together or one vpor


Entafler.To beape,packe,pile,lay up together, or one vp- .


on another ; to exaggerate,gather in beapes, add beape
unto beape, - :
Entafleur : m. A beaper,or piler vp of.
Ente:f.Agraffe. any
Enté: m, ée:f. Grffaed; ingraffed ; fixed, fafiened, or


fètled,in. >
Entelechie : f. Abjolute perfettion,or effcacie ;
marge aac force mouing ofit pe cal ‘sd


elechie. 5
Entelleétual: m.ale: f. 1utellcGluall, belonging to the
underftanding. : à
Entement : m. A graffing; a fafteniag,or fetling in,
Entendement : m.Vaderflanding, ayprebenfon, come
ceit; iudgement; intelligence ;naturall edge.
nt tsi cp HS vue en
bis wit on; additt,or applie bimfelfermto ; teint!
attend with diligence. : :
' Enten- |


e
sd Qridinakfron
THE OHIO:S TE ANIVERSIFY


A ENS VC) WT


ENT EN T


Enter en petite couronne. To graffe betweene the
barke and the tree ;muich after the fofhion of, Enver
en Canon; but with this difference, that the graffe
muft be lodged within the thick bark of a well-grown
tree.
Enter en efcuflon. Looke, Efcuftcn.
Enter en fente. To greffe within a cleft made in the
top of a Stock; (eur ordinaiic fz{bion.)
ter en flufteau. zs, Enter en Canon,
Enter à la hanede. as,Enter en perche.
Enter un ociller.Tofiften « bud with clay in the bark
ofa tree.
Enter en perche. To groffe in a willow pole; take
good big branch of willow, or of any other foft wood;
pearce it with a wimble unto the pithin (enerall pla-
ces at lealt balfe a foot afunder ; putinto each bole a
graffe,well clofed at the foot (to keepe out water) then
lay your pole along in the cayth, and ceuer it ouer,lea-
uing onely forme twoinches of cach graffe to peere se
Spread, aboue ground : of the fibllance of this pole
which quickly takes roote) they bemg nexrified,with-
in three or foure yeares grow prettie trees ; then is it
taken up, & with a faw parted among them, 10 ferue
to root them in the next ground they are fet in.
Enter en poupeé, To lodge a graffe within a cleft
made in the top ofa Stocke. ;
_ Enteren tuyau: #, Enter en Canon,
Enteriné :m.ée:£ Admitted , allowed, appraued of;
"confirmed, confented unto gs paffed, wbolly


Entendeur : m. da underfiander,conceiuerappreben-


er.

Entendible:com.cenceinable,intelligible;underfland-
able;plaïine.euident.

Entendiblement. Plainely, per{picuoufly,intelligibly,
fo as it may be under flood with eafe; alfo learnedly,
fencibly, underflandingly, with good iudgement.

Entendoire. as Entendement,

Entendre.Tovaderfiand conceiueapprebend,perceiue,
iudge of; alfo,to learne, or beare ; to haue notice, get
intelligence, come by the knowledge of.

Entendre 3.To ffudie, mind, becd, care for, looke to;
additi,apply,or gine bimfelfe onto.
Il entend Je numero. He és throughly acquainted
with the matter.
Iln’enentend que Je haut Alleman. He vnder.
Stands not aiot, bee is utterly ignorant, of it.
l'en feray commeie l'entendray.1 wil doe as 1 fee
caufe.
Tul'entens mal. You ave much miflaken, you take
Jour marks amiffe, you make a wrong interpretation of
the matter. ; ;
S’entendre avec. To prattife under-band , bauefe:
cret intelligence , be in league and friendfhip, bould
prinate correfpondencie, with, -
Qui mal entend mal refpond, Pro : He that vnder- \
. Sands wrong anfivers awry. ee)
Entends-tu: Looke Enten-tu,  - : :.
Entend-trois. An equiuocation of doubifüll, or double


meaning. ; ' grantcd,and thereupon fully executed ebtained,or ac-
I fait de! entend-trois. He anfivers (of purpofe complifhed.
from the sae as though be wnderflood not the terinement :m, 4n abfolute admitting , allowing,


queflion ; or ,be feemes to liften to fomewhat elfe; or,
makes as if be had three to anfixere at once,and there-
. fore cannot fatisficeueryane.

Entendu: m. ué :f Vaderftond, concejued, appreben-
ded,percemed ; al/o, wife cuaning,wittic, skilfull, ex-
pert, knowne, well feene or experienced, in.

Entendu que. Seiag, or confidering that ; now that, in
asmuchas, \. ,

| Entenne: £. A (ayle-yard. FF

| Entente: £. Iñtention, purpofe, meaning ; mind, fancie,
will, affettion ; diligence, indecuour; alfo, as En-

_ téndement. LOS PRE

i Men ae à M à deux ee anfiver equinocally,
- [3 doubly,ambiguoufly doubifilly,

FAP béton he Bufe,carnefl, intentine, fludious,

diligent,vehemently fet or bent vpon, firmely refolued,

5 pak so difpofed unto, USE pe

| *Ententivement. Intentiuely, bhfilÿ, carnefily ; atten-

|... timely,carefiully heed fully, as)

ae a : m. Wit, conceit, underfanding , appreben-

fion, Bsns at

‘A bon enten-tu il ne fault qu’ un demy ‘mor:
are Prov. A good wit needs but one word to informe

“+ | it's or,a wife man pickes whole fence from batfe a


approuing letting paffe; a full evaunt,or confirmation,
falowed byth'effc& , or execution thereof ; for it alfo
imports(more then a bare approbation) an accompli{h-
ment; or,at lease decree for it.

Enteriner.To admit,approue,allow of; to let palfesyeeld
confént, or giue confirmation , unto, and thereupomto
effect, execute,accomplifh; or iudee,and pronounce fit
10 be cffctted,executed,accomplifbed.

Nterrage: m. as Enterrement.

Enterré:m. ée: f.lnterred,buried, layed in a graue;hid
inthe earth, put into the ground, couered oner with
mould, '

Auiourd'uy en terre demain enterré : Pro: Looke,
Terre. :

Enterrement : m. Av interring, burying,buriall ;alfo,

a graue,fépulchcr;or place of burial. . ‘

errer. To interre, burie , lay in a grane ; to bide in
the earth, couer ouer with mould, put into the |
ground. f

Enterreur :m. Ax Interrer,br burier. Ra

Entefté: m, 6e : f. Buxxed into th'eares , put into the
head of; made beanie headed ; alfo, put on the head,
07, whereinto the head is put. : ALP
make beauie,the bead ; to breed,

i ele, Pris inionsor. con-

it) into the head ; alfo, to put into, or puta
‘on the bead. Mig wx be


one rie. | Entelleure:f troubling min of heen ery
rfixjin, | beauie; di
t gyi C t off with | $


ing, or bringing, of the beadach ; alfo,a
i oe ting of the bead into; cr puiting upon the bead ; a
he foote then needes to couer it.) ing; alfa |
fa fhoote, or branch, thats 4


t bole 1e put the bead |


; Île withi acleft


aif


j 3 iteu graffing. > i :
4 ar be fon arc iufques à P oreille. To drawe his
we vp to bis care. v. m. Se


sinsét sb lecedinaibrènes
| xed p tne


Original from= +
EOHIO-STATE-UNIVERSITY


er


a


ST re ee


ENT


‘ENT


Enthroner. Tointhronize,or (et in a throne.

Enthufiafine: m. 4 rauifhment of the fpirit ; ‘dinine
motion,or in{piration; poeticall furie,

Enthyrfé: m. ée: £. Decked, flucke thicke wrapped a~
bout, with Ivie.

Entiché: m. ée:£ Tainted; faultie, unfound,corrupt,
corrupted, polluted ; or, as Entaché ; fpotted, crc.
Entier: m. A graffing, or graffed locke ; alfo, a plot, or

nurferie of graffed, or graffing flockes.

Entier: mere: fintire,wbole, folide, found ; full; inui-
olate; unbroken; trong, firme, fleadfafi; alfured faith-
full; alfoupright, fincere,boneft, partial, inft ; alfo,
Saft, confiant, fiffeobftinate in bis opinion, no-
thing can remoue, no reafons diffuade, from a conceit
once taken.

Cheval entier. 4 flone-borfe ; alfo,a horfe that turns
unwillingly or is not pliant to bis turne.
tiercé : m.ée : f.Sequeftred,into a third band : €Or-
eannois.

Entiercement: m. 4 /equefiration, fequeflring,or put-
ting into a third band.

Entiercer. To féqueller,or put into a third band.

Entierement. Intirely, wholly, fily, foundly, through-
ly, altogether ; ftrongly, firmely, feadfafily, faithfully ;
uprightly, iuftly, fincerely, bonefily, vacorruptly.

Enticrete: f. Entirene[[e, wholeneffe, foliditie, found-
wh 5 al/0,boneflie, integritie, faceritie, vprightnefe;
alfo, conftancie, or obftinacie, in an opinion.

Entimbraillé. That beares a denice on the top,or fou-
rif banging from the top of bis belmet.

Dane a coma i ;

Ntiquer. To cleaue, or flicke faft like a Ticke.

Entotle :m.ée :f, meade d mfr with, linen,
or canuas ; alfo,int or caught,in toyles. ‘

Entoiler. To make ofl lianen, to firnifh, = garnifh with,

linaen doth,or canuas ; alfo,to intangle, or catch in
“toyles ; orto compaffe,or hemme in with toiles.

Entoisé: m.ée: f. Bent,as a bow; lift up, as a {word
readie to execute,or firike.

Entoifer yn arc. To bend a bow.
Entoifer vne efpée.To lift up a fivord with an inten-
tion to firike,

tombé : m.¢e: £ Intombed, laied in a Sepulchre,
Entomber. To intombe interre, lay in a Sepulchre.
pacer :m.ic:f. Stonied, benummed, clumpfe, a-
e.

Entommeure, as Entoumeure ; 07,45 Entonnoir, :

Enton. A little graffe.

Ento ec: m. Tunnage,tunning.

Entonnele. Tuaned,put into caske.

Ento 2m. A tanning ; or putting of liquor

Entonefer: 480000 Ab 1)
ntonneler. To a (

tonné : m.ée:f. Singing, foundin, fuming al
fiong,tuned, or fourdedalftunned, or put into vef
fell with a fimnell, ee

Entonnement. 4 founding,or finging; alfo,a tuning or
giuing of a tune, LS

tonner. # Entonneler ; Al/o,to tune,fing,chaunt it;

© frund,refound ; and moft properly, to begin, or gine a
tune in fnging Ge. ;

Entonnoir : m. 4 funell,or tunning-difh.
Entonnoir matrical. Az inflrument vfed for th’in-
Sisfion of medicines into the matrix ; it may be alfoun-

. detfloodofar. | $ aye

Entotce :f. A wrinch, wring firaine,gird,griping; alfo,
crooked al, fred turn, ore parts aggie=

, 72 sa : À at ee


Wance; an


Entourné : m. ée : ££ Rounded,imuironed, incircled,


| Entorce : com, wrie,crooked 3 andbence ; Tambe en-


torce.

Entorceure. asEntorfeure} And, more peculierly, a
wrinch in the backe-bone which turnes,and wries the
pa thereof, and makes it of the forme of a Ro-


mans.

Entorné. Rouaded, or incircled by; compaffed about
wub.

Entors: m. A wrinchwring, firaine.

Entorfe: f. as Entorce.

Entorfé : m.ée: f.wrinched ; wrung, firained, wried,
by-ftraying ; wrefled , griped ; vexed, grieued , ex. |
treamely,

Entorfer.70 wrinch;to wring:to firaine,or wrie by firai-
ning ; to wreft,gripe ; vexyaggriene,extrcamely,

Entorfeure: f. 4 wrinch, wrefling, wrying ; Looke En-
torceure,

Entortillé.writhed,writhen, wrigled ; wound, twirld,
twined about.

Inteftin entortillé, The third (mall out, feated in the
lower part of the Nauell; it is verie red,and makes ma-
ny turnes, which extend unto th’Os facrum: Init the
Chylus waxing thicker beginneth to ref.

tortillement: m. À writhing , or winding about
a thing ; a turning into a rundle,or circle; a twining,
twifling,curling twirling.

Entortiller. To turne, writhe, wreath, or wind about;
to plie,or fouldinto a round.yundle,or circle; to twine,
twirle,twift,curle,round.

Entortillonné; & Entortillonner. as Entortillé,&
Entortiller.

Entouillé : m. ée : f. (Signifies mof? properly berayed,or
defiled ; but the more commonly) pefiered,incombered,
bindered; fnarled, intangled, confounded , without
head or foot.

Entouillement : m. .4 filthie peflering, incombrance,
impeachment, hinderance ; confifion ; mtanglement.

Entouiller.(1s moft properly,to beray defile make foule:
but moft commonly vfèd for) to pefter , incomber; in-
frat, infnave,jntangle ; (and thereby) to confound, or

indet


Entoumeure :f. 4 gobbet a great bit,or cut of meat, |
rc ; or as Entonnoir.

Entour: m. A round circle rundle,compaffe,
Les entours @’ vn ville, The liberties, or tevritorie
belonging to a townesthe compel of ground.or circuit |:
of countrey,thats next Unto,or about jt. Pax À
tour. About,round about ; on all fides, on each band, |


Tour à l entour. In all places countries, or quarters
thereabouts. :

Entouré : m.ce:. Compaffed, rounded, enuironed; in-
wrapped,inclofed,or hemmed in,on all fides; alfo, be
towred ; furnifbed,or beautified with towers, or tur-
rets.

Damoifelleentourée. Masked : €Rab.
Entourellé : m. ée:f. Betowred; bedeckt, or begist,
with turrets, ies à
Entourement : m. A compaffing euuitoning youndiag,

incircling,inclofing on all fides. 4
Entourement d'eaux, À furrounding of waters,

Entourer. To compaffé enuiron,goe about, round, fur-
round ; inclofe,infould, hemme in on euerie fide ; alfo,
to fürnifh,or beautife with towers, =

Entoureure: f, Looke Entourure; & Entourement.


china = Sa 3 alfo, turned , or wound ee as


Original from:
THE OHIOSFATE UNIVERSITY


ow
#


, ae ta =
ee ae ee ee =»


>


=


:
À
à
4


>


eS
RS To =


“ENT


Entourner. Teturne,wind, or put about; alfo,to com
palle,inclofe,inuiron,bemme in, or about.
sEntourner. To gor-round, or turne into a round
forme ;to.twirle,ov wheele about.

Bntournoy: m, as Entonnoir; Afimnell.

| Entournute: A roxnd,a circle,arundle,

Entourtillant. # reathing srowling about with.

| Entourtillé.as Entortillé.
} Entourtillon. A wreath, bvirlerowle,

Entourtillure: f. A wreathing,twir ling twining row-
ding about with ; alfo,«s Entortillon,

Entourure :f. A com pale, a compaffing ; any thing that

compalleth, and inclofeth another ; a goe-about.

Entracaffé: m.ée : f. Halfe- broken.

Entraët : m. The greenifh falue called Trait.

Entrage: m.as Entrée; A fee,or cuflome due at th'en-
tering of m: archandize into a place ; alfo, a fine, or in-
come payed for a leafe.

Entrailles: £ The intrals, inteflines, inwards, bowels,

vuls.

Entraing:m.ée:£ Drawen, baled, or pulled away;
trayned,or trayled along.

Entrainer. To hale,draw,or pull away; to traine,drag,
or trayle,along.

Entrait:m, A fhort peece of timber indented within a-
nother peece, thereby to bold it the fafler.

Entrange.as Entrage.

Entrant. Entering ; beginning; going inte,

Carefme entrant. Shrovetide, ouetew/day.
Vn homme entrant. «A bould erandacious fellow ;
one that (without muiting) thrufis inte any compa-


7}.

Entrape:m.A peflerment,comber;trouble,incombrance
any thing that catches,binders;ori intricats,a man as be
goes.

Entrapé: m. ée;f. Combered,peffered, troubled ; intri-
cated,intrapped ; caught, or. confined, within a trap.

Entraper. To pefler, comber, trouble, take up too much
roome ; alfo, to intricate, or as Entraver; alfo toin-
tra

Entraver. To fhackle, or fetter, the legs.

Entraverfer. Torun, goe , or bindorecroffe ; to oner="

= thwart,

Entraves :f. Shackles, fetters ; paflerns FPE of

à vnrulie horfes,
ÆEntraveftifleiment: m. An qu

wa fe: sa tania pol ire, or sare Pel

| Entraveftiflement de fang.1s re ek as are

| doyned by mariage 5 where the patie bath all, or the
moft part of that which was ioint pofe ee

Entraveur :m. A fetterer,or fhac

Entré:m.ée:f. ms

Vn vifage entré. À hollow iaw-fallen,fin

tenance.

Entre. Betweene amongfin,among, together, one with
another.

… Entre deux. Doubtfull, indifferent, i in (pence,at bis

ovene choice whether yea or no; alfo, readie, or about.

tre deux & as; Looke, Deux.
d'entreux. Right ouer againfithem.
ci » To become acquaintedor grow fami-


ller.To embrace,coll,or FR
ch y others neck. he
loner. 7


4s ‘la


E N a 3


s’Entr'acculer. To accufé,or ap;
sEntr’advertirTo bould inte igenc
intelligence one with another.
s’Entr'aftoler. To burt wound, ell one another.
s Entr’aguifer. To n each thother, |
s ‘Eng der. To giue mutuall affifiance one to the «|
ther.
s’Entr'aimans. Mutuall friends, equally affecting each |
other ; betweene whom no loue is Loft,
s’Éntra ler. To call one another. G
approcher. To approach one another , to draw &
neere together.
Ente arraché: m. de: f.Plucked up beere &r here
ted out from betweene.
trarracher. To pluck up bere and there, to roote out
oe betweene.
ntr’aflener des efpées. To firike, or bit one another }
with their words.
Entr’attacher. To ty, faflen, clafp, knit together, eme |
within another.
Entr’attachez:m.ées: Eyed famed apd, itso
gether,or one within another.
Boer aroin Tobaue , or poffeffe , ome another; Looke


Entrebaail:m. cleft, rift, chinck, chap; balfegape,
or yarone ; balfe opening, fmall ouerture, or


ieee ae
Entre é: me :f, Half gaping; balf, or yaw
ning-open, 7 rinen, clouen, ill ioyned,

or p.218 top

Encebaailler Half, oi in the middle, te gape, yawne;
cleene, riue,open; or fet open.

Entrebailler.as,Enerebaailler.

$ apes To interchange kiffes; to kiffe one an-
other.

Entrebafti: m. ie :f. Built betwixt. :

Entrebaftir. To build betwixt, to ioyne eo alee a


another.


ence PER e


_s’Entrebatre. To fight, to fall together by the wind


Scuffle one with another,

Entrebatu. ils fe font entrebatus. They haue
meld, or cudgelled, one another ; they haue Sought,
beene by tb'eares, together,

Entrebayement : m.A balfe-gaping,or bi siciee
a TS chap, cleft, rift betweene, or in the middle .
of a thing, |

Entrebecqueter. Ta che at one another.

Entrebeu :m. eué: fHalfe drunke,almoft site
cap is neereband fet, i

s'Entreblefler. To burt, or wound,each other.

Entreboyau: m. A thicke,and fat skin,that faftens 1 the
bowels io the backe,and each of them toth other, ~ -

res » To breake,or make breaches into, ome
another.

Entrebrifé :m. ée:£. Halfe broken, broken betswéene,or
in the middefl; (bence al din Ailingpifoed' alfo,
ynecuen,as a om If burf.

#Batebrouiller. 71 me, a trouble, one ano-


: =. mutual selene pero
afte tm. &e CAE no lai )


|: ther fillie wholenor broken,

| Entrecafler. Halfé,or almoft te breake. =

| sEntrecaffer les dents. To bruife the teeth by gnafh-
ing them bard one again(t another. aya

s’Entreceder. To yeeld or gine place one to th'otber.

| sEntreceler. Tobide,or conceale one another.

Entre-cep: The diftance betweene flocke and flocke.

s'Entrecercher.To fearch for each other,

Entreceffe. {ans en.ithoutintermifion,intermedium ,
er 5 or ceafing.

sEntrechamailler. Armed men to backe, or flafhone
another, or each other.

Entrechangé: m. ée :f.Imterchanged.

sEntrechanger. To interchange ; or, balfé to alter, al-
moft tochange; and hence ; AN
La veué m’ entrechange. My fight dimiaifheth,
mine eyes grow dimme,

s'Entrecharget. To charge one another.

Entrechaffe : £ 4 croffé caper.

| Entrechaucher. To iread vpon,to trample amongfi.

s’Entrecherir.ass'Entrecarefler.

Entrecheris : m.ies: £, Mutually cherifhed ynade much

À __ of one by th’other.

_Entrechevaucher. To ride betwixt or among.

Entrechoc: m, An interfbocke ; a mutual, or inter-
changeable, rufhing one upon anotber.

eeeeechoitic . To cull , picke, chufè out, one ano-


ther.
s'Entrechoquer. Two armies, or enemies violently to
cope one with, rufhone againfl,or preffe one vpon , a-
"+ nother ; to interchange , or come together with, a
furious foocke. ]
_Entrecler:m.ere: f A little cleere, fomexbat bright
or light,ov betweene darke and light, as in a twyligbt.
_Entrecognoiftre. To difcerme from otbers,to know one
among many others, 1
sEntrecognoiftre. To know one another , or baue
acquaintance together, ~~ ; is
Eoseecogaiews m.cue: f, Knowne among others, dif
cerned from others.
Entrecolomne. The fpaceor place betweene pillers,
Entrecolomneiment. A leauing of fpace between pil-
ler and piller. 4
sEntrecommuniquet.70 communicate one with ane.
ther.
s'Entreconvier. To lathe, bid,inuite,one another.
sEntrecofler: To iurre,or butt together,as Rammes.
sEntrecoudoyer. To iufllesor elbow, one another; 10
__ Sine one another the elbow. rls :
Entrecoulé: m.ée :f. Glid, flid, runne in betweene,


or amon: *
Éirecoà To glide, flide,runne betweene, or a-
mong. ar nee
Entrecoupé: toilet Cut betweene, balfe cut ; cut off
in the middeft: interrupted. Mae


Entrecouper. To cut betweene,or in the middef balfe
| tocut; alfoto prune, cut off, or picke out, unneceffarie


terrupl, ‘
Entrecoupeule : f Anintercutting ; an balfe cutting;
an interruption, a cutting off in the middeft.

ourir. To ruune on both fides, ioyntly to runne.


¢Entrectaind To and in feare one of another.
Entrecroilé : es £. Thwarted, inter croffed wrought,


| | Encrecrodemeas A thwarting,or intercroffing,ov


; dom orecroffe another, ¥ à
s'Entrecroifer. To intercroffe; to thwart intangle,or ie


Entrecroifüre : f. 4 double croffe, or intercrofing,
Entrecucilli:m. ie: f. Picked betweene, gathered


Entrecuellir. To picke, or gather betweene,or fiom à.
mong.
Entrecuiffes. The cols of a wild Boare,


Entredent. The pace that is betweene twotecth,


s’Entr er. To pull ene another in peeces,
s’Entredeschirer.To teare cach other afiader,
sEntre c.To undoe,or defeat one another.


Entredeu:m.eué: £. Due interchangeably, betweene


Entredeux: m. 4 difiance, a hace, partition, vacant


© Vn livre relié avecdu se blanc entredeux. 4


s Entrediffamer. To defume, difgrace, diferedit one a=
sEntredire iniures. To raile at, or to reuile, one ano-
ther,
sEntredifants. Telingone another , fying one to the
Entre-difcerner. To difeerne, or know one from the o-
other ; tomake a difference betweene themfelues,
s’Entredommager.To wrong,or binder each th’other,
Entredonné:m.ée:f. Interchanged,exchanged,giuen


s'Entredonner. Tofnterchange, exchange, gine each to


Entredonnir. To flumber; to lie betweene fleeping,and
waking. ;
Entredoubté: m. ée: or 4 at, fomewhat doub-
-
Entredoubter. To flagger at, fomewbat to doubt of, to
Entrée:£ Aa entrie, paage, entrance, allie, way, or


-of a boufe ; an accefle ; a meane to come vnto a thing; |


{prigs from among the fruitful brauncbes; alfo, 10 in. |


sEntrecourir. To incounter ;to runne one vpon ano- .
ae Saye mass the third unto xx.s.Tournois.


_ happée: Prov. The mowje shat barb but one ble i foom
15 |


tr a SEE ae


dat NE. = 2": - tr
me RER ae
y .


ENT


ec one another.


among,


ebvoir.Toowe each unto other,
re. Ta defend one another.
ander des nouvelles. To aske owe of ano-
ther how the world goes.


man and man,or from one to another,


place , er time betweene , or th the middefi of; an in-
termedinm, or interwal ; any thing thas parts, or di-
uides other things.

I futentredeux de Je tuer, He was abont to kill bim;
or ia doubt whether to kill bim or no,


woke bound with a leafé of cleane,between each leafe
of printed,paper.


nother,


ôlher. f


one for another.


the other ; s'en nner couçage, To bearten, or
encourage one anether.


ted of,or whereaf one is partly in fufpence.


be in fufpence,


path leading unto a place ; a gate,a doore,or threfhold


an entring,or going m ; a beginning, or ouerture ; the
fr blow giuen, flone laid, yce broken; alfo, cuflome,
or impoft, for marchandife brought into a place; alfe,
the income paid by a purchafer unto bus newLand-lord;
alfa prefent,or gratuitie beflowed ona Prince, cre,
at bis firft entrie into a place.
L’entrée detable. The firft courfe; or,the meat thats
ff ferued vp, at table. Ù
trée de vin és villes clofes. Am impofition of v.s.
Tour,vpon euerie Muid of wine brought into a walled
towne,or into the fuburbes thereof, to be fold; firft rai-
fed by Charles theix. and fince enhaunced by Henrie


Amende de toft entrée. Looke Amende, —
Droiétd’ entrée. as Droi& de prefence. -
Lafouris qui n° a qu’ vne entrée eft incontinent


cangbts |


eta ina dine ie


~
.
4
«
3
)
,


caught ; the man that bath but one belpe’s foone ore-
throwne.

sEntr'enbraffer. To imbrace, or bug one anotber in
tbeir armes.

s Entr'empoigner. Toclafpe(as wraftlers) one another
by the wrifis,er armes.

s Entr’encourageants. Jucowraging one another.

s’Entrencourager. To bearten, or incourage, one a-
notber.

s’Entr entendre.vaderband to ferue one anothers pur-
pofes; to bold fecret intelligence one witb another.

Entr'efclos :m. ofe :f. Halfé hatched,

Entrefcrire. Tointerline,or write betweene.

Entr'efcrit :m. ite :f. Iaterlined written betweene,

s'Entr'effayer à la, To trie one another at.

Entrefaiéte. fur ces entrefaictes. 1a the meane while,
hereupon, while thef things were a doing.

s'Entrefaire grande felte.To make verie much one of a-
nother; to congratulate with great ioy their good baps
together,

sEntrefascher. To be angrie, or fall out, one with th’o-
ther; 10 brable,or brawle together,

Entrefendre. To divide , cut. betweene, clecue in
two, part in balues ; alfo, halfe to cut , almoft to
clecue.

Entrefendu: m.uë:f. Halfe-clouen, almoft diuided;
alfo,clouen in two,parted in balues.

Entreferir. To interchange fome blowes ; to firike, or
hit , atonce , ene another ; alfo, to interfeere , as a


rie,
Entrefeffier : m. The pace betweene the buttocks.
Entrefeflon : m, The (pace betweene the priuities, and
the findament ; or as Entrefefsier,,
Entrefileures de drap. The (pace betweene thread and
thread,
s’Entreflatter. Tofioth each other, to finootb one with


another.
sEntrefondre. as sEnfonfer ; To runne, or finke ouer
head and eares intos or, to finke deepe into the filthie,
or dreggie bottome of.
a :m, Thediflance, or fpace that is betweene
pit and pit,or betweene ditch and ditch,
sEntrefouctter. To whip eachother. .
Entrefouir. To dig betweene, i
agar tread among,to trample inthe middef,
or thicket of,
s’Entrefrapper. To (trike or fmite,each otber.
Entreftizé; m. ée:£. Frizled,or curled, one within a-


nother.
Entrefrizer, To curle, frizle, the bain
<Entrefroiffer. To le roo Duin,
one another


one againfl another; to cr in pee-


ces. :
Entrefroiflez :m.ées:f. clapped, Hiocked, broken,
cracked,one againft another.
s’'En tter. Torub one againfianether; to inter-
: feere ; alfo, to beat bethwacke, or thumpe, each other
à ;


|  foundh.
| Entrefrotture: £. A rubbing one againft another ; a bor-


i Staelin Tornb, feratch,or claw,one another.
À :m. Ciuilitie, courtefie, comp t, good
I ame comelie fafhion of bebauiour,


bien fon entregent.as ee


<
on Fare |


regenté: m,ée: f Well bebaued ; that knowes
| fe (andrfts m) that becomes whatfoewer


de is
Se


Entrel e.as Entrelaffement.


nies. Hee knew well bow to carrie bimfelfe in all com-
panies, = 6 |
Entreget.as Entreje&. +:
s’Entregratter. Tefératch, claw, ferub, each other,
sEntregronder.. To whurre,yarre, grumble, one at
another ; whence; \
Pendant que les chiens “amant le loup de-
vore Ja brebis : Prov. Looke Chien,or Brebis.


sEntreguerroyer. To make warres one vpon ano-


s’ Entrehaïr. To bate one another,

s’Entrehanter. To conuerfe much together.

s’Entrehapper. Te catch bold one of another. -

“Entrchafceler. To vexe,barrie trouble, tug, one a-
nother,

Entreheurt : m. An interchacke ; or, as Enucheurte-
ment,

Entreheurtement: m. 4 fcuffling, iufline, infilin
butting, bickering, together ; yang . per
1h'otber. À

me To Ds: butt,or inrre,one another; to

507 together.

Entreheurtis. as Entreheurtement.

*Eneneh er. To call, whoop,or wbifile one 10.er for,
anotber. |

Entrejamber. Tocroffe legs.

Entreiant : m.as Entregent.

ject: m, An interpofition ; a caSting, or putting
betweene; a word cafl,or (peech ginen, forth by way of
motion,or otherwife.
trejeCtant. Interlacing, interpofing , tbrufling, or
cafting, betweene. L

Entrejeëté : m. éc :£ Interpofed, intermingled ; caf},
or thruftbetweene,or à
trejeCter. To interpofe,interlace, intermingle; caf},

thruft,or forcibly put in betweene,or among.

Entreilizé :m.ée : £ latergrated,thick laïtifed, croffe-

arred. 3

Entrejoindre. To couple,or ioyne,togetber.
s’Entrejoindre. mA clip,coll,imbrace,each other.

s’Entrejouér. Te play,or fport,one with another,
ntrelacement. as Entrelaffement,

Entrelaiflé. Deferred , imermitted, put or left off a
while, difcontinued for atime, ‘

EntrelaifSer. Tointermit, leaue, deferre, difcontinue,
Slackhen,put off for a time. Ts
n :m.ée:f. Interlarded ; fat and leane toge-


« ther,

Entrelardement : m. Aninterlarding; a mingling of

. different things, as fat and leane, great and fall, te.
gether. : f

des: Tointerlard; to mingle different things
togetber. ;

Entrelas: m. 4 4not bard to be loafèd, an intricate bu-
JSineffe , a worke much intangled ; alfo, as Enwrelafe-


ment,
Entrelaffé : m. ée :f.lmterlaced intermingled; foulded, |
plaited,intangled,onc within another;fet,put thinfi in,
betweene or among; voy aie
Enterlaffement: m. 4x izterlacing, intermingling,in-
terpoling sa plaiting oe eppine feulding, or intangling
one within another ; a feiting putting, or thrufling,in,


| betweene,or among. Sth
Entrelaffer. To ur ice, interminglejnterlard; finld,:


plait,rwine,or intangle one within another; 10 fet,put,
« or thruftin,betweene or among.
s’En . Te wearieor tire eut,0ne another. :


Toi@s


Orig Nabtrons


THE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


pre à Ts petite


ENT


Toi&s ornez d' enterlafleures. Roofés decked with

E er frets,

ntrelaflis: m, Aninterlacing, plaiting,interweauing.

Entrelié :m.ée :£ Tyed sicher ; bound betweene,

Entrelier. Totie together ; t0 bind betweene.

Entreligne:f. An interline, or interlining.

Entreligné :m.ée: f, Interlined,

Entreligner.Te interline(a writing.)

Entrelire. To read together.

‘s Entrelouér. To commend one another,

Entreluiéter. To wrafile one with another.

Entreluire. To appeare, fhine, or be fèene among, be-
tweene, or in the middeft of; alfo,to gine a glimpft,or
fhine by batfe.

Entrelunaires. Ioursen. The dayes, or fpace,where-
in neither the old,nor new Moone 1 fecne.

Entremander. To fend betweene partie and partie.

s'Entremanger, To eat up,or undoe, each other,

Entrement :m, 4n entring,or going in; a beginning,

“an entrance.

Entremeflé : m. ée: f. Interlaced , intermixed , in-
termingled ; fet, inferted yningled among.

Entremefler. To intermingle, interlace, intermix ; to

Shuffle vp one with another ; to infert, or fet ser à
s'Entremefler de. To Intermeddle with; to imbark,
or put, bimfelfe into.

Entremets :m.(ertaine choice difhes ferued in between

* thecourfés at a feaft, or banquet.

Entremetteur: m. A flickler , mediator, dayes-man ;
an mtermedler or dealer in other mens caufes,or con.
trouerfies,

Entremettre la befongne. Tointermit , flacken , de-
fèrre,diftontinue,delay, put,or leaueit off for a time.
s’Entremettre de.To meddle,or deale with;to thruft
bimfelfe into. :

sEntremeurir. To wax,ov be, half ripe, ,

s’Entremignarder. To dandle, cocker, er flatter, one
another,

Entremife:£ A meanes, 01 mediation; an intermed-
liag,or brekage ; a dealing betweene partie and par-
ii any medling in, or managing of, (other mens) bufi-
neffes.

‘| sEntremocquer. Tointerchange mocks, gibes, quips,
{toffs, flouts; to ride, or devide,one another.
s’Entremordre. To bite one another.
s'Entremouiller. To wet,bedeaw, befprinkle, moiften,
each other,
Entremoyen : m. A diftance, intermedium, meane, or
meane while,
s'Entr . To difiurbe,or binder one another.
Entre-mütiner. To put ite a mutinie ; to fet together
E ide moulin. The mill bo
ntr . The mill hopper,
Entremy: par en. Amongfl,or in the middeft ré nei
Entrenatitves To (pring up, arifé, be borne, betweene,
or among.
sEntretmeite Towound each other.
Entrenavrez. wouded,each by tb'other.
Entrenoüé : m. ée: f Interlaced , intangled ; tied,
or knotted betweene; alfo, foumme 5 Or a=


mong. L
Entrenouér. To fivimme betweene,or among x alfo, to
intangle,or tie knots betweene.
sEntrenuire. To burt, endammage; binder, pefler, one
ano!! %
"Entr'i oreuile,orabufè, oneanother.
Ent obliger. To bind oblige,or make bebolden them-
Selues,one to the other; to enter into mutuall bonds, .


Entrepe


EN T


com oblige. Bound, obliged, bebolden,the one to tbe !
7.

sEntroccir. To kill each other.

Entr'oeil: m. The (pace betweene the eyes.

Entr'oublié:m.ée:f Forgotten in the meane while;
flipt out of memorie fixce that time,

Entr oublier. To forget in the meane while ; or fince
then.
s’Entr'oublier. To forget each other,

tr'oul:m, ie: f. Heard fcatteringly,by balues, ov but
bere and therea word.

Entrouir. To heare by balues; tobeare bere and there
aword; tobeare vatobis thinking; or to thinke hee
heaves. *

Entr'ouvert : m.erte :£ Chopped chawned,clouen,ga-
ping 3 balfe, or almoft open ; neither fully fbut,nor open,

HCE ; >
Les yeux cachez à doigts entr'ouverts. Couered |
with ftradling,and halfe-apen, fingers ; rather hidden
in fhew then hindered of their fight ; or fo hidden by
them that the bider may with eafe laoke through them.

Entr ouvrir. Half to open,to make way tbrogub ; alfo,
to lay (balfe)open vnto.

s’Entrouvrir. Half, or almoft 10 open,to gape,cleene,

i afünder of it felfe.

s’Entrepardonner. To forgine one another.

cere per fe interrupting,a/peaking ina mans
Cait,

Entreparler. To interrupt one that fheakes ;to Speakein
bis tale,to binder his fpeech with demaunds.

Entrepas : m. 4 fafi walke, a racke ; a racking,or great
pace of fome borfes , that cannot amble, and muftnot
trol, .

nd: m. Part of a womans ec,


#Emnrepicquer. To pricke, nip,taunt quip, cut,each o-
ther


s’Entrepigner.Tocombe,or clave one another; to pluck
one another by the beards ; to goe together by the ears.
Entreplanter. To plant, or fet betmeene.
Entreplié: m. ée:f. Interfoulded, or foulded between,
Entreplier. To fould betweene,to interfiuld.
sEntrepoindre, Topricke,fling,nettle; gird, gall, or
vex,one another. ;
Entrepos : m.Aainterpofition; or,thing thats putin an
post diflance betweene others; alfo,a etting, putting,
laying,
Entrepofer. Seeke Interpofer.
Entrepofition. as Interpofition,
s'Entrepoulfer. Tozbruft out the harlot ; to thrnft, or
“x one another,
s'Entrepouflans. Thrafting,or crovding one another,
Entreprenant. Enterprifing, attempting; bold,bardie,
couragious, forward aduenturous; that cares. as little Ÿ
for bis flefh as another, à
Entrep; . Toenterprife, attempt, undertake, or
take in band; affume,or take upon bim; to venter vp-
on,enter into,goe m band with; alfo, tovfurpe, or in-
croach upon.
s'Entreprendre. To congealecurdle, thicken ; knit,
or toynetugetber,
s’Entreprendre parles mains, To fhake bands , to
ioyne bands together, if Me
ntrepreneur. Az enterprife, attempter rtaker ;
alfo,a Broker, Pettifogger or ermall other mone
contruer fies, Ë #
Marchand entr eur. À Marchant denturer,
, Clofed crowded, tbr ufls preféd in, or, one
betweene another. € DE
1i 9 En-


Digitizée by CO: gle


Original from


THE OHIO:STAFE UNIVERS ER


. Ser ae Ee © Se ©


ds


ee 28


ENT ENT


| Entreprefies. To flop,clofé,or preffe in, or one betwixt
4! anor ter,
©! sEntrepreffer.To preffescrowd,ortbruft hard one.
nother, :
s Entreprefter. To lend one to another.
Entreprins: mie: £ Vndertaken, attempted, enter-


sEntrefoufftir. To endure , abide , or brooke each o-


ther.

s'Entrefouveñir de. 70 remember one another of ;alfo,
balfeto remember,

oe ae An intermedium,or fpace betweene.

sEntr’efpier. To fpie, or prie mto one anothers do.
ings.


i

s'Entresuir. as s'Entrefuyvre.

s’Ebtrefurprendre. To furprifè,or take napping one, a-
mother. .

Entrefuytte : f. A continuation , or immediate fuc-
ceeding one of the otber; a clofe,or neere following one
of another.

sEntrefuyvre. To follow (clofe, or neere) one another;
ms Succeed immediately, or in the necke one of the o-
ther.

Engedié :m.ée: f Spotted (and fpatled)bere and
there.

Entretaillé : m.ée:f. cut betweene, or in the middef};
cut bere and there; cut by peeces,and with paufes; cut
at fenerall times ; alfo,interfeered. :

ee gener m, A cutting betweene, or in the

iddeft; a cutting bere and there;.a cutting by pee-
ces (with panfes, or at fenerall times ;) alfo, an in-
Fat and bence, atripping , or contrarietie in
ech, a.

Entretailler. To cut betweene, or in the middefl of, to
cut bere and there; to cut (anentire thing) by peeces,
and with paufes,or at feuerall times.
s'Entretailler. To cut; or hacke one another; alfo, to
interfeere ; to hit,(and inbilting to burt,or bedurt) one

- Leg with th other ; alfo,to trip,or contrarie, bimfelfe in
bis owne fpeech.


rifid.

Enteeprins de fes membres. Taken, benummed, or

blajied.

Entreprin{e:f. An enterprife, aftion,attemptyaduen-
ture ; a!fo,an under taking,or taking in band ; alfo, an
v/urpation, or incroachment upon.

Hommed' entreprinfe. A man thats fit for great
imployments.

s'Entrepromettre vne chofe. ‘To promife a thing one
unto another,

s Entreprouver.To proue, trie,a[[ay one another,

's'Entrequerir. To fecke each other,

Entrer: m. An entrie,or going into ;anacceffe unto,
Entrer de fief fervi. Looke Servi.

Entrer. To enter, goe,or flep ins to baue acceffe unto; to
bcein to put bumfelfeinto,

Entrer en bettes.To fall a tipling, or quaffing ; or to
evow tipfie by tipling. ;
Entrer en combuftion avec. To fall to deadlie feud
with; toraife a great tumult againft,

Entrer par lafencftre, See Feneftre,

Entrer en la haute game, To flretch , or bufie,bis
wis,
Entrer en quartier. To begin bis waiting ; to get into
fauaur, credit , authoritie, dealings ; to come inre.


quefl. }
Entreraclé : m.ée : f. Scraped about; filed, or polifbed


betweene. Entretailleure: f. as Entretaillement ; Or, a cut here
Entreracler . To ferape about ; to file , or polifh be- and there.
tweene,


sEntretafter. To taf, feele, effuy, found, bandle, or
grope, another. , ;

Entretemps :m. An intermedium,or meane while.

Entretenement : m. A coberencie ; or banging of
things together; an uninterrupted continuation of mat-
ters ; anintertaining; alfe,a penfion, wages, intertain-
ment. - |
Entretenement de voix fans refpirer, The holding
of a note. , :

Entretenir. Mutually to bold, or keepe ; (both fides) to
intertaine , or continucin a courfe agreed on; alfo,
(without reciprocation) to obferue or keepe inuiolably;
alfo, tointertaine , defray, fuftaine, maintaine ; alfo,
tointertaine,or bold in talke; to chat or conuerfe with;
toufe affably,courteoufly,kindly; alfo, to intertaine,or
_ accept of, an offer ; alfo, 10 hold, kecpe , retainestoge- |
ther, P
Jene fais point les brefches, mais ie les entretiens
fort bien. (The fpeech of anagedleacher.)

, er à To cleaue, hold, or bang clofè-toge-
s’Entretenir de. Tonourifh, intertaine, or fuflaine

| bimplfewith Weert a

: Ils s'entretiennent comme font i esd

of [uch as obfiinately fellow a feét, or, =
Ak on a amin’ ait finie
 vecluy:Prov. He that loues to continue à frien À

| baue but ttle to doe with im.

Dem Ur uë:f. Intertaineds beld, kept, obfer~

wads allo, defrayed, fuftained,mnaintained gl, beld

 intalke, or chat, complemented with , Purteoufly
ay “pds al, accepted of; alfo, retained, or beld togc-


LL = En.


s'Entreregarder. To bebold, or looke on each the 0.
ther,


sEntreregretter. To deplore, or bemoane each otber ;
_ paffionately to wifh for one another,
sEntrerencontrer. To meet one another; or toge-
. ther. 2
Entrerompant. Iaterrupting, flopping,
Entrerompre Ps en, 206 fous 2, » breake off
int
Entrerougir. To blufh alittle, to looke fomewhat red,
ae é: m.éc:f. Rowled betweene; or now and
then: : “aor ‘
Entrerouler. To rowle betweene. 5
s'Entreruer des pierres.To pelt one another withflenes;
to throw [tones one at another. Sac.
sEntrefaifir bras abras. To feize one another by the


s'Entrefaluër. To falute each other.
Entrefcieures:f. Interfawings ; frequent(but difiant)

ï À _cutssorentries made byafaw, rc.

> | Ent . To affift, releene,or fuccour , one ano-


Originalfrom


Spee THE QHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY.


D. AT RP gré Cie


+


: re ' AA
eADigitized MES gle |


ENT


Entretien: m. Intertainement, maintenance, meanes,
nourifhment ; alfo , complement , complementing , or
oe of one another with courteous fpee-


cbes.

Entretiffeure: f. The wooft of cloth.

reti{fu: m, ué: f wouen; or wrought betweene, as
gold plate in tinfell ; interlaced,

Entretiftre. To iaterlacesor weaue betweene.

D A croffe quarter; or onerthwart rafter, of
timber.

Entretortillé : m.ée:f. Interlaced, much intangled,on
twined,

pers To interlace; to twine , or intangle
mite


Entretouchement:.m, 4 touching, licking cleaning,
or hanging of things clofely together ; al/o, a continua-
tien, ©

s’Entretoucher. To touch one another ; to abut, neigh-
bour,or be neere one ta the other,

Entretouillé: m.¢e:f.lntangled, fubbled confounded;
peftered,incombered,

Entretouiller. To mingle,intangle, confound, fabble up
things together ; to pefter,to incomber.

s’Entrouver. To find each other.

sEntretuér. To kill one another.

Entreveché : m. ée: f. Intangled,infnarled, fêtrered,
intricated,

Entrevecher. To intangle, infuarle, fetter intricate.

Entreveillé. Halfé awake, or betweene fleeping and


waking.

Entreveiller. To be waking now and then, or to lie be-
tweene fleeping and waking.

Entrevenir. To come in on a fuddem; to bappen.or befall


at unawares; to be prefént among others; alfo, to me- |"


diate,or come betwixt. e À
Tels Seigneurs entreviennent au traité. Such
Lords are contained , or comprifed , within the trea-
tie. :
Entrevenu:m. ué:f. Come, happened, befallen,in the
meane wbilesor on afudden.
trever. To underfland: €Barrag,
Entreverdir. To be greenifh; or to be greene among 0=
ther colours.
Entreverdoyer. The fame.
s'Entreverfer. To ouerturne, or ouerthrow one another.
trevefche : m.ée: £, Peffered,intangled infnarled,
Entreveféhe faerle, or intangle one with
ntrevefcher. To 9 OF à one within ano~
ther ; or as Entrevecher. -
Entrevifé : m.ée:f.Viewed.or vifited,no and then.
Entrevifer, To view,or vifit now and then,
Entrevifité : m. ée : f, Seene,orvifited now and then,
trevifiter. To goe to fec,or Vifit fometimes.
Entrevoir. Scarcely to fee, tobane but a glimpfe of.
sEntrevoir. To bebold,or vif, one anotber.
Entrevoini :m.ie:f. Vomited, fpued, or caft ont now
and then,or among ether things.
Entrevoinir. To caft, er vomit out among otber things,
to parbreake fometimes,or by fits,
Entroupelé. Trouped, or flocked together ; affembled,
ov gathered,by troups. +22
er. Totroupe;heape, or flocke togetber ; to


gather in var tnenpde
a om @ Entrow ;
Enthik: m.ée:f. Tiled; couered with tiles,
Entuiler. To tile; to cower with tiles.


ture: f. +45 Entement; 4 £ |
vahi: m. ie: f. Inuadedyaffailed,a(fanlted, fet on.


“bisiwzen by GOugle


EN V


Vne volonté de fuir les avoit premier enyahie.
They had from the béginnine Nil io flies or, feare |
bad at fir ft poffe(t thei minds,and put them into à bu: |
mor of flying. E

Envahie: f, An affzult,an onfet jan iauafon. :

Bavahir. To very tne See orfet pon; alfo,to
Seife apprehend, ov lay hold on ; (as ia th'example vn-
der Envahi,


Envain.4 kind of Serpent ; as Envent.
Envaiffelé: m. ée: £ Inneffelled , put into a vef


fi. . Rahs
Va belefprit envaiffelé. À good pet wit.
2m. ée:£, laueffelled, put into a véfel.

Envafer. To put into a ve[fel.

Envafquiné: m. ée: £ Ina long,Spanifhxor cld-fafhio-
aed , Vardingale.

Enucleation. An enucleation; or vakernelling ; an ex-
planation, full interpretation,abfolute expofition,plaine
manifeflation of.

Envelope: f. Any thing that fèrues towrap another in,
4 couer ; a farplier ; a wrapper; a peece of waft paper
for that purpose.

ess :m.ée: f. Inueleped ; wrapped infiulded) in
clofed, inuolued ; alfo; ae inañgled, perplexed,
incembred,

Envelopement:m. Azinueloping , wrapping, infoul=
ding; intanglement implication jacombrance.

Envelopément. Obféwrely, intricately; comberfamely,
by wrapping,or inuolution.

Enveloper. To wrap,infould, inuolue,implicate,inclofe;
alfo, to pefler ; intangle , mfnare, perplexe , incom-


er al

Envelopoir:m. as Envelope.

Enveloppe, & Envelopper; & Enveloppoir. as
Enyelope,Enveloper,&c.

Envelouté:m.ée: f. Of Veluet, or cloathed with Vel-
net,

Envenimé:m. ée : f. Inuenomed; impoifèned.

Envenimer. To inuenome; alfo, to poifon th'outfide’


of. Er
Envent : m. A fhort blind Serpent, which is thought to
fleepe all winter ; whence ;
Endormy comnie vn envent, 47 extreame flug.
vergongné: m, ée:f. Much afhamed, far out of
countenance. |
Envermé : m. ée: f Filled with, or growne full of,
wormes.
Enyermner. To fill withsor grove fill of, wi¥mes.
Enverré: mée :£ Difbleafèd with, incenfed againft:
N .


qNorm, = :
Envers: (4 Subflantine) m. Th'infide, or wrong fide of
a thing; Y envers du drap:
Mettre Al envers.To onerthvow,turne upfide-down,
tumble,or cal topfie turnie: =
Nager à l'envers. To fwim on bis backe.
Tourner àl' envers. To tarne the infides or wrong-
fide, outward. :
Nul endroit fans fon envers : Prov.No commoditig
pee a difcommoditie. fes r
vers, (A Prepofition, figrifies) towards, neere to, a-
bout; alfo,in theprefencesor in refpeët , of; alfo, a-


ainff.
Enverfés m.ée:f, Inuerted; turned upfide-downe-
ward, or th'iafide outward ; alfo, turned in and


To inuert ; to turne vupfide-lowneward,
or the infide outward ; alfo , to turne in and
ont. : . + : : L À


di iy Envi. :


UT U ag :
HE OHLO-STATE-UNIVERS Pees ae


Gr ne


Envié: m.The fpot,or marke wbich a child hath on fome Scabwort and Horfé-heale.:
part of bis bodie | reprefenting the thing his mother | Enumeration:f.4# enumeration, yeckoning pumbring,
longed for, or was afrighted with , whenhce was in rebcarfall,

Enunciation, Aa enunciation, fienification, declarati-
on; a denouncing ; ; alfè a maxime,or propo, |

Envoifiné : m.ce:f. Beneighboured; compaffed with,

neere vito,pard by,neighbours,

FEnvols le: m.¢e:f. Fled away, palfed baftily or fwifily,

ne Suddenly ; efcaped, gat packing , departed. r
nvoler. To flie away; to efcape, depart , get pac-

kings bie away peedily, baft away quickly, pale away, ‘i

dd enly,

Envoulté.qui al efguillerte nouée, Chaïmed in bis”
chic fe member.

Enyoute: m, ée:f, Vaulted, ane; houtod yes ben-
ding,downwaids like a walt. .

Envoutement. as Delgouftement 3 À diftapting.


, (v.m.)

Envoy. 4 or fendings alé, th'Enuay , 4
ca of cl ph ae als ae rt sa Di
Selfe, and feruing, oftentimes, as a dedication of the


“| Bavoyesas 4 im. A fpeciallmefenger fent by a Prince vate
ador in a forreine countrey.
|, Lefainé “Envoyé The bolie Apofile.
Envoye : £ Looke Ennoye.
Envoyé: a ée: f. Sent ; delegated ; addreffed or di-
reéled,vunto; alfo,caft or thruftout,
Envoyer. 10 find ; to delegate ; addreffe or direci, vn-
104 alfo,to caft or ‘thrupiyout.
yoyer au grat.To fend agraine; a Maifter ta put
away bis man ; (and,perbaps from this phiafe came our


| E N V: ENV.
Envi. as Envy; With an ill will. nine mi viduals rai 2
Envictailler. To vidtuall ; to firnifo with , or prouide | Envitailler, as Enviétailler, : |
of,viétualls. Envis. Vies at play : Rab. |
Envictuailler. The fame, Enule-campane. The bearbe called Helicampanie,
|


bev bellie.

Envie: fEnuie, fpigbr,grudge;repining; griefs, difplea-
Sure al the profberitie, or good parts of another, ama-
licious emulation; alfo,a defire,or luft unto, a longing
after ; whence;

Vous auriez bien envie de me faire peur. Belike
you would faine make me afraid,

| Envieux meurent, mais envie nemourra iamais:

| Prov. Th’enuious die, but enuie liueth alaies.

he I n’el envie que de moine: Prov. Looke Moine.

|


Envié: m.éc:f, Enuicd, fpighted, maligned ;repincd


Env icillir. To wax old, growinycares ; become flale;
reine to decay; to quaile, faile , draw towards bis


ae =


Envicillifement: m. A waxing decrepite, j
into age, g fleppiag into yeares} PE on rs
E caying,becomm:iag vai ale. pi:
nvicr. Toenue; to maligne, (pi CA
the worth,or ood fortune har ddr
nefily,to long fr D
Envier (au ieu,)To vie.
Envieufement. Ennion) fpightfily mal icioufly.
Envieux : m. 4 Slow-warme,or Blind-worme,
Envieux: m.eufe: £. Enuious, malignant yepining, de-
Spight/ull, (pighting at another mans worth, or fortune.
Femme envieuse. 4 woman that longeth. Ne
Envieux meurent,mais énviene. mourra iamais :
Proy, Though eauiows people die, yet enuie fhall hue e-


wer. contemptuous, Goefcrape.) ,
Envinaigré: ni, €e: €. Seafèncd with vinegar, Ie le vous envoyeray par le borgne. 1 milfndi
Envinaigrer. To (eafon,or fhaxpen,with vinegar, 304 by 1obn Long the Carrier.


a in, ée: £ Stored, firuifhed, or feafoned, with


Bavirollé whofe top, end, onsipis bound about with 4
__ ting, or boope of yron, dre
Environ : m, les environs d'ine vite The vost
of ground,or circuit of countrey next abontite ,
Environ: About; thereabouts ; nigh; 7 re
Et mon homme environ. And my marchant to
fell clofe to it, went roundly abaut it.
Tour L environ. All thereabouts, round shut, on
each fide, on euerie part.
| aflez à faire environ les mains.thawe my ny bands
fly of bufineffe ; I haueas much to doe, pit à turne


rte Foun gompaed begin iced ed


> ged.or bemd in on cucrie


Quienvoye chetif ila mer il n’en rapporte ne
ER : Prov. See Poiflon,
ui folenvoye fol attend : Proy, He that ferds a
* frole, fies either for ( (or as) a foole. …
nvoyriner. To glafé a rie
of Mockerie saved, ve
Vy-Umpilline Aa + bp patrt
the will, much againfithe bumor
‘AP envy I fence autre, a. te Y schighe the other;
het Die ke ’ je .
ré: m.ee:f. Drunke,drunken; made;or e
drunke ; in drinke mellom,tipled, fixedLouerfènnes
Li a make drunke.s to fox.
er. To be drunke,or in drinke ; to bemelow,


ip er, bouteille. Hee is drunke |


t: m4 incompaling inven in- le; (aed of one thats 100 farre in lone
2 SS LE cin. ÿ 8 tb a good part dre owne, or seat mio bis
“Toi | ss


5 begi din, zs
pag var ee : Le


witbiwatersand ferby.th fail shag |
do yeeld forth of the narrow holes


tra
ne du te vores tae


: | =: addisien (ve Almanacks) “a


sas Efpaigneul,, t ab anes pit


Original from


deg UEG by Go gle ee HE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY
OR ce re . eee le 5 7


E POA


Epalouïr, Ta melt,or fivelter with extreame beat. …

Epanalcpfe: £ The repetition ofa word wbercby a fen-
tence or ver{e is ended, at the beginning of. the next;
cl repetition after a long Ares, ; the figure of

tion,

Epana le. Afeucrall rebearfall of two
Sirft were fpoken of ioyntty ; or(more genera
turae,vegreffion,renouation,repetition,

Epanons d'un dard. The feathers of a dart.

Epanter. «s Efpouvanter ; to difimay. :

Epatique. The hearbe Trinitie,or noble Agrimonie

Epaular:m. Az Orke sa great [ea-fifh mortall enemie

E unto fe hee fi

e. in flead of Evpuis; arufticall word.

Eocic he: £.4 For the red-tayled oadpicker pr
Highaw.

* Epelan: m, 4 Smelt.

elé: m. Spealt,or fpealed.

Epeler.Tofpeale.

Eperge: f 48rufh.
erlan: m, À Smelt,

Ephebe: m. A mariageable al or flripling;one thats
foureteene and upwards.

| Epheétique: com. One that after long fludie,¢ (earch,

és more doubtfüllthen be was at firft.

j Epheerc. The bearbe Liticumfancie, or May-Lillies ;

|, alfa,an ague of but one dayes continuance.
L'Ephemere Colchique. The wild Medow Saffron
with the dark-ved roots.

Ephemerique. Fievre ors. . That laffs but a day.

pacte A lourñall ; or daylie. Regifer of things


s which at
Ly) any ve~


| Epicae: £. Equitie, mitigation of the | rigour of. the


Epicatzen, Toiudge according to equitie, to mitigate the
rigor of the Law.

Epiche: €. A Speight ; the red-tayled Wood-pecker, or
Highaw,

Epicpcle. A ir circle, whofe centre is within the-cir-
cumference of a greater; bence,a leffer circle that com-
' prebends, and carries about with it, a Planet, it felfe
_ being carried about by a greater ; the Seat of a Planet,
or Storie wherein it is fixed.

ES The moff outward thinne skinne of the bo-


Enid fimnial. Maladie idimiale. as Epidimie.
An vaiuer[all Sickneffe. perse ep qi
a moft catching,or contagious
Epidimique: com. 1a jos t30r,
+ VARNA RO AT ber
‘fidyamang the peaple.


Epiece: m.  éet f, Diuided, peectmeated, reinge
Epica. To peccemeale, diuide, rend afunder, pull in


peeces.


: the bulke to the priuities,
FE Bpigaltrique racine thereto,
| Attere Epigaftrique, Looke Artere.


eine E rique d branch of the ‘Uiackyor flanke


re , both which at length are ioned with the


Ep jam aie ere feof PP 4
Ep mal it


Epigaftre : m. Al the outward part of the faite fon


- véimes there are two of thems Fp tale pedi


EPI


{
amme:m.An Epigram ; a Couplet,Stanxosr.
Sommes es particular PE Ru, mr
a pasa pet fuper{cription.
er. as Efcacher,& Poule. (at Tours.)
lemie. A fong of the fieper{cription of a thing,
kind of falling euill ina Hawke.
Pee The FRE foule enill,,
i eptique. That bath the falling fickneffew
Epil ogue: m. An Epilogue the conclufi fon,kaitting Ups
or final end,of a Play
Epilogué:m. ¢ ée:f,  Gimaluded, ended, faifred, kit
Up.
Epiloguer: To pr pa À it up; 10 make econ if-
. on, ¢piloguesor finall end
Epinarde: A "itil hs as Élpinoche.
Epinete. as Efpinette; a paire of Vrirginals,
Epinices. Feafts,verfes;or fins of Free aie at vic-
torie. GRab. + if
Epinoche. as EG pinoche..,
rm LL f. 4 whéale,or pufh that rifes on the skinne
ny night
Epphane f, The Epiphanie, or Twelfib dpi in Chrif-


Épiphôres f.The Rhewmaticke moifineffe,waterinefft er
dropping of the eyes; alfa, violence, imprefion, vebe-
mencie.

Epiphyfe : f. 4» addition, or appendix toa bone,obtai-
ning a peculiar civcumfcription within and annexation
to,tt though other wife it be no true part of it,

Epiploique. Veine eine ep iplokgue: See Veine.

Episcopal :m.ale: £ Epifcopall ; of,or belonging to,a


Ep aux :m. The followers, fauovites,or fanorers,of


Epi ernie: f. Anote,or defignation ; a firifation of
the mind bythe countenance,or geflure: Rabelais u/és
it (as if it were Epifemanomie) fir a popular fhout,
or acclamation...

Epiftcronas A Teacher. qRab.

Epiftre : £ An Epifilea letter. mifine.
HS he.Tbe ending of two verfes with one word, (a


Epi m.as Architrave ; ; «fo, alittle filler fesspon
Epitaphe: m. An Epitaph; a finerall poeme infeip-


Epiale d'une tragedie. The Duff part of a Trage-
71 lis

thle A weddi Songsor Poeme; ns 1e

Ep a fons long ing wedding commen of the Jar:


itheme: AA ui medicine ah ren ma
Epith d part of the bodie, by a pee


ca ipped init; ; thereb Spy Psp ma
Dr el CRE :


VE


sate m. éc:f. Bathed, BS i eth ‘be-


Epithemer. To bath moifen, wetsbedeam. HN |
ithimiet. as Epithemer.


‘The weed Dodder “ae
pain: ms sees sh hs i
ne coke or Clie moreloefeourr |
duats head: 22:20 La]


1 aie - egypt Sted va
A : Sate © a) |


Original from


= THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSE"
2 :


: ————


ry riens ie
Epi | ;


1


i y


L "


CPL |
«


bu 1 Lots ALAN SES


E Q V

Epizeuxe. A figure whereby a word,or more bauing no
otber betweene them,are doubled in one fence.

Epodes. 4 kind of Lyricke verfes ; the firft whereof 1

E longer then the fecond.

tique. Drunken, fwilling. qRab.

Epeends. The bloudie fi, red belle ache, that come
by the vlceration , or excoriation of the bowels.
qDauph,

Eptafyllabe : com. Of fêuen fÿlables.

ne a py poe)
puré : m.ée :f. (leanfed,purified,clarified ; alfo,dry-
"ed by running drayned of liquer by wringing.
urer, as Efpurer.
quable : com. Ewen,equall,of one fort,all alike.

Equalifé: m. ée: f. Equalled, matched made enen;re-
sembled, compared,

Equalifer. To equall,matchymake euen ; refemble,com-
are,


P
Equalité:f Equalitie,ewenneffe matchableneffesy¢fem-
fon,


blance; indifferencie ; comparifo

Equalizer. as Equalifer.

Equanimité: £. indifferencie moder ation,quietneffe of
mind; abumor that takes all things well.

Equarri: m. ic: f. Meafured, or fquared out, by a
Squire. ; °

Equarrir. To meafure,or fquare out by a Squire.

Equarriffement : m. 4 meafuring,or {quaring out,by
a Squire,

Equateur: m, The Equator,or Equinoltiall Circle; one
of the fix chiefé Circles imagined to be in the Firma-
ment ; thus called, becaufe tis equally diftant from the
two Poles, and becaufe when the Sunne is in it the day,
and night are of equall length,

Equerre. as Efquierre.

Equeftre: com. Ofor belonging to,Horfemen,Knights,
or Gentlemen.

Equibiens. The Halfes; or two boles in the prow of a
ship,through which the Anchor-cables paffe.

Fouicifanenet m, + pep

idiftamment. Ofequall diflance afinder.
ae f. An equall fpace, an eneg diflance,
funder, aa

Equidiftant. Equally diftant one fromthe other.

uierre. as Efquierre, x

Equilance: £, The bole or bollaw, wherein the tongue of
a balance playeth.

Equilibre: m, Equalitie of weight.

Equilibré: m.ée: f weighed in equall balances.

Equilibrer. To poift,or weigh, in equall balance.

Eee: £. The tot: sg Squinancieÿ an impof-

umous fwelling about the ie : Fe
uinocce:m.The €quinottiall; or equall length of day
and night ; It falls out in the Spring about the elenenth


of March; in Autumne, about the fixteenth of Sep-


tember.
: j iture,good armour, fit at-
ne rene | Eau


es
HOT


À by On F


wv : 0 compar ) well done.
| quip erat, rad


Digitized'by Go gle | ? ey :


EQ V


with, prouided of, all neceffarie fianiture, prepared for
an exploit, fet in good order, füfficient array, full e-


age.

Equiper. To equip, arme, attire, flore with, prouide of,
neceflarie furniture; to prepare,make readie,fet in ar-
ray, enable, by fill prouifion, for an attion, feruice, or
exploit ,


Equipolence: £ Equipolencie, coualitie in value.
Equbolent: m. Compofition money; or, as Equiva-
ent


‘Ale on Accordingly,of a like value, propor

Bah, y euen portions, for bis proportion or part.
quipolent. Equivalent, of equall worth, ofa like va-

ipo
lue,as goad as the other.

Equipoler. To be of like, or equall value; to counter-
uaile the worth of; alfo,to make equallinvalue with,

Equipollé:m. ée: f. Counteruailed, equalled in value
with.

Equipoller. # Equipoler.

Equippage: m. Tone: furniture; ec; as, Equi-
page.

Ê é: wig? f.as ag ;
uippée:f. Equipage ; or, a being in,er putting into,
trek ads eaiiqoge ; alfo, a fuddaine, and fantafii-
call prank,or ont-iert; a youthfull fying out of the way;
and bence alfd,a defo.

Les equippées d'un lievre. Her running an end, an
outright courfe.

rea com. Equitable ; iuft,enen,equall, fincere;
upright,

Equitation : £ A riding on borfebacke.

Equité: f. Equitie, equalitie; euenne(fe ; uprightneffe ;
mitigation of rigor ; moderation of humour ; mildneffe,
clemencie mercifulneffe.

Equivalent: m.Equall value; like for the like, one thing
Br ansther;or,the worth of a thingin exchange hence;
compofition money; or, an yearelie compofition, yeelded
unto the King by moft of tbe commons,in lieu,and for t#
abolifbment of an ancient Toll of xij din the pound,le-
uied vpon all fnall wares vittuals,and other prouifion,
retayled by countrey people in their ordinarie Markets: }
The Auvergnois,Limofins,Perigordins,¢> the inha-
bitants of {ome other countries thereabouts,do alfo po
a compolition to be exempted from the Gabelle de fel,
and others the like Impofitions; All,to auoid the exac-
tions,and hard dealing of the collectors, and farmers of
them; for otherwife,this compofition 1s as beneficial to
the Prince, and chargeable to the Subiett, as thofe
Tols,and Taxes were.

Rendre l'equivalent. To acquit, requite ; returne
like for the like,or one good turne fir another; whence;
‘A pere, à Maitre, à Dieu tout-puiflant,nul ne peut
rendre ‘equivalent : Prov. ee

Equivalent. (Adje&t.) Equinalent ; of a like worth,or

equall value ; as good as another. re

uivoque: f. An eqyiuocation ; a double, or diners


sence in one word, rc. ‘
Nous fommes en equivoque. You meane one
_ thing, and 1 anotber ; or we miflakeor mifconceine,one
. another. Fete"
Equivoqué: m.ée: f.Equinecated; doubt fully [poken,
doubly meant, yeaa
. me fuis equivoqué. 1 miflooke one word for anc-
ther, pe AGE CURE
ivoquer. To equiuocate, or ufe words of diners
Senile 5 to este dah, orth edule


rand


Originat fror


+ Ca ; Jin
et HE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY. |


ER G |


Granderable. The great Maple (erronioufly) called
: the Sycomore tree.

Eraige: m. As ayrie of Hawkes ; or,as Herageswhence;
En eft il encore del'eraige? #hat? is there yet more
left of the kind of them ?

Eraigue. as Eraige, qRab,

Etaillé, as Efcaillé.

Erailler. Seeke Efrailler,

Erain, as Airain. Braffe.

Eramme: mm. A fine, or amerciament fet on a parties
head for want of due apparance.

Erafer. Looke Efcrafer.

Erater. Tu vamiltjor take the milt out of. ”

Erbergé: m. €e: f. Lodged, harboured.

Erberger. To lodge,to harbor,

Erchat. as Archat, Yellow wire made of Latten,or Cop-


per.

Erculiffe: £ Licorice,

Ereétif: m.iue:£ Ereétine ; raifing,aduancing, lifting
up,making to (land, fetting bolt upright.


lorne.
Caufe eremodiciée. 4 matter thats giuen ouer for
-de(perate.

Ereole: m. A finall weight of twograines.

Ergalie: € The framing,and difpofition of veffels, and
‘aces for. Extraéhions pc.

ee m. A Prifonor Houfé of Correétion (as. ome

ridewell) for diffelute,and-idle perfons.

Ergate: m. AWindleffe, windbeame, or Draw-beame ;
alfo,a Racke for a Croffe-bow.

Ergot: m. The fpurre of a Cocke; the deaw-claw of a
dog ; the becle, or tallon of a Hog. =
Eftre fur fes ergots. To be verie flatelie, loftie,furlie;
to (land on tearmes,or on bis Pantofles.


ons ; quiddities, cauilling.
Fendrelergot. To runne away.
Ergoté:m.ée: f.8purred,or hauing (purres,deaw-claw-
- ed; armed, or furnifhed with fpurres,or dems-clawes.
Ergoter. To rift on bis toes,or fland vpon his tip-toes;al-
s0,ta wrangle,debate,cauill,contend.
oteure : f. 2s Ergoture,: 2
Ergotique: com. Sophiflicall,cauiling, fall of conclu-
ons, or quiddities,
Ergot


Mine: m. Arguing, cauilling, fopbifirie, quiddi-
tes. l ÿ
E-gotifte: m. A wrangling arguer, a cauilling fopbif-


Erigé: mée:f 6

. alfo, credteds — ~ Le ee Se

Eriger.To raife,eredt,aduaunce,liftorfetup. ~~

--Frigeren Duc, ou Conte. To create a Duke, or
Earte. : -

Erigoteures. The fhurres of a Cocke ; the deaw-clawes
Fe dog,crc; Secke Ergoture. :

rmaire.as Armaire. ~

ne. Terres ermes, That ly waft,defart,and vntilled.

. The (hate-fpot)Ermeline ; alfo, the skin,or furre


: m.ée : fFurréd with Ermines; poudered Er -


Frminette, Aüttle planing Ax. ; . eis: mh
Exmicage! wa era as


Eremodicié: m.ée:f. Forfaken,defert, folitarie, for-.


| Etre: f A way,paths courfè,or pace.


= Plein dergots. (as if it were, Ergo) fill ofconclufi- | ~


Ecpiitesn, dn Heritage that lines) ale re


ERR


Erné: m. ée : £, as Efrené.

Erner. To breake,or bruife,the reynes ; to crufh, or wea-
ken,the backe.

Erodé: m. ée :£.Gnawne off,or about ; eaten into.

er. To gnaw off, or about; to eat into; aljo,to driue
from field to field,from bill to bill.
ene. À certaine loue-procuring bearbe.

Eron. 4 Heron. A Hernefbawe.

Erofion. 4 gnawing,or eating into.

Erraillé: m.ée: f. Spred wide open, fet farre afinder.
Oeil erraillé. 4 ftaring eye.

Errailler.: To pread wide open, (et furre afünder ; (and
hence) alfo,to flare with the eyes;to {hale with the feet;
to flraddle with the legs,or thighes.

Errante. A fine, or amerciament (et on a plaintifs, or
defendants bead, for not appearing. :

Erramment. Quickly, presently, out of band ; nimbly,
readily ; alfo,at randome, ~ ;
Ferirerramment. To firike among the thickeft, one
knowes not whom, A

Errandonner. To fly away at randome, or be cares
not which way, fo be may be gone; (anold word.) _

Errant. Errant, wandering vncertaine,rouing y oaming,
Siraying,vagabond, firagling.

Erraté: m. ée: f. Vamilted;(& thereby)nimble,or light.

Errater. To take out'a mans milt, thereby to make bim
the nimbler:

Erratique. as Errant.
Fiebvres erratiques.Agues whofe fits bold no certain
time of returne.


. : f * 1,4
ae Loe Pe ee ee Oe


‘Erres. Inthe (plarall) number; as Exre;alfo,the view,
* or footing of a Deere, :
Erre de chaflerie. All the furniture, prouifion, and e-
mipage of hunting; as dogs, rc; and hence;
i de chafferic. To preparesor get, bimfelfe
to bunting ; to begin to bunt.
Erre de la mer. The floating,ov waning of the fea ; the
courfe of tydes. * € :
Grand erte. Swifily, faftly, fpeedily, quickly, baflilys
with noteable diligence,with great ccleritie,whence ;
Aller grand erre,ou,a grand erre, ou grand erres.
To fpeed,make haft,by apace,goe very faft.
Luis de hautes erres,& bonnes. 4 fleet,or (pecdie
und. | : ;
Pourfuyvre fes erres. To purfüe bis firft argument;or, |
to continue the fabieËt he began with. "|
Reprendre fes erres. To returne unto the waysorfüb- | <a
ieth from which be was disterted ; to come to bisweay,or AR


nr a RE à
tré: m.ée:f. Erred, flrayed,wandered,rouedroamed; |
miftaken,miffedafiyled ;offended,tranfgreftd. + "|
Errement. as Arrement; al/o, a path, flep, tratt, or |


È w d ae at d
Pinnementer. C’eft ( au ftil du pais de Normandie) |
prendre expedition, & proceder en la caufe avec fa |
partie adverfe. Ragueau. =
Errer. To erre; fray, wander; miffe,faylempake;alfo,
to tranferelfe,offend,be faultie. :
Qui ne parle n’erre: Prov. He that (Peaks not, erres
_ not(in tpeech.) RE
res. deerres. Muchor verie much; (an old word.)
Érreur:f. An error, ouerfight , ouerflip , miftaking ;
an ignorance, or fal(e opinion ; a wandering, or ftraÿ-
» ing out of the right way ; alfo, a milf, fale, ;
- tranfreffion ; In Law,an Error (not as ours, in proces
~ or pleading, but) in an Arreft,or Iudgement ; and that
tivo wayes ; eee


* Origitehtrom: ‘
THE OHIOYSHAEE CEN Tic ea
——— OR EE à


ER V


E S B


Erreur de Droi&. Error in Law; is when a ludge
bath ginenfentence diretlly againft Law ; See Propo-
fition d'erreur.

Erreur de faidt. Error in fact; iswhen be bath de-

creed againft the Prooues made, or Euidence ginen

in.

Propofition d'erreur. A writ of Error; is procured
out of the bigheft Chauncerie; oftenet,when Errors in
fatt are complained of; for it is not eafily beleened,
that the Judges, who can make Lawes, can erre in
La».

Errhine. 4 tent-like medicine applyed vato,or put into,
the nofé, to purge it or the braine ; as alfo, to flop blee-
ding ; prouoke /neexing ; or to procure childbirth.
rrone : m. Éc : f. Erronious, fraught with errors;


fil.
Erronnée: £ The bearbe Centorie, Larth-gak, Feuer-
wort.
} Erronnéement. Erronioufly, fal/ely.
Ers. les Ers d'un cheval. ne Ana Harts.
Ers. des Ers, The Pulfe called Cich, Orobus, bitter
Vetch, or bitter Fitch; It commonly beares a white
ower and therefore ome doe tearme it,Ers blancs.
rs de Crete,ou de Candie ; Candia Orobus; leffe
in the cod,and feed then the ordinarie one.
oo roux. The great wild Tare, Cichling, Peafe euer-
. lalling.
-Ers fauvage. wild Orobus (growes of it [elfe amon
corne,and : oft miftaken for ibe wild he
Erte:f.A place that ftaads bigh,or is fomewhat high to be
looked at ; a fleepe,or craggie afcent; a watch-tower.
Eftre al erte. To obferue,or watch(fiom a high place)
to lye in wait for; to baue a nimble, or carefull eye; to
be circumbeël, vigilant ,warie, veadie for all aduanta-
ges ; tolooke moft beed/ülly about him.
Tirer vn ennemy à l'erte.Te draw out an enemie in-
to the field,or to fight,
Erubefcence: f. Blufbing fhamefafineffe.
Eruce: f The hearbe Rocket ; alfo,the Canker-worme.
Erucé: m. ée: f. Nibled finely,licked up daintily,
Erucer. To nible finely, to licke up daintily.
Eruétation: £. A belcbing,or breaking of wind.
Erudition : f. Eradition, learning, teaching, doc-


trine.
 Erugineux: m.eufe: f, Of the colour of Verdigreece ;
… ruftie,cankred,or corrupted. F
- Eruité. as Eviré. weakened. @Rab.
LE ryfimon. Diofcorides called fo,banke Creffes,or win-
à ter Creffes : Theophraftus,and Galen, tw,
| one kind; the one called Miagrum,or

Eys other Does if hot oct Jum
a. ipele. A painefill,an ing ori ati-
_ yon, the tee mers being verie tithes, eae cleere,
eee it,


the bolie fire.
Es (of the Verbe,Eftre) tues. Thou art.
Es. (APrepofition, euer fet before wordes of the plurall
~ mumber,as;en,befèrelboe of the Singular.) In the,at
= the; into,or unto the.

VOUS oicy; behold; (an old wor te
illé: m. ée: f. Clouen, riven, gaping wide, fet o-


SR eM ae


— ht mme me


Digitized: by Go. gle “ >
BD Sh POPE Pee


QT | 2


Faire esbahir. To appall, affright, aftonifh,put out of
Pointe wonder Ling admin
ment: m. A wondering, marue a-
tion; appallment ,aftonifhment, 4
Esbahy.as Esbahi,
Esbailleure: £ 4 gaping,or openneffe.
a A borfes difordered leape out of time,and
mealure.
Esbannoy: m. &,Esbannoye: £. as Esbanoy.
Eek f, Paflime fport,récreation.
Oy: m. Paftime, fport,recreation.
Esbanoye: f. The fame.
s’Esbanoyer. To /port,play,recreate mel.
Esbarbé: m. ée : f. Made beardleffe ; barbed, fha-
ns fhecred; pruined, cut, or cropped off; alfo,{moo-


thed.

Esbarbesnent: m. 4 barbing, fhauing, fheering,clip-
ping ; à cutting, pruining, or cropping, off ; alfo, a
moothing, x :

Esbarber. Tocut, fhaue,clip.fheere off;haire fhag,a nap,
dc; alfo,to cut,picke, pruine, or crop off,/mall {prigs,
cc; alfo,to finootb (a rugged thing.)

arber vn livre. To cut off,or pare away,the edges,
or corners of the leaues of a booke.
arluér. a Esberluér. |

Esbafé: m. éc: £ Looffe,or fhaken at ; loofed, of
rai. drinen, or fled ont of, it Bafis, ground, or foun-

lion.

Esbafer. To looffe,or make looffe, at the bottome; to dig
up,or take py mike Wal of; to fhake from, or

ine out of it bafe, ground,or foundation.
s’Esbafer. To ‘lip rom,or fy out of it Bafis, ground,
undation.
at : m. Sport pafliune,play;récreation ; deligbt,plea-
fisre,dalliance,ieafting. > hin Fane

Esbatement: m. 4/porting, playing, dallying, ieafting,
recreation, i Liiaey

s'Esbatre.T0fport,play;dally;jeaftspaffe away the time in
mirth, and recreation.

Esbauché: m. ée: £. Rough-hewed,rudely begun; fqua-
red,framed,or cut groffely out of the whole peece.
Esbauché (en pein@ure.) Tricked.

Esbauchement: m.4 rough-hewing; a groffe framing,
Squarin fr out of awhole peece; a rude begin-

3 400,4 tricking.

Esbaucher. To rough-bew ; groffely to frame, forme,
Square,or cut out of the whole peece ; to begin rudely,
any peece of worke ; alfo,to pruime atree; and, in païn-
ting,to tricke.
baudi: m. ie: £ Glad,merrie,cheerefill ; heartened,
exhilerated,cheered,

Esbaudir. To glad, reioyce, exbilerate, make merrie,
hearten, cheere vp ; alfo, to rowfè, avake, or flirre up

‘om fleepe.
5 m. 4 houfe, lodging, or harbour ; alfo, an
Inne,

Esbergé: m. ée:f. Lodged,barboured, houfed,foiour-
bere fe 7

Esbergement: m. 4 boufe, lodging, barbour, lation,
place of ftay,aboad,retreat.

Esberget. To lodge,barbour, boufe ; to fay, abide, or fo.

og


ren foy vne faute. To commit, or be guiltie
3 alfo,to take a fault upon bimfelfe.
: m. ée: f. Dazled, d, made pur<


__ blin
Esberluër. To daxle, or dimme the eyes ; to make them
geet Es


Original from


THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


thee »


BS B


Esblaré:mée LR Gaflier pale of countenancesbleake
wanasone that is affrighted,or hath bad a feaner. |


Esbloui. Dazeled ; dimme-fighted ; or whofe fight is
darkened.


the eyes; to make them glimmer.
Esblouiflant. ‘Dimming , daxling, cafting ry be-


fore. £
Esblouiffement :m. .4 daxeling , dinmeffe , obfeu-
ritie, .
ag rors f. as Esblouiffement ; or, a mift caft be-
ore the eyes.
Esblouiflon dela tefte. Giddineffe of the braine,
Esboché: m. ée : f. Rough-bewed, fquared out,begun
Hu ; cut grofjely out of a groffe peece; Looke Es.
aucne. :
Esbocher. To rough-hew, fquare out in greats begin
rudely; cut groffely out of the whole peece ; Looke Es-
aucher.
Esboire. To foake in,to drinke vp.
ssboitement: m. À lamenele ; or laming.
Esborgné:m. ée: f. Depriwed of an eye.
Esborgner, Ta put out an cye,to deprine of one eye.
Esboutter. Toburfioutinte a laughter ; alfo, as Es-
boufler.
s esbouffer à parler. To buffe, or burft out in
eech.
Esbouflé: m. ée: £,
moiflure) upon.
Esboufler. To fpurt,Spout,or blow moiflure upon.
uilli: mie: f Throughly boyled ; sé 3 lef-
Sened, or decayed,in boyling ; almoft dryed up with


boyling.. ’ ‘
Esbouillir. To boyle throughly ; to boyle tothe diminu-
tion of the liquor thats in boyli®; to ouerboyle,or boyle


Spurted, fpouted, or blowne (as


Imoft dry ; alfo,to worke,as new becre
Exbouillué : rears ne 3 race phe AS in


oyling. i
Esboulé:m.ée: € Ruinous, decaying ; tumbled downe,
fallen,or broken off ; mouldred away of it (elfe:
. Terres esboulées . Decayed, or tyred out,by ouer-


much tillage. - : «
Esboulement: m, The ruine, decay, falling away, or
tumbling downe of a thing.


bouler. To rowl: or tumble downe;to fall ov-burft off,
to moulder away of it (elfe; as earth, flone, cc, in the
banging fides of an old, or ill made, wall, banke, oc,
thereby going to decay. , gh
sboulu. as Esboulé; or, boyled out,or away.

Esbourgeonné: m.ée: f. Prained-piched,

Esb >urgeonnetnent. asEsbourjonnement,»
Esbourgeonnerla vigne. To praine, fhred or nip off,

~ ‘the fieper fluous,ind nee ofa vine,


dlelfe buds,or {prigs
of Vine buds. ;
Esbourjonnage.æ Esbourjonnement. |
Esbourjonnement: m. A cutting off or plucking 2.
wy of, {uperfluaus buds, or fprigs from Vines ; a prui-
nine, or {redding of their fall branches.
urjonner. 4 Es nner. i
Esbourjonneur: m. 4 prainer of Vines. en"
ES TS ce: f. Cleanfed,winnowed,purged taken
out of it huske. 35
Esbourrter. To winnnw,vabuske unfbale ; to rid purge,
cleanfeé from chaffe, haire, huskes, flocks, done, ¢
alfa, to vinch, or wafh (4 cloath cc) lightly
fleightly. ‘ha me


Se
Esblouirlesyeux. To daxle, dimme, caftamift before | Esbranche: f. 4 Esbranchement.
ee it | ER


ourgeonneur: m, 4 pruiner, picker, or nipper off, |


ES B
Fahour, Esbloui. Dageled, @Rab.


ce: £. Vabraced,unbuttonned,emtruffed,
loofely drefjed ; af, with bis puddings about bis


zm, Ge: f. Lopped ; bared, or depriued, of
branches.
Esbranchement: m.4 lopping; a baring,or deprining,
of branches.
ancher. To lop, or cut off boughes; to bare, or de-
priue, of branches.
di: mie: f.1mbrandifhed ; caft violently, or fi-


rioufly vpon.
Quand le feu eft esbrandi en plufeurs maifons.
peu fire hath violently feixed on, or flafhes into, many
fes, : %.
Esbranlé,Esbranlement,& Esbranler; as,Esbran-
ler Fema MS ‘
: m, ée: f, Shaken,iogged, (hogged; brandi-
Shed ; flirred moued ; made to quake ; wauer, flagger;
incline,or decline. . à
La partie eft bien esbranflée pour luy. is farre
pus acere band loft. :
Esbranflement : m. 4/fhaking jogging, fhogging ; mo-
ning, (livring ; brandifhing ; waggng.
Esbranfler. To fhake, fhog,iog ; brandifh; moue, wag,
flirre up and downe ; to make tremble, quake, waucr,
totter, flacger; incline, or decline ; and hence;
Esbranfler quelqu'un de fonopinion. Te remoue
one from,or make bim alter, bis opinion.
s'Esbranfler de fon devoir. To fwarue from bis du-
tie; to tran{gre(fe. É
Esbranfle-rocher. Rocke-fhaking; (an Epithete fora
bluflering wind.)


Esbreché: m. ée:£ Broken, or whereintoa breach is


‘


2 made.
Esbrecher. To breake,or make a breach into.
Esbrillade: f. 4 iert,ierke,or correétion, ginen a borfé
with the bit,er bridle.
broiié: m. ée: f. Hard-rubbed(in the wafhing;)alfo,
faurted,or fnuftered, ; ;
Esbrouément: m. 4 rubbing bard, as in the wafbing
of anaftie cloth; alfo,a faurting, or (nuftering with the


Esbrouér. To rub hard,or together; as in the wafhing |
of a foule,or bard thing.
rouer des narines. T0 fnurt,or fnufter.
Esbroucure: fi #s 1 id ra
Esbruché: m. ée: & Scattered, difperfed, fowed a- |
_ broad, Le
Esbrucher. To (catter,difperfesor fow abroad.
Ee Due mers TRS , te
Esbucheter. To 307 Up: RAS,
Esburré: m. der Vnbuttered ; or,from which butter
hath beene taken. . Lee HE :
Laid csburré. Butter-milke churnd mile. as]
Esburrer. To take butter from; to make butter-milke


A A floole.
Elcabelle: £ 4 little,or low floole.
Efcabreux: m. eufe: f. Rovgh,rugged.
Thu orge nue,
é:m.ée: fs. ; beaten, or cruf
ae ae 5 preffed , tbruft, knocked, faueexed bard


ogether. |
Eleachement: m. À fauafhing a eating, battering,
Foro an ac


"SES


Efcacher. Te fquefh; beat,batierer crufh, flat;to thruft,
Bes eskenacke, (queere bard or clofe together.
acheur! m.4/quefber ; a beater,or crufher of things
fis a oper, preffer, or fqneexer of things,bard or
clofe togetber.

Efeachure : € A fanafbing ; beating,or crufbing, flat ; a
thrufling ,prefin Tene bard or clofe su ;
alfo,a[quafh,crufb,knocke,or [queexe,(whereby a thing
is flatted pr beaten clofe together.)

mai f. as Elquadre, 4 fquadren ; or fquabe batal-


Hlcades ifnelles. Swift, and light companies, as of
WAS Oc.
pus: m, as Efquadron ; a fquadron of Souldi-


Eicalfecte: f, A kind of great,and long muskle-fheU(re-
aren little Skiffe, or Tr ) wherewith the women
enone skumme their mi
gnon: m. A Socke; os Pumpesor,a clofe,and
wo “filed foe of thia leather.
See de fil, ou de foye:£. A skaine of thread,


penile: f. The skale of a fifh, &c; any skale, broken
fhel,or fhale ; alfo,as Coucon ; alfo,the cruflor upper
laying of a Pauement.
Efcailles. (a) peeces of weod wherewith ioynts, or
crannies left betweene [lones,in building,are filled vp;
alfo, the little skalie plats whereby an Armour is made
lyant unto the bodie,
Ecaille d'acier,de bronze, d'erain, defer,&c; the
alls of Steele,crc; the skales that fy from them whé
they are hammered ; (very medicinable ; efpecially
thofe, that full from the vunwrought braffe,or copper ;
whereof notes are forged.)
Alun d'efcaille, Seeke Alun,
Angelot à la groffe efcaille. Anold Angell,and(me-
taphorically) one that —_ in bim more fluffe and
worth, then forme or
Bois d'efcaille. The beart of Wood ; (called fo by Foy-


Pouroin d'efcaille. 4 plated Corfèlet made feale-


Tel ie avoir des oeufs au feu qui n’y aque les
cfcailles: Pro.Some weene they bane ogges shat bane


but fhels,i'th
neu a à Skaled, skalie, hauing skales, or
ee cfcaillé. 4 wall full of. pagent


illeme . À ;
Ea To shelé-ee Ry ore fates fs ae base
Te pend, pf 3 confume, or


thvacke,belabor the Sa ‘coat of.
E r fa ieun
we bis youth ia diffolute, riotous, or licentions cour-


dé iller des re . To En ane
eal -m. A skaler ; piller of.
Efcailieurc: £. À skaling,@rc,2s Efcaillement,


| “ces hen 1 vem ites er Pals lee
Ê Te


fet sie a ino


ARE men arse too" ple


ae ee | ee


Es €


Bivalarderdesuctz. To fhale Nuts. (Norm.

Efcalbotté: m. ée: £ Pilled unbusked.

Efcalbotter. To pill ; 4s Peafe doe in boyling ; te vn-
¢ sor looffen the buske of.

Efcale: mée : f..as Efcaille.

Elcalies: er Jiayre.


Efcallé: m. ée: £. Skaled; taken, furprifed,or entred in
to (as a Towne) by fcalado ; alfo,gone into diners parts,
and ports ; alfo,as Efcaillé. J

Efcaller. To skale; to take, furprifé,or enter into,by fea~

lado; AT to goe into diners paris,and Ports ; sane


Efcallier: m.as Efcalier.
Ekslounier: m. ere: f. (Dents efcalonnieres. ,4
orfes tuskes or tufhes.)
que: m. AnVher,or
Efcalventré: m. ée: f. al guts are fauafhed ontor
pete burfi,by treadin
calventrer. To iad ot out the gus; to burft the bellie


J


Efcamne: m. A Bench,Forme, or Seat ; alfo, a flep to
ag ber thing by. Pic.
Paras to m.é¢: f. Died changed, fo Sopbiftica-


unes. To change, difguift, alter, fopbifticate, fol


in ill wares.
Efampe: € A faping, flitting, fhifting, flying away; a
lampe ie di iflodgingsquiche retyring.
re » fled anoided,recoyled,difledged,


¢EGampes To feape, flit, fly, pe nr retire; to
runne away,or diflodge quickly out of a place.

Efcandal: m. .4 Mdfiners founding Plummet.
candillé: m.ée: f. Scantled; made according to the
patterne or fcantling of.

Efcanné: m. ée: £ en. throtled, firangled.

+ NE f. The Puanpe of a {hip ; or, as Efcandal.


@Ra
Efca f. An efcape, or efcaping; and (more part
Spade: licentiôus, pe ee difordered meee
inaborfe; and (fometimes) the difordered,or licenticus
flying out of a man.
caper. as Efchapper.
Efcapolin‘m. .A remnant, or parcel, fa peece of
Et ae, À finall ih


ee circle, or fillet in a pil-
3 alfo, the


ie of apiller


Eftarade: £ The opening of t nether part of thebranch |:


of a horfes Bitt. ;
Efcaras. as Efchalas. Pic.
carbelotte: €. A fimall Beetle.


Efcarbillat: m,ate:£. Quicke, lie, liuelie, folicke, À 23


ivitfull, firring, that will fland on no ground ; alfo,
eel amas giddie, baire-braind. A


t: m, The blacke Flie called,a Beetle. ~~
- Ete Jn À euidinscn ais
Efcar im, Stirred up,as the fire.
Efcarboter le feu. To flirre vp the fire.


Efcarbotte: f. 4s E{carbot.
:m. The precious flone tearmed, a Car-


buncle.
Elcarboucle: £. The peflilent betch, er fore, tearmed a
Bitarbouilé: rm, €e: fi crushed, feexcd battered,
| enn To cr ob a: aaa


7


y Efarbouiller Igcervelle.Tobraine.
Elcardé : m. ée: f. Carded.
carder. To card, as wooll.
Elcardes. Cardes for wooll, ec.
fardeur: m. A carder, -
Elcardeure: f. 4 carding. .
Efcare: m, A certein fifb which (again the cuftome of
all others)chewes bis meate.
Efcare: f. A skarre, or feab,or as E{chare.
| Efcargot. Afayle. ~~
Elcargot de mer. Awhelke: alfo, a winckle,or pe-
wags 3 (the firft, the greateft; th'otberssleffe kinds,
thereof. ) \ :
Efcarlate : & Scarlet ; alfe, the Scarlet apple.
Efcarlatin: m. ine: f, Of skarlet,or of a skarlet bue,
Rofe efcarlatine: A Damaske tofé.
Efcarlatte. as Efcarlate:
Efcarmouchant.Bickering, skirmifbing. \
Elcärmouche:f. 4 skirmifh, bickering;brablement; a
fall fight, or fray. :
Efcamouché. Bichered, skirmifbed; brabled.
Ils'eft bien efcarmouché. He hath talked tbrough-
ly be hath wrangled, or beftirred bimfelfe exceedingly
in the matter,
Efcarmoucher. To skirmifh, bicker, brable; to befiirze
0 bimplfe' like a borfe that driues aviay- fes with bis
a . 4


{PP tayle, ;
| Efanhoucheur : m. 4 bickerer, skirmifber; brabler.
Efcarotique. Skarre-breeding ; skab-bringing.
Caroufle : m.ée : f. Scvatched,torne,rent.
Efearoufler. To fcratch; to teare, to rend,
EfCarpe: £. A fearft, or little wall without the mayne
vampire of a fort. :
fearpé: m, €e: £.7aulteds alfo,cut fleepe downe sand
ence ; : 2:29 LB DEA
Foffé efcarpé en plomb. A dike made plum done.
EtCarper. To cut fmooth,and fléepez" : 2 2 102
Efcarpins : m. Pumpes ; light, or finêle-foled fhooes ; al-
fo, a kind of torture, : ge} fal
Efcarpoulette:f. A kind of fiving (wherein aman fits
as he fwings. ‘
Efcarque. as Efcalque : (Rab.
carquiller. az Efquarquiller ; to fet wide open.
fearrabillade: com. as Efearbillar,
Efcarre: f. A Skarre,or hard {cab opon a wound ; Looke
Efchare. °° T3959. pet
Efcarure : €. A womans fquares
Efcart : m. 4 difcarding ; a departing , or putting afide,
— and out of the way; alfa, a place of folitarie il
à Pme ee Apari,afide, out of the way; afiader one
_ from another. — | , ald Age
Beard m,€e: fi Scattreed , dispersed ; difpareled;
Bes RE M Re irait ; hes.
cartel uarteved: cut into quarters, 11111001 À
Femmebioneltartelee A woman bi,


> . es ich iat
| L Limmes,and large quartérs, "0 ER te
D Efartcler. To quarter ; to flaughter, butcber jé
| Mar ters. >) I MES tee 5 igh
Efcartellé. as,Efcartelé, Quartered, pitt
carter.Toftatrer;difipate, difparile; alfo,todifcard ;


’ oat


@7 abroad. : :

- + To goe afide,get out of companie.flip out of

way. <u) EVA Yo I ut
Eftas:Thetenth penie of the value of mourables

a forreiser ue reeds a freeman, due Unto the notte
Seclisn, Bale fous Lillesby shee partieulée

ang charters, a


to fet or 4 apart; alfo,tofheed; | matter throw pont,


MEyaat iy Sreere


Efcaffable. Meubles efeaffables. Moueables fubicét


\wato Efcas. :
Efcaveffade: £ Afhake,iert,or blow with the cord ofa
Canejjor :


iffon. —….

EfCéer. To cut,or flyve ; alfo,to pill.

Efcelles: f The cha rs

Efcerné: m. éc: f. Vnkernelled, whol kernel! is taken
Saint alfo, opened, feraped, or ftarified round a-

‘out, -

Efcerner. To vakerncll; to take, or cut a thing cleane
out of the round place wherein it was 5 alfo, 10 open,
fora a féarifie a thing reund about,or oneuerie part |
or fide of it.

Efcervelé: m. ée:f. Braine-ficke, baire-braind, wild- |
braind,cocke-braind ; beadie, giddie, bumorous; «fi,
brained ; whofe braines are knocked or dafht ontsalfo,
braineleffe or deprined of braines.

Efcerveler. To braine, to ketocke,or dafh out the braizes

of; alfo,to take the braines out of. à

Elcervellement:m. A braining, +

={chabouillé: m. ée: £ Scorched,ouerheated.


Efchafaudage: m.A feaffoldiag ; a ges fétting |.
0


up of, a presenting or fhewing out on, feaffolds ; alfo,a
fcaffold,or [caffold-like Stage érc.

Efchafaudé : m.ée: £. Made into a feaffold; alfo,pre-
Sented on a feaffold; or caried from {caffold ta feaffold,
for afhew, or to bis greater diferace ; alfo,fet on the
Pillorie.

Elchafauder. To build feaffolds ; to prefent ona (caf
old ; to fet onthe pillorie ; alfo, to deuife, inuent, plot,
or praétifé villanie.

Efchafaudis:.m. .4 (taffold.

ee ianider as mia aya
chafaut : m. 4 Scaffold,or bigh Stage;alfo,a Pillorie.

Elchaffaudage: m. as Eichdbadage.” *

Efchalas: m.4 Pole, prop, flake,or flay whereby 2 V'ine,


| — Ofany other weake-branched , vp-creeping | or high-


_ growing Plaat is beld,and helped, vp.
Lefchalas faittomber la Vigne: Pro.Laoke Vigne.
rare a : a £. Propped, fuftainedunderfet with
4 pole,or flake. . -
Efchalaffeau: m. A fhort,or finall pole,prop,or fake,
Efchalaflement: m. The propping, fuflaining,or under-
Setting of Vines crc.
Efchalafler. To prop, fuflaine, vnderfet, or flay vp a
Vine,Hop-plant ges > 110
Efchalaffier: m. ereg £ Of or belonging to ; fini


£ ve or bearing flore of, poles, props, crc, for Vi a


Efchalier: m. 4 winding flaire; whence ; ee
Auffi toft preft qu'un chien auroit fauté vn efcha-
lier. Readie after awhile; or as foone readie’as one,

°° that does all things with deliberation,can be; (for whe-


ther a dog leape vp or dovonie fuch a faire, be commonly


) him leifitre Loo Sauté.) >
eee
Efchalle: f. A little ringin ing Bell, © :
Eghallicamthahas Sept ts mc
EXchallon mf fd reat der fr igh bf
Ffchalon: æEfehellon: ° >
Fiennes Giclee Babs fe wc aes

té: f. A Cine, or WO eth

"Plates cehalotces mof ed) al, a raid


en'tang d'oignon 8 ne valoir va'e(Gha-
à place, or imployment, whereof heis


Efchambouillute: £ ai a pufb.
champé : m. ée: f. Flowne out,runne,orgotten loo[fe;
got abroad at libertie,or at randome.

sE {champer. To fly out,to take libertie;te runne door,
freely,licentioufly,or at randome.

E{champre. as Enchampre,

Efchancré: m. ée: f. InféGted with,or eaten into,by a
Canker,or cankcred fore; alfo,cut or made bollow, and
into a balfe-round femi-circled, balfë-rounded ; alfo,
neere pared or nipped off; alfonotched,

Souliers efchancrez.Peided or cut with an opening,
in the fides.

Efchancrer. To eat,as a Canker, into; alfosto cut or make
hollaw,and balfe-round ; alfo, to pare very neere, nip


of too neere ; alfo,to notch.

Efchancrure: f. A balfe-round ; or a balfe-round notch,
dint,or bole cut,made,or eaten; alfo,an eating into; a
cutting or making bollow,and halfe- vound;a notching;
a neere peringsor nipping off.

Efchandille:m, as E{chantillon.

ee m. ée:f. Scantled ; or, as Efchan-


Elhandilon, 0 a ve PT

chandole: f. 4 fhort beord,or fhingle fiuch as,in fome

places, boufès are couered witball ; LÉ a = Pr

Bee oe a Beater. kina for fn
change: f. Aa exchange, trucking,barten, feoor,

Efchan Bis m.éc:f. Exchanged, interchanged chopped ed,
féoorfed,bartered,trucked.

Efchanger. To exchange , inter ben trucke, chop,
[cowrfe, barter, change one for anothers

Efchanfon: m.4 cup-bearer,or cup-tafler mie 4 great
perfon. 5

Efchanfonne: £ 4 woman cup-bearer....

Efchanfonner. To play the cup-bearens! and, to taflor
take anaffay of another mans cup. f

ee Los £ The Office of a cup-bearer, or cup-
tafter.

Efchanteler. To breake into cantles ; 5 Or tocut of the
corners, or edges 0

Efchantillé: m. ée: f. curtalled, abridged “esate
cutinto corners,or cantles,

on. A finall cantle, or corner alfo a

is ing, fample, patterae, proofé of th Mar-


Va‘ ik efchantillon de canne. A ride of


Efthandllidnaies. To breake of a fa all RE a or cor-


_ ner peece: alfo, to cut, or take off a
| terne, Armes ; |
Ejompeler as Chapeler, To c
atoire: m, An euafo
mee et ou to sr
exception a
Be et Beye
4 fom; a away ; De deliucre
+ Lt


ple, pr “a a


; apsdiitete


a pierre € ft efchappée. 1
n'eftpas


Efchar. #5 Efchars |
Efcharalle: f: .4 | dead, “a  fiimking fell,pobicb breeds
about wounds made with hot, or otherwi{t much bru-


Sed,

Efcharas. as Efchalas.

Eicharaveau.s Charaveau.

Bihabos as Efcarbot ; a Beetle; alfo,a Saligot, Cal-.

op, water Nut.

Ech +4 my as Efcarboter. Rab.

Efcharcement.Scarcely, {cantly barely hardly, mifera-
bly needily ; LH ia ti niggaraly, pin-
chingly, pennyfather-like,

Efcharceté : f Searcitie, »feantnessbor eneffe; pinching,
necreneffe miferie; alfo,bafencife,or want of er
in coyne.

Efcharcette : f. as Efcharceré (in the lafi fence.)

Efcharde: f.4 fplint,or (plinter; a flarp, ur ume,
of cleuen wood,or flying from wood in the cleaving al-
fo,a little, leane, or skraggie girle, that lookes as if fhe
were flarued.

Efchardonner. To weed,or plucke wp,thifiles; to cleere
a ground,or garden,of thifiles.

nneur: m. 4 weeder of thifiles.
gee : £.4 woman that weeds or plucks vp,


Bieta: £ Asharre, or hard feab upon a fore, burt,
wound; alfo, the ae which avifeth vpon an atinalt,
or potentiall caut
Efcharfaud dou El hai fur Efchaffault.4 fcaffola.
Efcharfaudé. as E(
Efchargotté: m. ée
round about,
Elchargotter. To pruine a tree ; 10 picke any thing


‘ound about.
ame: m.ée: f, Flefbleffe ; pulpleffe,pithleffe; de-
ined of flefb; pulp,or pith.
Eh Charotiq ue: com. Which breeds, or brings a fab, or
skarre ss a wound, foresvlcer, re
Elcharpe: f.4 Scarfe ; a paudlicihs 3 alfoya vapor wipe
-couer the shoulder witha fwdrd. >
es de cordage, The ropes which firengtben,
and fettle the iaumbessor cheekes of Cranes,or the like
Engins, !
, L'éfcharpe d un pelerin. The evip, alles or pouch
:æherem he carries-kis meat,
Elc arpeux: m. eufe:f Scarfe, fiarfe- like; flaun-
ting it with many (carfes about bim.
: fas Efchare.
: m, arfe: :£ Scarce,needie, (cantie; fine pa
bard, niggard, »pinching, mggiffiscowetans, netre,
ait-ban re
Ho plaidoyeur ardi perdeur; Pro.4 nigarde
~ lie pleader is an euill fpeeder.. 4.
Efcharfe
Efcharfe


26 ete as a tree; picked


(semer rh met ,


F | ra. Droid des Mes chats, & Tavernes. A certaine


saline ee fold by Me oe
iia pre 4, fi :


se 07 Enr. bo. coe ti


( e de re Pet-
1 ma then pu i À ù
hafleur. One that gocs eile.
102 Efchaf fleur. az
ant, Scalding pe bot that it blifers


| oo "Bichan-


Original from


46) TATE 230 Ageia > ai


ES C


~ {E(chaubouillé: m.ée: Full of bot blaines, pufhes,
wheales ; bebliftered; or,bauing the Shingles.

Efchaubouillure : € Abo pb blaine, bliflers or, a
hind of inflammation, which brings with it vneuen-
nee, and rnggednelfe to the skinne, with many little
buds, or bliffers that fret it; Some call it the Shingles,
fome the running worme ; others, wild fire.

Elch auboulé & Eictenbsuare, as Efchaubouillé,
& Efchaubouillure,

E{chaubourré: m.éc: £ Troubled,moued,in an ago-
nie; (a word vfed about Tours.)

E(chaudé: m. A kind of wieg, or Symnell, fifhioned

Ul.

c


omewhat like a Hart; a thres-coraered Symnell.

Efchaudé: m.ée: f.Scalded with,bathed in,bot liquor.
Chat efchaudé craint I’ eau froide: &, Chien ef-
cae craint l'eau froide: Prov. Looke Chat, or

ien.

Efchauder. To (ald,or caft bot liquor vpon.

E(chaudet.as Efchaudé.

Elchaudure: f. 4 fcaldinz.

Elchaufaifon: f. 4 beating chaine, warming, making
bot; alfo, a beat; or, a difeafé that comes of immode-
rate beat.

Elchaufant. Chafing beating warming.

Efchaufé: m. ée: f. Chafed, warmed, heated, fet in a
heat; alfo,bat, feruent,ardent ; vehement, eager, ear-
neft,in a matter. :

Efchaufement: m. as Efchauffement.

Efchaufer. as Efchauffer.

Chaufeture: £ A chafing, warming, beating ; or, as
eon re
chauftadatle: £.4 burnt whore, qLangued.

Efchauftader. as Efchafauder.

Efchauffaifon: € as Efchaufaifon.

Efchaufté: m.ée: f as Efchaufé.

Efchauffement: m. 4 chafing, warming, beating, fet-

ting ina heat.


beat.
Il s’efchauffe en fon harnois. Said of one that growes
in choler, or into paffion , for the fatisfying of fome
difordinate humor.
Bonne befte. s’efchauffc en mangeant: Prov. 4
good beaft eates till be fiveat againe ; or, eates that be
fiveat withall; we [2y, good at meat good at worke.
Efchaufferette:f. little Chafing-difh.
Efchauffette: £ A Chafing-difh.
fchauffeture : £. a Efchaufeture.
autre: f, À chafing,or fretting by beat.
Efchauguette: f, A Sentrie watch-tower,Beacoz.
Efchauguett


é:m. ée:f, Watched in a Beacon,or bigh
Tower; bebeld from bigh,or a farre off. ;

Efchau .To watch at a Beacon,or in a high tow-
er ; 10 ety, bebald,fee from high, farre abontor a farre
off to fland Sentinel. crea

Elchauguetteur:m. À Sentinel, or Watchman in a
high Tower,or at a Beacon ; bence, any Spy, Scout, Ef-


pyall.
EfChays.Aller achae To fhale, firadle, goe crooked,
or wide betweene the feet,or legs. ;

Efcheable: com, Eftheatable.

Efcheance: £.42 E{theatage,or efcbeating; alfo,an Ef-
(for want of beires.) .:

Efchec: m. A Checke at CheTe-play.

Des efchecs. The Cheffe-men..

rica remedil rieor misfortune.

Donne hee 4 mat À, To fubdue, conquer, ouer-


1


Efchauffer. To chafé, warme, beat, make bot, fet ina.


intricate bufinelfe,er danger.
Kky


ES C ek
come; fürmount, fuarpalfe, win,or get the beiter,af ai- |


_fo,t0 ruine,or ouertbrow,the fortunes of.
ef: m. A fall,wafting,or diminution.
beni as Efcheller.
iclette: m. A Skelton,or Anotamie.
Efchelette: f. The bird called a wall-pecker ; alfo, thé
little flalke of a Grape ; alfo,as E{chellette.
ch ¢: m. as Efchellement,
Efchelle: & 4 Ladder, or Skale ; (alfo, a fquadron of
s rortt in old French.)
fchelle altinietre. Part ofan Aftrolabe.
Mis à l'efchelle. Set on,or faftened unto,a ladder with
a Miter,or Paper,about bis bead ; bence(alfo)publikely
diferaced, put unto open (bame(any wa à
Se voyant au pied du mur fans be e. See Mur.
Efthellé : m. ée:f Skaled, or climbed vp on ; alfo,
rs d difgraced (by flanding in open Market on a


er.)

Efchellement : m. A skaling,or climbing vp unto,a get-
ting up on,by a ladder.

Elcheller. To climbe ; to skale, or get up unto, by a lad-
der; al >, publikely to difgracé,or put unto open fhame,
an Offendor by fetting bim, in open Market, on a Lad-
der witha Miter,or Paper aboutbisbead, |
Efcheller vne grandeur. To afbire wnto a dignitie, to
mount unto greatnelfe.

Efchellette:f. A little ladder, or skale ; a {mall flep, or
greece; alfo,a little hand-bell, fuch as (ryers ufe.

Efchelleur: m. 4 climber by,or skaler with,a ladder.

Efchellon d’ efchelle. The round, or flep, of a lad-
d


er.
Tondre à efchellons. To clip uneuenty; to notch, or
mal fleps in the baire.
Efchelon. as Efchellon.
Efchemeau : m. The bed of a Vive; the ridge wherein
it flands,
Etc . To fivarme or breed young,as Bees.
Efchenal: m. A gutter,or channel,
Efchenillé: m. ée: f. Rid from Caterpillerss
Efcheniller. To rid of Caterpillers.
Efcheoir, To bappen, chance, betide, fall out, befall; to
ai come vato.
cheoir en foy,ou main tierce ; Looke Tiers.
Il n’efchet point à vn homme de bien de mentir.
An boneft man cannot ly; o7,is verie feldome knowne to


yy.
‘A vn bon chien n’efcheut oncques'vn bon os:Pro.


A good dog neuer lighted on good bone;an honeft perfon “4
Fm topre 3 the uerier knane the better à

, fay we. ss
Bichequd: m, ée: f. Checkered ; or (as Blafoners) 4
(a . NS:
ne m. À check-mate at Chells. 4
fe: m. = Chetker;or Chef[ë-boord. à
tare valet pings er deol of à pelle | +
Escher. The Skirret root. RTE |


Eschet: m, 47 Efcheatsor thing fallen to. à
Escheu:m. euë: f. Befallen,happened, chaunced ; fal-
lensor come unto.
a deux jours escheus. Two dayes were come
and gone. ;
Eschevé m, ée: £, E/chewed, funned,ausided,bent or
Escheveau: m. A skaine,or loope of thred,or filke.
Defmefler vn cau. To wind bimfelfe out of an


à


EE
Se


a ewe


Original fi M ne ne CAS :
THE OHIOSTATE AVESNES
ET ee Te +


(+28 7:


3
|


B.S C ES C


Efchevelé: m. ée:f. Diftheneled, ruffled ; whofe baire
fais looffe,or in difarder, about the eares; (a word moft
proper, and moft ufed,in the feminine;) alfoybared(as of
haire;) made bare;or bald.

Efchevement : m. 4 Sonning. efcbewing, auoiding,


nerally) any Succeffion.


ir. as Efcheoir ; To befall,bappen; fall unto,
oies f, An Efbeat ; land fallen, ec ; as in Efcho-


Eichoite:tficed follow in the roome are


bending from.
Ether 1 foun, efchew,auoid, bend from. pitholage e. as Efcolage.
Efcheyin: m. The Sherif of a Towne ; or, an Officer c.as Efcolaftre.


whe (reprefenting the Roman Ædilis) "lookes that the
Market be duly furnifht, and wellferued ; the boufes
fitly ranked,and well built ; the fireets euen paned, or
cleane kept : And where a Towne bath, by any Prini-
ledge, the difpofall of it ovwne Police, the Efchevins
(for there be euer more then one) difpofe of it ; and
(bowfocuer) they be in authoritie ot vato the Mayor,
(or, as in Paris, te the Provoft des Marchands) and,
in the Townes that baue no Mayors , the principall
pppprar

hevinage: m, The Sherifefhip of a Towne; the Of:
fice,or Asboritie of a Sherife, or Efchevin ; alfo, a
Sherifes Court, or, the Iurifdidtion thereof ; ; alfo, a
Corporation ; or the Incorporation of a Towne ; and
hence ;
À Pace d'efchevinage. Looke Droi&t.

{cheviffement.as Eichevement.


Efcholc. as Efcole.
Ef


: f. A little, and (moft commonly) low flop;
ie a one as one of our meaner Seamflers, pes
ath,


Efchoppe. as Efcho oa
oer flay àl'efc . To lay a finall, and thinne
cece of filuer, oc, Le 4 hot burning coale, there-
5 Lo ré the value, and alloy of it; (a Goldfmithes


phone. m. ée : f. That bath € ee after a fhip-


oot alfo, runne a land, faft on ground, asa,


Bichouér <To vun,or touch vpon a ban If e
and there make {hipwora a. “ica ates

Elément: Wittingly of [et purpoft.

He àbon eftient. In deed, in earneft, in good


: fuith,in g ood fadneffe roe heart.
Elcheutes f. as Efchoëtte. An Efcbeat, cree On Lien. With bis confent, or knowledge ; wit-
Efchez. Looke Efchec. ting ili for the nonce,


Etchif: m, iue: f. Rawenous,or greedie at meat;(a Hun-
EG teavme.)
Etchiffeur. 4 Cutter,or Pinker.
Efchifflé: m. ée: f. Split,riuen.
Elchiffler vne branche d'arbre. Tofplit, river blfi-
breake off,a branch,
Efchimeau. as E{chemeau.
Efchinal: m. ‘The bead of « Sinke, covered with a
Grate.
Echine: €. The chyne, backe bone, ridge of the backe ;
aif (ina rine a round boultell cut with egges.
ue efchine.A flimme,lunges,luske ; long-backt,
rm il. foap ed,loobie,
Efchiné: m: ée: f. Chyned, broken |
Efchinée (de Porc.) À chyne (of Porke.)
Efchiner. To chyne; to dinide, or vale, the backe


of eux: eufe: f. Ofagreat
Eithinon: m. A LS heck be.


Bichique ce des 3(atearme of Blafèn.)

quier : m, The Exchequer ; (in Normandie) is an
wins of high luflicers, wherein the Decrees, Or-
- ders, Commiffions, and Iniunétions vein hal
lifes,Vicounts, and inferior Iuflicers, may be
and amended; ( This Affe was |
and held at uncertaine and unfet times , vntill that
Lewisthe twelfib net 6 and of it, (as it
‘fill continues) a Soueraign Court;) alfo,a chef]-boord;


me el efcient. In fuch fober fudneffc, in fo good
po!
zm. ée:f. Topped, whofe top, or bead is cut


mer. To gp; to cut off the tops,or heads off.

Efel och: :m.€e : £.Be(pptted,be(patled befprinckled
with water,or durt.

Efclabocher. To besprincklebe/pattle be/pot with wa-
ter,or durt.

Efclaboter. 4s Efclabocher. Pic.

Efclaffer. To buff,or burfi, out into a laughter.
{clair : m. Lightning ; ae or flafh of lightning ; a
ete blafé,or flafh of li i:

ci: m.ie: f Cleered, diftonered; explaned, dif
plie ; fined clarified. ;
Claircir. as Efclercir:
ement. as Efelerciflement. *

Bitiane. f. The bearbe Celandine, Svallowort, Tetter-
wort; (La grande Eftlaire.)

Petite Efe aire. Little Celandine, Pilewort, Fig-


Eairé: m.ée: f. Lighined ; lighted ; alfo, watched,


Edifices bieneltlaiten.zisheyome,or wel: -windowed,


houfes.

Esclairer. To shine spinel ifter ; 10 lighten,to flafh out;
10 appeare, or flit felfe ; to give light vnto af,
towatch, or obferue ; to/py,or pry into.

Pourveu queie voye esclairer, ce fera fait; à


,Checker-warke. bin
1 Meer def ier To plant trees Chec: ker- wife ‘Pelee ee eS. tin
ne to fet them in mes diftance one _ the es sas ni All-fecing, all-ligbting; mi


os aft ani in iw ne fre te.
and to preuent the corr :
F1 aber might be ufed in tengo Dh
Bn: com. Gaunt Janke, fall bellied


Esclamme : £ A long, and thicke viding cloake to beare
tf "the gg Pilgrims cloakeg@ mantle ;a a


| mea LE voa ca al aif


Original fron’
QE OHIO Saar Eee NIVERSITY


HT ee


ESS:C 4


Efclanche demoaton. Aleg of Mutton(cut large with
the whole bone atit.).

sap m. À fase: 34 damnation leteetialion,
vninft imputation ; alfo, a flaughter ; alfo, a mifha
danger qe mi fe. ‘ à
‘A grand pecheur efclandre : Prov.Great finners e-
uer come to fhame, \

Efclandreux,Seandslou, fluunderous,or flaunder-bree-


ing.

worse To flaunder, defame, difhohour,depraue,de-
traét from.

Efcl : À Groffeneffe,corpulencie,fatneffe. .

Efclat:m. A Shiver, splinter, or little peece of wood
mes off with violence; alfñ,a finall and thin: Larb.or
Shingle,
Ee at de lumiere. A glimp(é, or fuddaine flafhof

ight.

{clat de tonnerre. A clap,or crack,of thunder, °
Diamond de bon efclat. Adiamond that fhines very
faire,or {parkles much in the eye ; a dyamond of a good
lufler, or water.

Par elclats. Peece-meale, in fhzeuers, into a thoufand
peeces, .

Efclatant: m.ante : 6 Splitting, cr.afbing, cracking; rin-
ging 3 bright-fhining, gliflennes glittering, flafhing,

randifhing; basing a frefb,or faire gloffe... .

Oraifon efclatante. Aa earacfl, vebement,or pear-
cing, fpeech.

Efclate. A kind of difeafe among children. .

Efclaté:m. ée: £ Burjt, fl, crafhed, fhiuered into
fplinters;, alfa fparkled, güttered, gliftered, flafhed

i


out, : tort
Efclater. Tofbine, (parkle,g glitter ; to flafhout;
alfa ; to baue a frefh ox fair Bes ae
breake , hiver into


‘€

s’efclater. To fplt, bucft, cr
fiinlersacn pecet per ERY CER ant
clature. À (plitting ; fhiuering in peeces, a burfting

fhiuers, or (plinters; alfo,a gliftening, (parkling,
glittering ; flafbing. Mes
Elclau. as Efclave. A flaue.
E{clayage: m. Pare sar ag on ; villenage.
Efclave: m. A flaue, bondman , bondflaue, bought fer-


want.

Eflaver. Toenthrall, make flauifh, bring unto flauerie

or bondage. :

Efclavine:f.as Efclamme ; or aféa-gowne ; or a courfe,
~ bigh-collered, and fhort-fleeued gowne , reaching
. downe tothe mid leg, and vfed maf by fèa-men, and

Saplors. LE


LR Li


xp] orm
M ee ge 32 ose ! ‘a
eche: m, ce: f.. Difmembred ; rent,or torne from ;
in parcels diuided, feperated ee ey f


ElCler. Seeke Efclaïr. = 2. QU
ile : cps TUNER a fed iluf*
trated fined,clarified; qrowne thia,light,faire. y

Eflercir. 10 cleere ; illuftrate ymanife(t,explane,difplay,
alfo,to fine clarifie make cleere. salinioa!

s'Efclercir. To wax thin iz [ubllance ; to grow few,


or fmall ia number; light, or faire in colour to cleere


Efttercift t:m, A cleering, mani Be
mage mate salé « ing, lar:


EE ie ic. hind Se
ine. : à


MMS ei


Elelerement. Cleereiptight ty ; plainly, manifefily. >
e


Efcodilles : & The bulbesson bulbed roots,of Daffedils,or |
Efe


Efcoffret: m. as Efcoffraye ; orsa ttl eri, =< ee
2e rin, A Coy fe,o7 ales | Ey PNR TRUE CIE
re ;


a. ae ASS


EOS C


{che : f. as Efeleche. . .
Efclichoir: m.4 Squirt,or Siringe.
i he, as Efcle e.§ Wallon.


Efelifché: m. ée:f Difinembred,diuided,peece-mea-


ihe

Efclifchement: m. 4 difmembring, parting, diniding
of amentire thing.

Efcliffe:£. ay (final!) Hurdle,or any Vienfill of watled
Oxierson Wicker crc; hence; a Cheefe-fai,or Chesfiord
thereof and, the Rundle, or Circlet put vader a difh
at Table; a wicker bottome for a difh ; aifo, a twig, or

’ a Oxiersor Wicker ; and hence ; ’
liffes. Splents, bound about a broken legjexc; alfo,
the fides of a Violl,or Fiddle.

Efcliffe: m.ée: f. Squirted ; (purted, fpatled, or fpou-
ted from (or as from) « Squirt; alfo,watled; wouen of,
or made up with, Oxier or Wicker twigs crc;alfo,/plen-
ted; boundup in,or kept flraigbt by, pleats.

Fromage efcliflé. Formed in the Cheefe-fat ; or, that
bath flill on it the print of the Chesfoord, .
{cliffer, To fguirt ; to fpurt, [parles or pout from (or as
from) a Squirt ; alfo,to watle,or make up with Oxier or
Wicker twigs,@rc ; alfo,to fplent ; to bind up in fplents,

or ieshe fraight by fplenting. Bf i

Efclifloire. 4 Squirt.

{cliftre, as Fouldre.

Efclop: m. 4 Patten,or weodden fhooe. Tholofain.

{clopé: m. ée: f. Maymed,limping,lame.

Efcloppé. The fame.

Efclopper. To maime,to lame.

Fig To batch; alfo, to difélofe, produce , bring

rth.
Efclorrela bouche. To open the mouth,

Efclos: m. fez£. Hatched; difclofed; opened,

Eflot:m. as Efclop ; alfo, a Reed, or Cane, to fucke
with ; afi, a Reft in Muficke ; alfo, a Galley-


ee)
Efclotouére. 4 Clap Net. a
Efclou: m: The print of a borfès foot.
Efcloy: m. Piffeslant,vrine,lee, fale. Pic.
Efcluine. as Efclamme. —
Efclufant. Stopping, as by a Sluice; or, as Exclu-


ant.

Efclufe: £4 Slüice, Floud-gate, or water-gate ; alfo,a
Mill-damme ; alfo, aay. Damme, Cefleine, or. great
Veffell, whereby the water that comes from a Spring is
receiued,and kept for v[e;al[o,a paffuge betweene hils,
or at the foot of a bill, which by a high, and betowred
gate feperates the ttarches., or territories of one conat=
trey from another. TT


Daffadowndillies.
Efcoffier: m.4 Shoomakérs. in) 0 AS
e: £.A Shoomakers Stall,or the boord whereon |
he works. “Tae resonate


aye. as Efcoftraye.> Large
Ecognte im, À Luske,a great Slouch, Clupter fifi, fonte
Clunch. &Orleannois. MAD oy
EfCoinfon : m.A Seunches the backe part of the iaumbe
of a window.” . DOYLE Bayt
Efcolage: m.Sgboole-bire ; a flipend or money,ginen for
_ the teachingor tutaringof a Scholler._ 1
Efcolaftre: m. The Reéior, chiefe Maifier, Supérinten-
«| dent,or Querfeer; of a Schooles alfo, an valearned, or
meane Scholler ; one that is but halfe a Scholler. .-
Kh ÿ EC


DURS Rue


recs! oe


‘ Original from, =
SETHE OHLOSTATE CINE
i ee


ES C E:S €
Efcolaftreric : f. A "Reétorfhip or gouernment of, a Efcorcher le Latin. To inborn of nk
Superintendencie ouer, a Scheole ; alfo, meane Scbol- tearmes.
ler fhip. Efcorcher le Regnard. To pue caft, vomit ; (from,
Efole: f. A Schoole ; or Colladge, wherein any Art is the fübieët to the effect; for the flaying of fo flinking a
taught. beaft is like te ‘make them fpue that feele it;
Chemin de l'efcole. The longeft way. Looke Regnard


Faire l’efcole buiflonniere.To play the truant.
Table vaut efcole notable: Prov, Table talke is an
excellent Schoolemafter.

Efcolier: m.4 Scholler Learner , Pupill,Student.
Ilen parle comme va efcolier fs armes. He gestes
thercof ignorantly,improperly,or from the purpo ;
Efcoli 4. Pablo shes ie feu, & bain hors la
clafle: Pro. (Meant onely of a meere Scholler; as our)
A Mafter of Art is not worth a fart unleffe be be in the
Schooles.

Escolleté: m.ée: f Vacollered ; whofe coller is taken
off, or pulled away.

Etcolleter. To cmcellahs to diuide, plucke,or take away
the coller from a garment.

Efcolté. Soulier efcolté. Looke Efcoulèté.

Efcome. The blade(or broad end)of an Oare.

| Efcomé. Peis efcomé. The fjit-ffh,or fea Pikefo tear-

med at Marfeille.

Efconduire. To deny,or fay nay unto; to refifèsor reiedt
the requeft of.

bane: mi. ite: f. Denyed ; whofe requeft is refic-


Eiconjuré: m.ée: fDriuenor gottenaway by intrea-
tie,or coniuring.

Efconjurer. To driue away by intreatie, or coniuring.
confé : m. ée: £. Hidden, couered, concealed; tt, as
the Sunne, @Pic.

Efconfement. as Abfconfement; ;aconcealing, Pic.
Efconfement de foleil. The Setting of the Sunne.

onfer. as Abfconfer ; To bide, conceale, couer.


Ficopetade. The (hot of a Harguebuxe,or {mall Peece.

Efcopetin. as Squiopetin.

Efcopette:f.. Petronell,Carbine,long Piftoll {hort Har-

guebuxe ; any {uch (mall Gua that gees off by a fire-lock.

Efcopetterie: f. Gun-fhot ; av te

Efcorce:f. The rinde, or barke à ees the outward
skin, or pilling of fruit.
Mettre le doigt entre le bois & I’ elcorce. Bafily to
- intermeddle with, or take much notice of, the differen-
ces,or cunkindne(fes that are betwixt neere friends.

gente m.ée: f. Barked, pilled;vnrinded; blanched;
pared.

Eforcée: f. as Efcorcement ; alfo,the pilled, or unrin-
ded part of a Plant.

geen terete m, A barking, pilling,umrinding ; 5 blan-


Force. Te bc smhertés to pill, pare,blanch un


: m. 4 Corcefque,
eee Abarker yh à.
orché: m. ée kim excoriate
| Efcorche- he-cul. à D cp the flaying of
“buttocks; or(as lier wit bare arfe kif
dragd alg on tbe LA


À excoriation; am saad testinal
des boyaux,
Riper ae fi


re


.


ee f Go. gle 5


jor | Eleornflr- tu
er. To eat, or breake off Ze.
Re fmell a dors bard, ata fealt ano-
te man pares frelessick or carry tales


Tglas


sees HE OHIO SEMTE UNIVERSITY


ea L° == 1 par See = Sly Le NE -,


+ 70
EL


ie >
Affez efcorche qui tient le pied: Pro.The Asien
is as guiltie as the Aëtor ; the Acceffcrie as the Prin-
cipall; be does mi(chiefe enough that belpes to doe mif-
chiefe.


Bienefcorche à qui ne deult: Prov. Senceleffe peo.
ple may well enough be flayed; or, tis good fleecing of
them that haue fo much, as they miffe not what x gone.
‘A la preuve l’on efcorche l'Afne: Pro. (Applyable
wae Sich things as cannot be tryed without dan-


iz parler n’efCorche langue: Prov. Faire words |
El? not the tongue; teare no skin,breake no bones.
corcherie: f A flaying bouft ; Fis place wherein


Forte beafts are ufually flayed
corcheter. To flay; to pill thei ind off,or pull the skin


corcheur: m. À flayer; af, an Outlaw, or Free.


HÉolchouse: m. A flaying of beafis.
Efcorchure: f. 4 flaying,or rer the off; a gau-
ling,or gee ae any part of the bodie.
ET m.uê: f. Barkie,bauing a barke.
Efcore: cops Paper ‘aight down,in depth; whence; |
La mer eft efcore en cefte cofte . The fea is very
decpe.or,the channel is on this coaft.
es. The flocks whereon a {hip flands in the docke.
a f, A thong,or belt (of leather; ) alfo, a firipe,
fh with a leatherne thong.
Efcorne : £. Shame,difgrace,contempt, feorne,
orné: m,ée:f. Vaborned , without hornes , that
hath loft bis bornes ; bence (alfs à) melancholicke, out of
beart,out of countenance, afhamed to fhew bimfelfe, as
a Deere is,when he bath caft bis head; alfo,uncornereds
whofe corners are broken, or cut off; “and hence; safe
ced,ruined ; Scorned, difgraced.
Arbre efcorné. A tree whofe branches ave lopt off.
Dez efcornez . Ground Dice, blunt-cornered


Ekorn nement:m.4n umborning,or detriaing of hornes;
a a racine; F defacing 3 baring or bereauing of orna-


Bigomer. To unborne, , dishorne, or deprine of bornes ;
to cut,pull, or take from one a thing which is (or be
oped is) an ornament and fine: unto bim; to breake
off the corners of a fquare thing ; to lop, or fred of
the boughes of Trees ; toruine, deface, difgrace any


thing.
Se Ter efcorner. To füffer bimfelfe tobe ridden,
made a foole,vfed likeaGull.

Efcornicher. Jn fread of Efcorner, or Efcorcher.


Efcorniflé: m. ée: £ Vncornered ; whoft cornershaue


f hares etence of i tale-car-


Efcomiflerie: € Fe -fineKi fleating at (other
| mens) cov sc 3 af Para fingsor talecar-


EC


Original from


ng


B.SC


Efcornifleur: m. À ba/é piekthanke, or parafite; gree-
die feeder,or finell-feaft ; one that carries tales, ieafis,
: 2 acwes from boufe to boufe , thereby to get vittu-
ais, }
Efcornizer. as Efcorner.
EfCort : morte: f. Diféreet warie,beedie,aduifed,cir-
- cum/pect ; obferuant ; that knowes well bow to carrie
bimfelfem any bufineffe wherin he meddles,or compa-
nie wherewithbe meets, :** ’ :
Efcorte:f. 4 guide; conuoy; fafeconduit a diveëtion,or
Safegard for the way.
Elcosse: f. The buske,bull,or éod of a beane, peafejerc.
EfCoffé :m.éc: € Vabusked, foaled,bulled.
Efcofler. To unbuske, fale, bull.
Efcoflois : m.oife : f. Scottifh,of Scotland,
Magot Efcoflois. 4 Coot,or Moorebenne,
Efcot: m.4 fhot; alfo,a yong fhiste of a tree; alfo,a fplin-
Pie an flumpe of a thorne offenfine to the bare-
voted.
Difner à efcot. A diner at an ordinarie ; ov,where-
at ederie guef} payes his part, or, fhare and {hare like.
Faifonsl’ efcot. words ufed by the Capuchines when
they fake their robes ouer the imbers, to auoid their
vermine and to confime by the aire of the fire the mat-
ter whereof they breed.
Parler par efcot. To Peake by turnes, to beare one a-
nother (peake.
Payer!’ efcot pour autruy. To pay,or be punifhed for
other men. .
I a prins,ou fait cela foubs l efcot. He bath taken,
orc, that in fecret, vnder-band, by flealth, in bugger
mugger. À
Ils a beau taire de I’ efCot quine paye rien: Prov.
a may wel ynough conceale the ‘fhot that payes no part
ofit


it.
3 m. ée: f. That is within a fhot, or bath paicd
} . afhor. J AS


Efcotter.Euery one to pay bis {hot,or to contribute fome-
what towards it ec.

Efcoüade: f. The traine,or followers of a Captaine, ov
Leader; alfo,the companie of fouldiors whereof a Cor-
porall hath the leading ; a fquadron.


- Escoiiarde. as Efcoiiade; vn cap d’ ef. A Corporall,


Efcoube: £.4 brifh;alfo,a maukin for an ouen : @Lan-
ed


Escoudé: m, ée: £ Deprined of bis ‘Support, of the fay
whercon he leaned, of the meanes whereon be relied,
Efcoüé : m. ée: £ Curtalled ; whofe taile 1 loft, or cut


off 6,wagged,or fhaken vp and-downe,
ou


€r-To curtall or cut off the taile ; alfo, to wag, or
oakea thin dr dewe its
Escouétte: ft A Plaiflerers whiting brufh.
Efcouëttes. Sheates ; Looke Efcoutes,
Efcoufle if, 4 Kite,Puttocke,or Glead. ù
Efcouillé :m, éc : € Gel, hbd;vnfloned > bereaued, or
maimed ofpis flones. LoS
Efcouillé de Sybille, One of Sybells (gelt) Priefis.
Eiouter m. A gelding, libbing, bereauing of
ones. | :
Efcouiller. To geld, lib, unflone, cut away the flones of,
bereaue offlones ; alfo, 10 maime,or make impotent, by
Striking on the cods,or flones, = = 6
oq on :m. se. 2, or difbclowt ; a maukin, or
rag,to cleanfè,or fweepe an ouen. 3
Beatie: f. A gelding,or libbing; a cutting away of


“Etcouiffon. xt Ecoinfon. hat) Se
Efcoulable:com. Drainable ; confumeable ; eafie to


BSC


be dried,or decayed; fone flipping,or gliding by.
La memorie dele vb cc ables Buick
_ Y paft, eafily rafed, foone gone.

Escoulant : m. #s Efcoulement; Or,a draine ; or firai~
ner; alfo,a floping part,or place, downe which a thing
eafily glidesor is apt to runne.

t. Drayning, or drying up ; gliding, or ‘flipping


Efcoulé :m.ée:f. Drained; alfa, rained; alfo, deri-
ued from one to another ; alfo, flid, flipt, paffed,runae,
fled finootbly, glibly, quietly along,or away ; allo, con.
fumed, wafted, pined away by little and little,

7 Jour efcoulé, A day onerflipt owerpafl,or gone, almoft
before it was thought of.

‘Efcoulement: m.4 draining,or drying vp,alfoya firai-
ae i da confiming, walling, or pining away,as of
the bodie.

Efcoulement d'eau. 4 gliding, flidin » flipping,
Smooth running, glib falling, gentle ores rr 7
water, us é


Efcouler. To draine,or drie vp ; alto derine from one


to oes alfo,to firaine through,
S’efcouler. To glide, flip,liderunne quietly, paffe
couertly,along;to fall doves alist op ur Basi
* alfo,to wall,pine,decay,confume. >
Elcoulcté.fouliers escouletez-srelted; alfô, cut,or o-
en.0n tb'influp, and tied with a lachet palingouer it.
Efcouleure : f. 4 firainer,
Efcoullement. as Ecoulement.
ee as Efcouler. > f.
coupellé: m. ée : f. Topped,or whofe top is cut off.
Ficoupelles To top, or oie off the top of a ae (v.m.)
Efcoupette. as Efcopette;, 4 Petronell, or long Piftoll.
Eftourgée : f. A thong, latchet; (courge,or whip.
Efcourgeon :m. Amelcorne, Starch-corne; a kind 0


bafe and degenerate wheat, which being ground yeel
little nourifbi


verie white ( but verie light, and ifhing)


meale, a
Efcourre. To thrafh,or feuer corne from the chaffes alfa

to beat. Ha duftie clothes rc: sé ass
Élcoïtfouér :m, The dale of a ( fhips) pumpe, whereby

the water is paffed out, :


Efcourté:m.ée:£ Curtalled, fhortened, cut, or chap. |


ped off.
Escourter. To curtall, fhorten ; cut pr chop off. à
Efcoufle:f. 4 fhaking, /wagging, fwinging, fhogeing,
dogging ; alfo,a fiwag, fwing,or violent fivay; alfo, as
Refcoufle.


Efcoufle. (The feminine of Efcoux.)
Efcoutant. Hearing, bearkening,liflening unto.
Ine feroit nuls mefdifans s’il n° eftoit des efcou-
tans : Prov. None would reuile if none would beare.
Efcoute: m. A pie,eaue-dropper , prying companion;
Alf, a fcout, {cout-watch,or Sentinel; t dihouerer
or forerunner of an arme,


Croupir aux efcoutes de gros morceaux. Looke ;


Morceau. ; os ;
Eftte aux efcoutes. To liften, bearken , watch, or
' fie, whats done abroad; to eaue.drop, to prie” mto
. mensaétions, or courfes ; prinately to obferue their
- __ lookes,or ordinarie [peeches. “ES
Efcoute: m.ée:f. Hearkened , lifemd , given eare
0.


unt :
Efcoutement: m. 4 bearkening, or liflening; 4 bea-
ee aie oe
uter. To t, beare,lifien, €, yeela at-
tention unto ; crea! the [peech,objerue the words


it
a +


à


fi


‘


ESC


Efcoutes. The Sheates ; thedouble ropes which ferue to
fafien the maine faile behind.
Escouteur. An bearer, bearkener, liftener, eanes-drop-


cr.
iciéene fage efcouteur: Prov, while fooles
doe fpeake wift men bad need to heare.

Efcoutilles : £. The fcutles or batches of a fhip; th'ouer-
tures,or trap doores whereat things are let downe into
the hold.

Efcoutillon : m. À futile,

Efcoux: m. Efcoufle: & Shaken , iogged, fivinged,
fivagged.

Paille efcoufle. wherein no corne is left.

Efcouvelle : f. À bruh ; as Efcouëtre.

Efcouvillon. as Efcouillon.

Efcouvillonner. To fpunge a peece; 10 cleanfe ber be-
fore and after fhe is difcbarged.

Efcrageant. range cent out,

Elcragé : m. ée :f. Crufbed,or fqueexed out,

Efcrager. To crufh,or fqueexe out of.

Efiaigne. A little bouell, made of poles fet round with
thew ends meeting at the top,and couered with turues,
(ods and dung,fo thicke,that no weather can pierceit.

Efcrain:m. 4 Casket, or {mal Cabinet; a little Ring-
box,or lewelt-box ; alfo,the till of a chef. j

Elcran: m.A skreene tofet betweene and the fire; af,
the tefler of a bed, .
Faire e{cran contre le vent. To turne bis nofe into
the wind to fet bis nofè againfl the wind ; or, to land
betreene one and the wind. 5. elie

Eferafé: m, ée: f. Squafht downe, beaten flatgerufhed
in peeces with much preffing, or hard leaning on. 1

Efcrafement: m, A crufbing flat , or fquafbing downe.

Efcrafer. To fquafh downe , beat flat, crufhin peeces
with much preffing,or bard leaningon. «1

Efcrafeur : m. A crufher ; fauafher , or beater of things
flat by bard preffing of them, :

8 Efcravanter. To burft,or (plit bimfelfe.

Efcriere. Pie ef. The rauenous bird called, a Shrike,
Nimmurder, wariangle : Savoyard.

Elcrazé. Looke Efcrafc.

Efcrein: m. Askreene.

- Efcremé: m, ée:f Vacreamed., flected, asmilke.

Efcremer . To fleet , or take away the creame from


milke. ues
crefiner. The fame. esac a
creté :m.ée : f, Vachaulked ; or depriued of chaulkie
whiteneffe.


Eftrever.! ef. duiour, ou de la nui&. Th
the day; the twilight. bing
sE(crever. To rine, cleene,burt, or


Bee. | Biereve:m. Ge: ki Rina ue ror li ander
LA € dawning of
3


ityafinder.


E :S C


Efcriement. as Eferi; Or, An exclaiming, or crying
ks


— $$


0 . .

Eferier aucun. To exclaime crie out on, call upon ont.
sEfcrier. To exclaime, crie out, make an cutcries to
yore, bray,or yell.
crime : f. Fencing,the Art of fencing.

Efcrimer. To fence,or play at fince ; alf, to lay bard a-
bout bim.

Efcrimerie : f. as Efcrime.

Eferimeur: m. 4 Fencer,a Maifler of Fence.

Efcrin. as Efcrain ; A Casket.

Eferiner. To barbe ; to powle, or plucke off the baïre.

Efcrinier: m. A Joyner ; and (more particularly)a Caf-

t-maker,(abinet-maker. Hs é

E Cript: m, A writing; a manufcript, fcrowle, (cedule,
thing written; an Indenture , or peece of eusdence,
Bailler par efcript. Te publifh,declare, offer exbibit,
put forth, fet out, mwriting.

Mettre par efcript.To couch,dige/t,record, fet dovwne
in,commit unto,writing.

Efcript:m.te:f, written ; deftribed or decyphered,
publifhed o1 declared , couched or fet downe, in wri~
ting.

Dred efcript, The Civile Law. .

Efcripteau :m. A note,or bill of ones-band 3 an infivip-
tion, title; hort memorandum, libell, certificates a
declaration, or defcription ofa thing, in writing.

iptoire : f. A Penner,
ture : f. Writ, Scripture, writing; a flileor man-
ner of writing ; the making, er writing of bookes ; an
infcription,or title; a deed,writing, or eurdcnce,
Scavoir moult d’ efcripture. To be learned,or skil-
Sill ia, or well acquainted with, moft pastes :

Escrire. Towrite ; feribble, féribe it ; 10 iadite decipher,
pourra), difplay couch, or fet downe, in writing; to
make a booke,or worke.

Efcrire nicement. Looke Nicement.
“A mal exploiéter bien efcrire. Appliable when
man by a hire tale,or wel-couched words, indcuors to


extenuate the guilt of bis faults, or of bis ervorsinpro- |


ceeding,
En Ja peau de brebis ce que tu yeux y efcris:
Prov. One may write what hee will in a fheepes skin.
Escrit :m. ite: f. written; Looke Efeript. , :
critequ :m, as Efcripreau,
Elcriture : f. as Efcripture.  - * ;
Efcrivaillé : m.ée:f, Scribled, fenruily penned, banld~


&. written.

Efcrivaillerie:£. Scribling, banld writing.

Efcrivailleur : m.4/cribler,bauld writer, paultrie pena
man.

Efcrivain: m, A Notarie, Scribe, Scrinener,


2 Efcrevifle: f..4 (venice , or Crayffb; (By fome An» | Efcrivaineric: f. Scriuenerfbip ; the Art , or At of a
A … thors, but nat fo properly, the Cr & alfo tearmed Scriuener. .
E ft. D 0 à Eferivill. as Efcreville. .
|. Efcreviffe defumier. The great, & venomous black | Efcrober. Tofhog,er iog,as a cart in an vneuen way:
| Beetle. mer | Efcroë.æ Éfcrouë, À 1
| « Efcreviffe de mer. A Lobfier3 or, (more properly) a | Efcrotter. To gnaw,or bite with the teeth. _
; WSAMCOMEB à, Cuan, bina ne 4 L: m. rie peine =
Bhi |. Pasd’ efcreyille. À ba epsa going backward, {croué:1 ue ; the hole or bollow thing?
| Picresd'eferevife. Fone Pier. = wth vice oft prelfee>caoth ire ala er
tique qu’ yn’. fle. & So,the booke wherein a Goaler fets downe, am


iw


the backe of a Cre


pea fo
_ terst nd furncones of bis pr


ue} of the ground held by a Cowier, or


+ 43 t er, delinercd into bis Landlord ; alfo, a
containing the particulars ofthe Courts expencein

. meas, Oe, dgehed, and faped enrie day by

>


Original from
gettin OFHO.STATE UNIVERSITY.
LR ' «


ae


Nr. To


Steward and Comptroller ofthe boufhold, and deliue-
red ower unto the ne Breuiate of a
cafèor caufé,in contrauerfie ; alfa, the warrant thats
delivered by a generall Affelfor unto inferior Collec-
tors, for the leuying of a Subjidie,tax,or impofition.
scruoélle:t.A litle Shrimp-refembling werme,ot ver-
mine in puddles and fome Pring».

Elcrouëllé : m. ée:£ Troubled with the Kings enill.
pe efCrouéllée. An infetted traiterous,or depra-
ned fbirit- RE bss

Les Efcrouélles. The Kings euill.

Hehe des efcrouëlles. Little Celandine , Pilewort,
1gwart,

Efroulé :m, ée:£ shaken,tottered, flogged.

Efcroulement. 4 fhrking, hogging, tottering.

Elcrouler, Te shake,totter,shog.

pe etn m.éc : f. Rumple[e ; whofe crupper is

J10ken,
Efcroufté : m.ée:f. chipped; uncrufled ; unfeabbed.
Efcrouftement: m. dn uncrufling ; or unfeabbing,
{croufter. To chip; wncruft ; vnféab ; to pare the craft
off, pull or pill the [cab from.

Escrouter. To vacruft ; to chip, or pull the cruft off.

Eicru. drap efcru. Raw,new, fresh, vndreffed,vntrim-
med cloth; euen as it comes from the weauer.

Efcrué. as Accreué.

Eicu: m. 4 crowae in money ; alfo,a shield, or targuet ;
alfo, a Scutcheon (of Armes ; phot th’ Armes

_ themfelues) ot coat of Armes.

Eicu couronne, Is leffé in value, by a Sous, then the
Efcu Sol.
Efcus à eftoille Poufsiniere, Looke Eftoille:

cu du Palais. 4 counter.
L’efcu du foc. Th'eareofthe plow-share,
Efcutol. 4 Crowne of the Sunne ; (the beft kind of
Crowne that is nave made)bath a little flarre on th’ one


fide,
at vicil. Ax old Crowne ; is worth vij. s. ij. d,
er. ;
I n’aefcu nytarge. The dinel may freely daunce in
his purfe ; there isnot a croffe to fright him, or bleffe
th’owwner withall.
Il fait de fon tefton vn efcu. He thrines well, gaines
much, increafes mightily in eflate.
Efcudes. as Efcudettes.
Efcudettes. The hearbe Hipwort,Venus-nauell,Penny-
, wort Pennie-graffe.
cueil: m. Arocke; alfo,areckie place,
Efcuelle:f. A dish, * v


Efcuelle à oreillons, À porrenger.
Grande efcuelle. 4 0 charger


r .
Petite cfcuelle. 4 faucer ; or finall dish,
Les afaires iques y vont par efcuelles. .47
things are fquandered, rioted, or diferderly wafied, in


that houfe; the like is; .

. Tout y va par escuelles. There is cheevein bowles;
= us nOfparing, pinching, nor fauing of any thing;
and;

- Metere rout par efcuelles, (As we fay) to throw the
bonfe out at windowes,


~ Quis’artend al efcuelle d’ autruy il difnefouvent


waits for another mans
Efcuellée:£ 4 dish fullof. Ine
Excuelles, Hipwort Vall peniewort, Ladies nauelsan
Ficucllettesé a ttle dish, 5


bien tard : Prov. Tis long before bee bee ferued ‘that ‘


Efcueuil: m.d kind of Oake wbofe acornes ‘ae good |


Et SC


4 4 eaten; fome hold it tobe, the barren Scarler
lake,


Efater. as Efcuyer ; An Efquier,érc.
erat aig as PE
ant. Smarting, itching, netling, flinging.
— : m.éc :f. Hipped or whofe bip, or thigh is put
‘out of iaynt.
Efcuisser. To bip ; to put the bip,or thigh out of ioynt.
Efculé:m. ée: £ Whoft taile is burft, bcele troden


downe,
Efculée :£..4 dish fallof
Efculer, To burft the taile of.
vne aiguille, To breake a needles eye,
Efcules ee To tyvead bis shoves sre ti atthe
eles.


Efcume : f. Scumme,droffe, foame, froth.
en de Mar The refüfè, or droffe of yron ;
imi ‘
Ef Plomb, Lead-foame,comes by cleere wa-
ei upon hot lead, prefently after it hath beene
melted.
Efcume de fel. Looke Sel,


Là La


Cume : m.ce : f. Scummed,or skimmed:refined,e.
fied; cleaned in thoutroard parts; alfo, ftowred, as
the fea by a pyrat ec.


cement: m.A foaming; alfo,a fcumming,or skim


ming; alfo, araunging , rouing; alfo , afcowring of
thefeas, -

Efcumer. To foame, or yeeld a frothie flauer ; to gather
vntoa froth, or {cumme ; alfo,to skimme,or clagatie, li-
quor ;to refine,or take off the (ottward) M;
alfa,to raunge,roue,deale at randome :wbence :

ner la mer.Tofèowre,as a fleet of warlike ships,
the fea ; to play the pyratsto vf piracic.
umeur :m. (Is properly)a/cummer, or skimmer of li
quor ; alfo (lee properly, but more commonly) a pirate,
or a rouer at fea.
cumeux : m: eufe :f. Foamie, frothie, filthie,

Efcumier: m.ere : € Of foame,or froth ; wherupon fème
Poets tearme Venus, fille e{cumiere, becanfe shee is
fained 10 bane beene bred of the [ea-foame,
cumoOir : m.Aféummer.

Eicumpke if. oe M à
curage:m, Afcowring; cleanfing ; feying.

Escuré; m.ée: f. Scowred; cleanfid 3 eyed.

ie Tofcowre ; fey, rinfe, cleanfe, or make cleane :


Efcureur. 4s Efcurieu; À Squirrell ; alfo; a fèowrer,
cleanfer; feyer. |

Efcurie : f.as Efcuyrie,
curieu: m. A/quirell.

Efcurs. The little fallade bearb called, Cines, or Chi
ues. so Mass - :

Efcuffon: m, A Scutcheonsa finall targuet,or fhielé, at
So, the knop in the presi timber-vault where the
ends of the courbed poafts doe meete; alfo the bud of a
tree,cut off with part of tbe barke,in forme of an ordi
narie {cutcheon,and hence. Riss
Enter en efeuffon,To lodge that budin the bark ofa
tree byan incifion made thereinto of the forme of aT,


or by any otber hole apt to receane it ; the clefts, and
pac therof afterwards clofed up with wax,
or clay.


cuffonnable : com. Fit to be ed. ‘
pee : “A be: it. pe with


= {cutcheonor fhield. ’ =
icseHensicxias ait: en cf 1; alfe, to defend, :
er coner with a (cutcheon, or fhield. vs 14


Efuyer: |


a


(Te Ei, oT AT PER SUR ae eS ee ta ae


.

À
J
+
#


| _ > Be 7


É SF


Efcuyer : m.An Efquire,or Squires alfa,pe that beares
an Err ant knights launce & fhield ; alfo, an Vfher, ov
Sewer ; alfo, the falfe bud of a Vine; alfo, a yong male.
deere which ordraarily,keeps an old one company; alfo,
a kind of yellow, and bard-rinded Peare.

Eftuyer de Cuifine. The clarke of a kitchin.
Efcuyer d’ Efcuyrie. 4 querrie,in a Princes Stable ;
the gentleman of a lords borfe.

cuyer trenchant.4 carmer,or, Squire of the mouth,
alfa a Tafter ; (for be that carues to a Prince,euer tafis
of what be carues, before his mafter touch it.)
Le grand Efcuyer de France. The mafler of the
boïfe ; who befides bis autboritie oner all th Officers
of the kings lables bath alfo(which bere belongs to tbe
Earle marfball ) LurifliGtion ouer heralds, and pur fin
uants ; In old time the great mafler,or fleward of tbe
Kings boufe , was alfo called thus.
Peu peut bailler à fon Efcuyer qui fon coufteau
lefche : Prov, He that bath but little for bimfelfe bath
not much for big man. à
Pour l'amour du Chevalier baife la Dame l'efcuy-
er: Pro. (wherein bis worfhip 5,ofien, but little be.
holden to ber Ladiefbip.)

Efcuyere: f A woman-efquire; a Gentlewoman that
attends on a knight as his Efquire. :

Efcuyrie : f. The flable ofa Prince,or nobleman; alfo,a
Querry-fbip or the dueties or offices belonging there-

to; alfi(in old authors) a Squires place ; or,the digni-
tie,title,or eflate of an Efquire.

Efdenter. as Edenter,

Esfarouché: m.ée:f. Frighted, feared, frightened,
feared away ; alfo,tamed, reclaimed, made gentle, in-
ward,or traflable, 3

Esfaroucher. To fright, (care, frighten, affray, feare a-
way ; alfo,to fame, winne,veclaime make gentle,trac-
table,inward.

Esfilé. as Effilé,

Esflanqué : m. ée:f. Swayed in the backe ; alfo,leane,
meager,gaunt tbinne-flanked,or fhrunke inthe flanke ,
that bath no bellie at all; SY,
Esflanqué en cheval de poftillon, As lanke as a
poft-horse. SPELL


meager gaunt thinne- flanked,fmall-bellied.
Esflorer. To depriue of flower, or of flowers; Looke Ef-


fleurer.
Fsfoiré: m.ée : f, Bedunged, bemired,berayed.
Esfrontément. # Efrontément; Im, =
Esgail: m. 4 fine morning.froft, that fhines like glaffe.
Efoal.as Egual; Equall,euen,leuell,
FE Ondes font al efgal. Plaine, finooth;calme.
Efgaler.us Egualer. “aah ois
Esgallé: m, ée: £Equalled,matched,enened,leuelled.
Esgallement. Equally,euenly,alikematchably,
Esgaller. Toequall,match ; leuell, euen.


01 account ginensof.
i ons,& rapports : 4:


Uspbedient. |


Esflanquer. To fivay in the backe ; or, to make leane,


rd :m. Kefpeét,becd,regard, obferuation; aduife-
à spas reckoning account ; alfo,a report
| Bfpards. font gens expers , & cognoifants à faire


8 eftesgaré de;&c.Hegs wandered or firai-
es or digreffes, from be is out of the wa;
bouche, (Ofa berft)not fubieét to the bi


E SG. Re


effing from; alfo, a feattering, difperfing,miflaying.
Esgarement en Javeué. A flaring, gafiline(/e, ama~
xednelfe of lockeser,an vmcertaine fafhien of gaxing up
Eien cone por
(garer. To ftatter, difperfe, miflay.
s Efgarer. To des scsi ol roue, to fie ont,
fivarue,or digreffe from,to runne out of tbe bigh way.
argaté de crier.who/e throat is almeft bur for wel
nigh rimen with crying.
Eigivomnt :m, ée: £.Tro dden downe,as a fhooe at the
ele.


Efgaronner vn foulicr. To tread a fhooe downe at the


eele.
Efyarouillé. yeux efgarouillez, wide-flaring,or glo-
TiNG,eyes.
sig yee Toreioyce; to be iocond,merrie,glad; to be
glee,
s'Efgayer. To fport , make merrie,be gamefome ; 10 skip,
‘leape,or play,as duckes, or ffbsin the water. :
Fe zm. €c:f. Ploughed,or broken up, as land for
lowes,
Esgerer. To plough, or breake up land for fallowes.
Es jer: m. The Eglaatine, fweet Brier , Hep-tree,
wild Role-trce.
fglantier odorant. The fiveet Brier.
ulise : f. as Eglife ; 4 Church.


:


Esgommé: m.ée : £.Vngummed, whofe gummme is taken


ommer. To ungumme; to take away the gumme


‘om.
Esgorgé: m. ée: f. whofé throat is cut.
Esgorgement. The cutting of a tbroat ; alfoya whirle-
poole, or fwallowing abifinesor gulfe.
Esgorger. To cut the throat of. 4
Esgorpeté : mée:f. whofe throat is cut ; alfo, bare-
neckt; bare or open breafied; or wearing a verie low,
or no,coller to bis fhirt, doublet, ierkin,érc.
Efgorgeter.as Efgorger; Alfo,to goe bare-neckt open-
brefled ; or to fuuld downe the coller of a garment,
thereby to bare,or difcouer the neckesor bofome.
Efgofillé: m.ée:. whofe throat is cut. :
Esgofillement:m. A throat-cutting. .
Esgofiller. To cut the throat of.
Esgofle: f. 4 re a, grt à
Esgoii¢ : m.ée: f. Cloyed. fa led, ouer full, or fill vnta
sacietie. t f
Efgouér. To be cloyed, faded,ouer full 3 to eat ~ fe
cietie, ; F
Efgoufler. To unbuske ; to pill, or fhale busked fruits.
Esgouft : m. as Efgout.
Esgout:m. drop,or dropping,as of water from a boufe
ote ; alfo, a little finke, channell, or gutter to void


filth by. |
sa Fevrier vaut efgout de fumier : Pro.Look
umier.
Efgouté : m.ée :f. Drained,dried , foaked of moifiure,
by little and little, ae
outement: m. A draining by dropping. |
ter. To draine,or make drie by little and little; to
. leane neuer a dropin. =~ TETE | el
:- Goutte Aigoutre la mer s’ efpoute: Prov. The fea
= by acontinuall draining will grow drie.…. _
E out Be trenton pup by drops.
À enon mad gullet,il which wa-
ES lee little more then drap. :
fpoutoir: m. 4 ane bal ale, or low guiter
* madairie,kitchen,&rc.


Efgrailley. Te oaleser firaddle with the forge


‘ Originaltrom
Fete ORIO STAFEUNIVERSITY


raie asEfgrener


| __ way from; or as Defgrafé,
EG aphes. Ta loofespil afinder sr pull away fom; or
elgrafer.

Elgraphigner. as Efgratigner.

Esgratigné: m.ée:f, Scratched, fèraped,rent,or torne
with the nailes,

Esgratignement: “M. A {oratching, feraping, tearing
with the nailes.


Esgratigacr. To ferape, ferateh,yend,or teare with the


Laue gneur : m. A feraper,or feratcher,
sgratigneure : fas Efgra gratignement ; Aifo,a feratch,
rend 307 teave,with the nailes.

Esgrené: m. ée : f. Ready, barren, ficrile, without
corne ; alfo,vagrained unfeeded ; deprinedyas an busk
ofit feed, an eare of it corae or graine.

Esgrener.: Tofhake corne out of it eare ; peafe,or beanes
Out of their husks; to depriue,or make barren of corne;
to. vnfeed,or take the feed out of.

Esgrette, as Aigrerte.

Esgrugé : m.ée:£ Grated Small; alfo,crumbled crum-

j wed, or broken i tatofmall peeces.

_ Esgrugeoir: m. The ttle round grater of lattin,thats
ad in a cafe of the fame, and vfèd moft for the Nut-


Esgniger. To grate fall; alfo,tocrumbleor. breake ‘un=


Va crummes à
Esgeumé : : m.éc: £Uncluflered ; uncluttered; haken,
ur kak fromi it clufter.
Efgrum runclé as Efgr A ke
er: To vnclufier, or unclutter; to Or take
cea things that hang looffe together.
ras To pluck kgrapes from shew clufter,
uner. Tocrumme, crumble, reat final
ire dn equalling, matebing, dose na.
king like
| Esguale, &, Efgualer. seeke Egualé,8 Egualer.
Espue : A leaneill- -fauoured,carrion mare.
Esgueré. la bouche esguerée. See Elgaré.
‘Sguerer. as Efgarer. -
ueulé : méé:f. Gorged ; whofe threat is eut, or
mouth barf
Esgueuler.To gorgestoc cut the moyen burftthe mouth


sou de ie. Te his mod veer
exclaiming, 2 00 ni


bes a Lauer, er
uille:f. A needle; alfa; a fina ffhcaled,a Horne-
, Smacot- fs, Geaeefip, Piper-fies =


per
Esauillé: m.ée:f Of a needle, full of n
vith the ap pricked with needles,


‘mie i con bits |


ps rx rons

uilictte ac chien. course leai| erne point, |

Bes illetres de Ne te) è
RE vid:


Ne be able to vfé bis
= 4 not be able owne
à be ne ‘ct |


m.ée:f. Crummed crumbled, broken fall, |


ae | fein eet ye cern mb à
Esgraphé :mée:f, Li, pad fade, pale:


| sstrar parties codpeece-point.)

guillette. To be madde after a P. to run
DT doo after ber leacherie, like afalt bitch; to
"play the common wboore ; (tn old. time common wen-
ches were enioyned 10 weare a on one of their


point
hereby to di thofe th
En A ao iftinguifh them from thofe t at


rt Antedle-maker,
?m. A pricke,a goad,a fling, a urres a pro-
LOCATION; any bin bite Us ge en or “vrgeth
ard; 3 aYfo,an inward griefé.pinch,or biting burt.
ons. Little fakes beaded with yron, and fluck
into the ground, the galling of horfemen.
De petit eff poinét on bien grande afneffe :
Prov. A little goad can pricke a great Affe.
as oe bg recule, deux fois fe poind :
TOY. d
Tel afne tel efg ion : : Prov, Looke Afne,
Efguillonné : me £Pricked, 5 pinched; vexed;
urged, incenfed, pronoked forward.
buillonnement: m. A pricking, Stinging ; pinching;
Urging incenfing , forwar.
guillonner. To 'pricke, ling ; pinch; vex; urgeseeges
force prouoke incite infligate, d,
Esguillonneur : m. A pricker, flinger; vrger, incen-
er,pronoker, infligater. 1
Espulllonnente:
pricketh forward,
Esguisé : m, é¢:f, wWhetted, fharpened, whereon 4 good
edge is fet.
Ene To whet, fharpen, fet an edge on.
euifeut :m. 4 A foarpener,or wheter of blades,
Fe hanché : mée:£. Whofe bi, or bañch is out of ioynt,
hancher. To put a hanch, or bip out of toynt.
bancheuré :f. 4 putting of the bip, or banch out of


ET :m, ée: f.Weeded.
erbement : m, A weeding; a ridding of weeds, a
a ucking vp of | pales 1,07 weeds,
er. To weed; rid of: weeds ; 3 plucke vp the wap, 3
y er na
Eshonté : m. 6e :f.Shamelefe impudent, brafen-faced,
ouer-bold, whom notbing can put out of countenance.
- Os eshonté, The forehead bone, fo called by fome,
amen M, es » pe 9) Ui
frame price efñeffe |
Bahontén Shien amele


shonter.70 be rs Cu

a brafe C;10 he iio 1
Bajeté mide ier f Eieéted je oa TR eS
viisjerren fF a or ja ie, cu, dl
eh mtb i aia
Hep in, 122728 &


fi She that moneth,iacenfeth, vrgeth,


rea Tove
glee
Eo ay mirth, elec, reise glad


ee a Gladfome, frolicke, iocond,reidycing pan


| eat ork long, rake bis leapare,ofe


es ; To) ë
byte f pe rar deanfed dopref.


mr ae, ee ee off onpid fable HAE or


‘from trees.


meee i Tinton ew baie | +g


oy


ek eo ae
= ere
< ewes oe Se a


ce, ss. qu a i =


ifsant, Prumit ping,or plucking off wnpro-
de. An engine wherewith great flones ave lifted


AA

\ oe.
Eflancant.Violently launching. foooting,burling ,throw-
| ing, tbruii ing forward ; firetching out.

_. |. sBflangant. Furioufly leaping, running, fetting, or


“4 Re. ei £ (Violently,or with an out-ffrerched
| bodie) leaped,girded, skipped, launched; put, pufbed,
thinit on,or forward ; throwne ,caft,burled, flung, dar-
ted, {hot out,or from ; alfo, firetched vp, or out; alfo,
| “gaunt,lanke, lone,thinne or leane bodied ; [irag-like,
right like a Gangrell, 5 4
ancement : m. A violent leaping. launching, skip-
ping ; putting, pufhing,tbrufling on,vp,out,or fr ward;
hurling, throwing, darting, {hooting out, er fiom; a
retching,or firetching out of the bodic in any of thofe
aétions; alfo,as Elancement; alfo,a flitch, or pricking
inthe bodie, caufed by an Impoflume,Plurefie, oc.
Eflancement de l'efprit. Am vaguietneffe ; a dif-
quieting,or flirring up of paffions; an out-ierting of the


ke fpirit,a fudden motion of the mind, or tranSportation
i. of thoughts.

2 Eflancer. (Violently, or with an out-firetcht bodie) te

“fe thiuft put.pufb,vp, forward,on, or upon ; alfo (and in
Er: the fame maine burle, theme art fhoot

Ba.” j ” out,or from ; alfo,to firetch out,as | e, inany of
Dr thefe aétions ; alfo.as Elancer. .


Eslancer vn cerf, Torom/é a Stag.
~~ Eflancer vn cheval. Suddenly to thrujt a borfe for-
+ PRE À  -wardwitbthejpurre rc.
LEE  s’Eslancer. Violently,or fuddenly to leape, skip, iert,
TE gird.launch forward,
= : s'Eflancer fur vn ennemy. To make firioufy to-
wards bim, fet fiercely vpon bim; leape, or flie, at bis


ace.
Eslangouré. as Eflangoré,
Eflangui : mie: £ Languifhed,in languifhment, or fal-
__ len into languifhment.
-Eflans:m. A firetching out, or ierting vp, or thrufling
forward, of the bodie prepared unto a violent aétion or
motion,as leaping, hurling, darting @rc; hence alfo, a-
7 linelieviolent, or fudden motion,be it leap thipert,
~~ thrufi,or firetch ; alfi,the wild, and difordered pre[-
_ fing forward of a doing borfe. 3
re :f. Dilated, widened, inlarged, greate-
, increased; alfo, freed, inlarged , releafèd ; fet
is vel 3 alfo, given largely, dealt frankly, beflowed
ountifuly.
Efl ar. To dilate,inlarge,widen,greaten,increafe ; al-
© fo, to fiee, fet at large, gine libertie, or {cope vnto;
ao, to gine largely, beflow frankly, deale bountifully.
“ gEslarger en la mer. To get fea-roome , or goe
roomeward to fea to get, put, or make out into the


maine.

per iy phy jet oe
x 3 a 0, freein elting at arge, or at isbertie
Jorn > dealt, | 6 0


ment: m, An inlarging, dilating, widening ;


Psa ficeing 5a giningof ope ent, or fling at
Abate i i rae liberall giuing, dealing, be- |


de Ja prunelle, An imperfeéi
be. all


bigger then sey be.


Diliting, inlarging, widening, increas
beeing lage, frank
at togrow lafiiesiboantie,bigh-mind


Dr Sight: off
Esleveur : m. A svaifer, lifter, mounter ,beauer vp; an


Defaillir au jour de fon eflargiffement. To make
_ default on the day of bis apparance (whereto be was


ound.)
Eflavé: m.ée:f.Hoificued, bedeawed, wafhed ouer;
wefhie desvie; wofhed away.
Eflaver. To moifien , bedeaw , wafh exer; wafha-


Way. Fr
Eflay: m. A Careere, or courfe on borfebacke ; (an old
d. {


word.)

Efe. as Aile.

Esleétion: fi Az eleéticn choice pr chu fing; alfo, an E-
leétion; the feat, or circuit of an Efleu; a Towne, or
Dinifion (whereof there be diversia each Genervalitie)
witbin which a certaine number cf Efleus doe exercife
their turifdiétion.

fleus: m. Generall Affeffors of ee 307 Ma-
gifirates, who,when any Aide , Subfidie, or: lmpofiti-
ons to bee leuied, rate, at a certaine fumme, euerie
Parifh,and Village of the Eleétion,or Diuifion where-
in they vefide; and accordingly fend their warrants
unto the particular Officers , or chiefe inhabitants
thereof, fer the present gathering of what they banera-
ted : They alfo take notice of the vaifing, and main-
tenance of publicke bankes, and caufeyes; and of col-
lettions of money for the walling, or fortification of
Townes; and (as Iudges) of all aétiens (whether ciuile,
or criminall) that concerne , or come of, any of thefé
watters. At firft, when the Aides were not leuicd
but intime of warre , nor then without confent of the
people, they chofe two Affefors in euerie Townefhip,
and from that choyce gaue them this name , which
they beld no longer then duiing the lenie: But afier

» | that they grew ordinarie , and to be impofed at the
pleajure of the Prince, the Efleus changing their Mai-
fiers became bis officers,e> officers during their lines ;
yet receine they fill their wages of the people,» fome-
times large Efpices to boot : Since then they haue
increafed both in number, and authoritie , fomuch; |
that they ave now become verie burdenfome unto. the-
whole countrey.\ : Es ete fe

Efleu: m. eué: f Elected; chofen, culled, picked |


out. |

Eflevable : com. Fit to be eleuated, raifed, aduanced';
reared,bred brought up. 3

Eflevation: f. An elenation; or as Eflevement; alfa,
a rebellion,commotion,or vprifing of people, °°

evé:m.ée:f. Elenated, bX lifted,houenvp;ad= |

sanced;extolled, promoted; alfo, rifèn, fivollen, puffed |
Up, fironted out; bolt upright; aljo,bigh, loftie, bautie,.
floutsalfo,beaped,or piled on; aljoreared,bred,bronght


Up.
Eslevement:m. A lifting, raifing, beaning ups ad-
uancing,extalling, promoting; alfo,a mounting, rifing,
fwelling, puffing vp, firouting out; alfo,a rearmgsbree-
_dingaor bringingrp. "0" "0
E agp: elenate, lift, as te up, aduance on
© high; extoll, promote ; alfo, tot pile, or pi
£ one thing Die af, A +
_ sEslever. To rife, mount, firell, puffe: ' from jh “out;
a ie rnd, refi |


à aduancer 3 apiler ups a rearersbrecder bringervp
Esleveur. Elenating, bi rne p: and bences


: - Mufcle -esleveur. Li : vist ft |
Esleveure :f. A raifing ; ora rearing; alo;arifing.er


Swelling


“ Lt 1
Sot OO STARE UNIVERSITY


Efnerillonnant. watching narrowly ; obferuing with
‘a quick eye, Re

acrillonné :m. ge: £ Linelie, quicke, (right fill;
gras Emerillonné. LE NE

ierillonner.Looke Emerillonner.

tveillable : com. Harwelôus admirable miracu-

lous, wonder ful much to be wonderedat.

inérveillé. Maruelled, wondered.

Éfinervei t:m. A marvelling, wondering ; ad.
miration,admiring; a gaxing at.

Efmerveiller. To make to wonder admire, or maruell
at ; to breed affomifhment, or admiration in.
S’efmerveiller. To wonder ynaruell,admire ; alfo, to
lodke, or gaxe at with aflenifhment. “

Efmery: m. AnEmtod , or Emerill flone ; ufed by 1u-

__tllers, Lapidaries ,Glafors, ec. "7


fwelling vp in eight; an imbofing or oie 3al-
Lf, od lal ad buach ; a thing rifèn, fwollen, or
__ puffed up. a La
Es gible: com. Eligible; wortbie, fit, or like, to be e-
lected ; in election, :
Eslingé: mh. ée: f. Slender, lanke.
Eslire. To choofe,clect,cull,pick out. 3;
Eslite: £. A choice,eleétion, picking out. +
Gens d'eflite ; mots d'eflite. Choice people, quaint
termes ; men,or words, of the better fort. * 3
oché: m.ée : £. Shaken , wagged,iogged ; looffedin
thé ioynt. CT
Eslochernent : m, 4 Shaking or loofening,as of a ioint.
Eslocher, To fhake, wag, iog, waner ; 10 loofe in the
soya, ‘


Esloigné;ou Esloingné : m.ée:fRemooued, fent,/et,


put, banifhed, or driuen, farre away, Efnefché: m. €¢:  Smuffed, Kets
Faire la sn au plus esloigné. To yeald but a finall | Efinefchet.7o /auffe alight. es


part, allot a poore {hare, unto. —
Esloignement, ouesloingnement. 4 remoouing,or
conieying away; a baaifinng froma putting, or fetting
arre of:
| Edoiner: ou csloingner.To remooue,banifh, driue,
N° fet, put, farre away; to keepé aloof, to fend a great
\]  awayfrom. 1!
_ Sesloigner de. To leañe,abandon, forfake; to depart,
“Or get him farre from. :
Eslourdement : m. 4 dulling,or dulneffe; an aftonifh-
ing,amaxing ; a dixzines, an amazement, L
Eslourdie Ts ill, blunt, make beauie,(ortify, lumpifh ;
510 aftonifh, dixxe,amaxe.
Seclowrdic 2e ye dull, grow fottifh, proue beauie
beaded ; alfo,to be amaxed,aftonied,drxxed. d
Esluder. To deceiue, mock, feoffe at ; to dallie with ; te
‘auoid, or fhift off with words. eer
Effnail: m.Ammell,or enammell ; (made of ezend
: Berets or Chaulx metalique ; for b Looke
Ulx.) ;
Efimail de Venife. A kind of blacke enammell made
at Venice.
Effnaillé: m. ée: f.. Enammelled,


Efineu : m, ewé: £ Mowed,or Rirred up ; excited, incia
__ ted, incouraged, prouoked, fet on; pricked, put, vrged,
or egged, forward; alfo,wageed or [haken up & down,
Efineut : m. The mute, or dropping of a bird.
Efmeute: f. A tumult irre, uprore,commotion, infler~
rection, or rifing of people ; a broyle, riot, (edition, bur-
ty-burly, old coyle; alfo, a prinate motion, or fuddain
en unto a thing.
meute de chiens. A kennel of hounds that be much
of a fixe, and color : See Meute.
Efmeuti. Müted, dropped ; purged.
Efineutir.To mute, or drop,as birds doe ; bence, alfo, to
pus any way.
Efiniable : com, Crummable, crumblable.
Efinié m.ée: f. Crummed, crumbled; mouldred'; bro-
ken into final peeces,
iér. To crum,crumble,breake into[mall péeces.
S'efinier.Tofall into fmallpeeces; to moulder away.
Efiniettement: m. 4 crumming, crumbling, breaking
. into finall peeces. x
Efinieure :£. 4 crumming, crumbling ; mouldering.
Efininage:m . 4 meafure in fome parts of Burgundie,
conteyning about balfe a bufhell.


Efmailler. To enammell. al :m.Anotber meafure ; being the balfe of the Bi-

| Efmmailleur:m.Aaenammeller, — - ot. = .
Efmaillure: € An enammelling. Efininotte :f. Ameafüre of about ij Burgonian bufhels.
Efimañé : as Emané. ~' Efinoéllé : m. ée :€ without marrow ; ber eaned of pith;
Efinaner.seeke Emaner. depriued of marrow, :
Efinarmelé: m.ée : £. Crufled, croofed, or burft in éller.To deprive of marrow, to pick marrow out of


bones, pith ont of trees ; to bereaue of |lrengib,
jérionne :m, éc: f.Stumped,cut off at the flump;
made a flump of. ; :
Efinoignonner, To flump; to cut off at the lump or
make a flump of-
Efinonétoires. Looke Emon@boire,
nde real, Ofmondroyall, male fearne.
Efmondé : m. ée : £. (leanfed , purged , cleered, made
cleane picked ; pruned ; weeded (by band.) '
ement : m.A cleanfing, purging,cleering ; or
a cleane ; a picking ; pruning ; weeding ( by


ba Fe
Efinonder.To cleanfe,purge,cleeve make cleanesto pick


j Bin ler. To serene, ere peeces.
ay as Efmoy. Thougbt,care. >
vElinayet.7 be fad, penfive,affonyed, carefull; to take
Wee . —

Efine LE ayme, or leuell taken; alfo,a purpofé,inten.
tion, determination. à
Efmenuifé: m. ée: f. Made finall, broken or beaten
into little peëces. PINS
Effinenuïifèr. To breake, or beate into fimall peeces ; to

… makefiiall ; or, as Efmier. 4:
Efimer. To ayme,or leuell at ;t0 make an offer to firike,
cre “its to purpofe,deter mine, intend.


le: f. An emerauld. (as Corne;) to prune (as trees ;) alfo,to weed (by band)
auldin :m.ine :f Likean emerald,belonging to | or pull vp weeds (with the bands}
anemerauld, ‘ey ES ndeur: m. A cleanfer , purger, cléerer | maker
Efneril sm. An Emrod, or Emerill flome, © cleane ; a picker (of Corne); a pruner (of trees) a wees .
on: m.The hawk termed a marlin; alfoya fnall | der à.


1 ERA 1h,
A € “
VS aa


peece ce about the fixe of a Robinet. ” Efinont, a Eimeut. (4nd word.) ead |
I un ON. As merrie as 4 mar+ : £ Touch-powder ; alfa, a tickling ; alfo;the
Be" NS ceil Sessa | ordure that cleanes to an vmpipe iped , Le irfe.
: 9 RATE i pppoe


3+ NGadiied.a 21


Bis M


V7.


ESP


Efinorcellé :h.ée:f. Peeceméaled;beaten, or pulled,in-
tofmall peeces,

Esmotcellét.To peecemedle; 19 beat in peeces,or break
into finall mor cells.

Efinotelé: m. ée: f. #hbfe clods aré broken; alfo, con
Sumed,or eaten,

Eimoteler. as Efmotter ; Aljo,to eat,or confume.

Efmotion : f. An emotion commotion, fudden,or turbu-
lent flirring ; an agitation of the [pirit, violent motion
of the thoughts vehement inclination of the mind,

Efmotter. To beats the clods of a plowed land,

Efmoucé: m.ée :f. Dulled blunted,

Efmoucer. To dull,blunt,or take away the edge of.

Efinouchail : m, as Efmouchoir. _

Efinouché: m. éc : f. Rid of flies.

Efmouche-lourdaut. 4 cheater, guller, conicatcher,
foifling companion, a craftie flattering knane; a de-
ceiuer of fimple,or ftifh people.

Efmoucher. Torid ofor drine away, flies.

Esmoucheté. Flie-blowne ; alfo,pinked,or fet with lite
tle tufis.

Efinouchette:£ The round tuft, or head of bearbes,
wherein their feed is contained,

Des Esmouchettes. A paire of fnuffers..

Efinouchoir : m.4 flap; or fan to drine away flies.

Effnoüellé. as Efmoëlle,

Efinoulage: m. A gi Hoy hee: Sharpening of.

Efmouldre Togr

Efinoulendier: m. 4 Fu a

Ef nota :m.A À poet better, fharpatr of blades.

Eimoulu: m.ué: Whetted, fharpened, ground, that
hath anedge fet onit.

“A fer efinoulu. Vielently,vebemently, throughly, in
fall earneft , 10 the proof , without boording, with all
extremilit.

Gentilhomme frais effnoulu. À gentleman newly
forged; a gentleman of the firft bead.

Efinoulure: £4 grindingmbetting foarpening,e gining
of an edge vat

Efinoufle: hay sf. Rid,or bared of moffe.

Efinoufler.Torid of moffe,to plucke the moffe from.

Efinguvemnent :m, A mouing,or flirring up ; an exci-
| ting,inciting urging, pr omoking unto; alfo, a refines ae
© gitation ; exercife ; wagging,or king up ec downe.

Esmouveur: m.A mouer,or fisrrer 0p; an exciter inci-
ter,iacourager prowoker , fetter on; a picker,purter,eg~
ger,or urger forward,

Esmouvoir. To mone, or flirre up; to agitate; excite,
incite, incourage,prouoke, fet on ; to pricke,put, vrge,

. or egge, forward; alfo,to waz,or foake up and downe,

Efinoy:m.Carke, care, thought, vor peo


finenelfe.
he er de, Earneftly 10 aske,or enquite,of.
ers m, €€ : € Rid or cleered of, cleanfed or
ae mdead,broken,withered 1650
smundement. as Efmondement; A pruniin
ndet. To cleanfe ;to prune, se au,


re


. as Efmeutir ; To mule;or mow


= tiffement. 4s Efineut ; ne. Geer f
À SA td ofm eafure;asEmine. "
‘4 Le mc a Ene ri nofeleffe ; ne |


rit! mew: beréaue of fiteng

t-Oyfeaux efors. Wilde id, or ill-mand hustle
apt, when they are a-wing, 10 take a toy,6r 10 fic their
Countrey.


Bipace: £. A fpace, or diflance,a refit ,panfe,interme-


pad: f. A broad fhort fivor
Era m. Afhert hs ied fivord,
Fe ler tm. A Spaniel.
ol: m. A Spaniard ; alfo,a Spaniel,
Ps fu des Efpa: pane A bot fcorching Sunne.
Vn Efpagnol fans lefuite eft vne perdris fans o-
range : oa ; Spaniard without a fefuite is (wee
fe [ay) cheefe without muflard.
fpagn agnol: m. ole :f Spanish, of Spaine,

{pee Efpaunole. 4 Rapier,or Tucke.
Efpagnolade : f. A Spanifb tricke,blow,bob.
Espagnole. Al Efpagnole. After the Spanish maner,

bion,bumor,

ayer AP ‘Efpagnole. To give knockes ia flead of

coine ; or to viftc {uch as be should requite; ( a phrafe
devi by fome Dutchman.)
Eipag aonole: :m,€e:£ Spaniolized; made Spanish, or
+ as ike.
orps bien aiid A bodie made flender.
Efpagnolette A aioe as of wire in workes
Eipag! ouer with fil
Efpagnolifer. ze iy the Spaniard ; 10 fpeake, or doe
Er 4 Spaniard,
Efpagntir Hag court ; «s Muguetter,
lier. Looke Efpällier.
Espa Thicke; seche Efpez.
Esbaitf ant. Thicken ening
Espaix : m. Thickne(fe, clofene(fe denfitie,gr offeneffe
Espalé : m. ée : f.Scattered,caft, or (pred abroad, with
a sheuell,
Efpaler.To (catter,cafi,or fpread,abroad with a shouell.
Espalier : m. He that rowes with she firft oare in a gal-
lie : alfo,as Efpallier.
Efpaller. as Efpaler. —_-
allier: m. 42 bedge-row of findrie Puit trees fet ,
clofe pose, their bou eagles interlaced one within a-
nother, and held in with flakes , railes, or pales ; al-
fo, a buttre(fe, shore-poft, or shouldering peece (ine Ar-
chitetture.)
Eipahns: m, ce:f. Caulked , or pitched oner, as a
ship.
Efpame : m. The crampe.
Espame: m. ée : f. infebled, Prewk made Jeane,
as with fafling; allo, troubled with a crampe , or con~
vulfion, falleninto a fwoond,
Efpamer. To a i make leant, a with faf-
ERs pete cate LS fly bh
pampe. rofes efpampees. ich be ovne,.. |.
ES ré;m.€e: papées avine, def
sae va
rement : in. The pruning of 4 a vine
la vigne. To prune a vine; en
Deli shoots thei'eof.
Elan m. À


éc:f. Squati d,fpille or
moe ah ered, [pi nin por.


a | diforder.
Tene eon apenas a eae m. À difèrdered e fauatte-
4 peer. ig, sheeding,or powring

x i ae Hi, sheed.or, powre ont dif

“ns 07 in

er de Pale Té pill water; alfo,to pif.
bb: : com, robe be ee. ed
out. À "Eipande.
Origina i from
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.


aly MTL


ESP


Espandement : m. feeding, (pilling, powring out, a
Spreading dilate pane
Espandre. Tofheed, (pill, pose out ; to Spread, caf, ov
Scatter abroadin great abundance.
s'efpandre.To fpread,run abroadsouer flow,dilate,in-
creafe ; extend it felfe.
Espandu:m, ué: f. Shed, fpilled, powred out ;{pred,
caftjor fcattered abroad ; dilated, largely extended.
Ee : m. je: f. Blowen; fpred abroad ; firetched, dif
€


PATES

Espanir. To blnw, or fpread, as a blooming Rofe, or any
other flower,in the height of it flourifhing ; alfo,to dif
play, ftretch,or fpread out.

Espanité. as Efpavité, |

Espanoui:m. ie :f. Blowen, difplayed, [pred out.

Espanouir..as Efpanir,

Espanouiflement :m.A blowing,or blooming of flow-

AUS ener difplaying.
Espapilloté: m. ée:£ Befhangled; befpatled , befpot-


ted.

Espapilloter. To befpangle ; befpot,befpatle.

Espatvet :m. A kind of thicke persia pulfe in Dau-
phiné, the bay whereof is very good for cattell, and the
feed for pulleyn; tis newly fowen euery fourth yeare.

Esparcete.as Parietaire. Pellitorie of the wall.

Esparcetiere : f.4 plot,or clofe thats fowed with Efpar-
cet. ‘ <

Be <i : 10. A feattering, fprinkling, difperfing,

iffpation.

Espartire. Tofcatter, difperfe, fpread abroad, to difi-
nt ok into many peeces, to caft beere and
there.

Efparer. To fling, or yerke out with the becles,as a borfè
in a high manage.

Le ciel commence s'efparer. The skie begins to
breake; or to fcatter, or throw afunder the cleudes
that ouercaft it. >>

arges. Sparagus.

argnant, Hard, neere , warie,thriftie, féantie, fa-
ning, frugall, paring niggardlie, fomewhat miferable.

Esparone:£ Thrift, frugalitie, [aning, fparing, wari-
nefieneerenelfe,parcimonic, goed husbandriey alfo,a
firait,compendiows,or (cantie courfe of proceeding; al-
fo,the Treafurie or Exchequer of a Prince; alfo,ground
reférued,by particular men,onely for pafture,

. Taillé d espargne. Cut with {paring worke ; the in-
cutting being filled with enamel and the work fet ont,


or appearing 2 gold, dc.

Elpargné : mah Spr d, busbanded: refèr-
we ible fnrborne ; alfo, contrined,cut,ov made
out of, ae OSS |

Espargner. To pare, faut, husband ; forgiue, forbeare
EF beare ee contrine,make,or ré of. :
Sans eff rne Roy tly Roc. Without mercie,
or refpect of perfons ; with as little fauour to one as to
another ; indifferently,or alike feuerely toall.
Bons mots n’ pa np oe am ge
Ce que chicheefpatgne, large id: Pro, That
which a niggard faues bis heive A: or that
which one pares another [pends. ‘

3 Marchandifer’ efpargne nuls: Provaware will de-
 Ceine any bodie; [pares no bodie. eta
Qui bien gaigne, & bien e le devient tan-

riche : Prov. He that gets and faues ,much;grows


Esparpillé : m.ée :£ Scattered difperfèd,difparkledsal.


Esparp


uicklyrich. D ~ J
Espargoutte: The bearbe Feuerfew , Fedderfiro,

i nt, Motber-wort, HO |
espargoutte.Starwort, Sharewert,Cudwort.


E S$ Pp


So,toufed difordered, difhenelled,as a womans baie;
. alfo, fpred wide opened, fet farre afunder,
illement : m. A feattering, difperfing, difpark-
ling of many things afunder ; a difordering, difheue-
tings orvntoward toufing of things ; alfo, a fpreading,
wide apeningsfetting farre afundet.
, To fcatter difper{e, difparkle afunder; alfo,
70 fet wide open,or far afunder; alfa, to difhenell, dif-
_ order,toufe, as a womans baire.
iller fon beurre. To fpread his butter.
RiparreX The barre of yron Fu nailed on à doore, and
turnes at th’ end on the bindge.
Espars. Scattered, difperfed , diffipated , difmembred,
rent,or broken into many parcels, caft bere and there.
Esparfément. Scatteringly, diforderedly, vncertainly,
bere and therve,all abroad jot one neere to another.
Espartant. Scattering ,difperfing diniding , far-funde-


ving.

Espartillé : m. ée : f Difparkled ; or difperfed ; infifed
by fall par cells ; diuided by et ds: 5

Espartir. To featter,difperfe.part dinide, (et afunder.

Esparvain:m, 4 /pauen in the leg of a hoife, or beaft.
parvier :m. 4 Sparbawke, or Sparrow-bamwke ; and
(more generally) a fhort-wingd bawke; alfo, a great
Sweepe-net for fifbing,
Esparvier de Montagu. .4 lowe.
Hetbe d’ efparvier.as Cichorée iaulne.
Mieux.vault meftier qu’ efparvier. Better à 2 good
occupation then hawking ; or , beiter it is to follow a
trade thena Hawke,
On ne peut faire d’ hibou efparvier: Prov. He
thats a clowae by nature, cannot be gentilixed by nur-
ture ; The like is; :
On ne peutd’ yn Pigeon faire vn vif efparvier:
Proy.

FRE :£ Afword: €Langued.

eis efpafe. Looke Spafe.

Efpaté: me :f.Broad-footed, flat-footed ; well onder-
layed ; well fpred,or of a good breadth, at the bottom;
well evounded, fixed, fetled,at the foot.

Espatement : m.The(broad)foot or footing; the ground-
worke,or foundation, of.

s Espater. Tobe broad-footed , or wclvmderlaid ; to
fp'ead, bane fome compaffe, beare a good breadth, at
the bottome ; and (thereby) 10 be well evounded, fixed,
fetled, 1 ds

Espatté. as Efpaté.

Espattement. as Efpatement. Sythe = |

Espatule : £.4(chirurgions , or Apothecaries) little flice.

ave. A waife,or firay ; a chattell or beapunowned ; |
any thing whofe original, or owner, is not knovene; .
(bence)alfo,a firanger borne in a farre Sen re
¢


E which they bunte Merle mith ae
ve: com. Maiflerle{fe; without author, or ovmers
Tn forreine , farve-borne ; of unknowne birth;or be-
ginning. SE |
inl Soe Strange,new-forged ,vmaccuflomed,
words. E A ,
Espavent: m. À Spanen in a borfe. ae
avind: € The Len t a Soneraigne Lord hath to the
ands, or god's of flrangers , dying within bis domini-
ons ; or the being a firanger as Efpave. =”
ae :m. A Sea-monfler, enemicto Whales; as


| ue.
Espaule:f.  fhoulder. oo Nt 19 1e
sa LIÿ 1


Espave & effrcinte des chiens. A fônle “=
me on Sad ON Yee etd, etant game |


ee ee Le ee eee oe ee. ec, fé


way ; and bence ;Riche, ou vertueux; pat ‘deflus! | Espautrer.To paut, pelt,thrafhybeat crush,bruife, "0
efpaule ;(fignifies) a verie begger ; or, an arrant | Espe. (at Blois) as Empan(iz other places.)

knaue, Espeaultre. Spelt sor fpelt-corne,

Baifler les efpaules. To yeeld ; or vndergoe. Espece :f. 4 kind,orfort of. 4

Faire éfpaule à. To belpe;affii,fècond,back, fuppert. | Especial. par efpecial. E/pecially, particularly, pecu-
Haufler | efpaule. To lift up the fhoulders; ( a gef- arly.
ture gotten from th'Italians,and much ufed when wee | Espectative. etre à! acne Tofland waiting,
refife to doc a thing which we are afraid, or loath, to, looking ,attending,expetting fr. |:

meddle with ; and imports as much, as if wee fhould | Efpée: f 4 Sword; Rapier; Tucke; a Glaine , Cutte.
Say, you fball pardon me fir, &rc.) laffe, Faucheon, Hanger; Blade; alfo,a certaine round
Porter a deux efpaules. (Ina faction) to fhift often flaffe,that lies betweene the upper boords of a Vine-
from fide to fide; to adbere fometimes vnta tb'one, preffe,and the mother or fubflance of the grapes;(fome-
Sometumes to tly other; or to be neither conflant,nor ve- times)alfo, valour ; and, a valiant man; (ccf vn'des
rie behouefüll,to either. —~ meilleures efpées de la France.)

Porterfur les efpaules. To carrie a burthen on bis Espée d’ armes. as Efpée de Chevalier; or, Eftoc

© fhoulders;alfo,to grow wearte of or find bimfelfe oner- d'armes, :

charged with, : _ Efpée blanche. Looke Blanc.

Poufler letemps AP efpaule. To delay, or drine off, Espée desbleds. Corne fedge, corne flags, corne gla-
the time ; to fpend,or pale away his dayes idly, but fo den, 5
fo; or enen as be may. Efpée de Chevalier. 4 fharpe, and broad fword,of a
Prefter efpaule à. To helpe to beare, to lend a hel- reafonable length,and plaine-bilted, bauing but onely
ping hand vnto. one croffe-barre,

Je me recommande à leurs efpaules., eto their | Elpée Elpagnole. A Rapier,or Tucke.

fhoulders ; or, their fhouldeïs are like to pay for it; or, éc Hunifque. A kind of Scimiter.

their fhoulders are fire of a whipping. Espée de mer. The Sword-fifh.

Sentir fon cfpaule de mouton, Tofmell verierank, |, Espée mifericorde. Looke Milericorde,


verie [lreng;verierammifh. . des moiflons. Corne fedge,corne gladen.


BSP ESP |
Par deflus l'efpaule. Over the fhoulder or the wrong | Espautrc : m. ée: f. Pelted,pauted,beaten,tbrefhed,
|
|
|


E Tenirefpaulc à. « Faire efpaule, Ft Espée rabatuë, 4 füile. |
£ Tirer Ÿ efpaule. Te fhrinke in the yas one | Espée Romaine. (ertaine twined, and retorted


that likes not what be fées,or ess. .

Lesbelles robbesplcurentfur des cfpaules indig- | ther,

nes: Prov. Good clothes meepe on vnwmorthie fhoul- Pled-de l efpée. High inrifdiftion ; authoritie to pie

deis. ; sn DAT gn | nishor puijue, offendors with the fivord.
Heels race: f, whofe fhoulder is burfizon out of ioynt. | ., Sergent del espée:Looke Sergent.

ne befte efpaulée, Crackt fluffe, broken ware; a Hardi comme vne efpée. As bold, or bardie as a

wench that bath bad a clap. Sword (which is oft more bold then welcome.) :
Efpaulée : f. par efpaulées. By fits , dy Jones > by Jouër de l'efpée à deux Jambes. Yo shew a faire paire

diners fboulderings ; now.and'iben ; with many pan- of becles; to ranne away.

fis betwcene. | ne) | . Steniouér del’ ¢ à deux mains, To doe what he
Espaulement: m. À bug, or omignting of she if withall; Seeloust, à 2 7


Espauler. To burft a fhoulder ; to put a fhoulder ulde rout of | .
port with, orbeare on, |


bares on a hor(e; refembling and by fime called,a fea-


> Spealed, fpelled , flayed. |
+ M, ça a au aioy- |


+ toynt ; alfo, to {boulders to fupport. of letters, ov.of fillables together.
the fhoulders, “r peat ler, To/pek, tafpeates to ioyne letters, or filla-
Efpauletée. as E{paulée ;: together; te make of letters fiables, of fillables


words; alfo,to flea, pillsor pull the skinne , or vind off. |
eller. as Efpelers.(E/pecralipgim the taf fignifica- 'S.


1CE


DENCE, TT Ep |
prendre, ourefaire vne muraille par cfpaule- |
tees. To repaire a wall by parcells,withouttaking a-
ny of it downe. | Ee ina Sion). ANA ET
Efpaulet sf fe Mont > 10€. op! iche :£. Plush, © PE EE es 3
_gowne, doublet ; rc; alfa, a buttref re-pofl, or | ndre. Looke Efpandre. 5
Shoute MES COVER Espenaillé :m, ée:f: Tome, raggedall to tatters. |
; kejnwalls, speoir. Secke Bfpoiny. 010 ln: Mii woe
ee. E i le conn oaneain ft hoped for; dnpe-
Or," er | JM, ei aie GG : LRO Lie Gras
ce more then in erance: fHopésir sme ET
x. Belonging to ,fipporting or feruing for, the eux: Prov, The!


pauliere. See Veine. - aps" 21 v4 ; ge


t 1 Delp ately, ¢ loi

edly ; wtterly extrecmely wi

se 1 pt :
To hope,truf! have affiance, repofe cong


Ed ANTS 2531107164 à


: Original from
=THE OHIO. STATE, UNIVERSITY 3


=


2 nr =
SE Se eee eee à


Eesti + Sw
perlan:m, 4 Smelt.  *

J ucat: m. A focke;or foie rled baive: (yim) |
_alfoaneat, Le ri aude lie Ponds i
nn gr LS A fpurres alfo, aki nda fh ation ca
on :m. HWrre; a! akin cation

chere same of beake


eon des efperons. Latkedoutnée. mmf
_ Osde? efperon, The leffeboneeftbeteg.
‘A elperons pareils. With both fpurres at once, and
‘in the fame part af nt PA Re ft Satoicet
Arrondir Jes erons. Looke Arrondir, - 2
-Chaufñer les perons à.To rt poemeite)
to giue bard chace unto; to make one runne.s 07 fend
away as fire were at histaile; alfa, to apes, maté
bet me Hl, fuggifh be led}
Dur à lesperon. Dull, fluggifh, axie-metta I
o that Sont mowed ; or Ref any ill


 gation

. À morceau reftif efperon de vin: Prov. (A cup of
facke agrees with a cold flomacke ;) a refline wig
needs a (purre.of wine.

Tour cheval abefoing d’efperon: Prov. All men
baue need of fome correction. .

Le vilain ne feaitqu’ efperous valent: Prov. Full
Little knowes the clowne what fpurres can doc; bafe
people. know notor cannot ufe, brave belpes.

ga :£ {purring s aiert or pricke, with a ‘

UIT. :
nné: me £. Spurred ; epee aig
| Pares on bis heeles
Foei qui ck efperonng 3 à cheval dithay : «Pro
in


y-
pan Se :m. A farines a picking forward
aa inciting,or vi ging onmard,


nner, To fpurre; pricke forwatdyi juste or mg,
on» 1 ve


s’Efperonner. ‘7°. put on bis owne fourres; alles to
ger € bim(elfe on.
Efperonnier : m:4 Spurrier ; al/o,a Bit-maker, | à: |

nnier : meere; f, Belonging toa fpurre; or to the

leffe bone of the legs’.

“Mulcle ef] peronnier.4 double mufcle; one of the fiue

whereby we firetch out the firfi part of our feet.
ding méc:f, That weares long lackes, on cure


se 4
ou
ma bg groffe ex
m, 1e : ickeneds Gi ,
gether; ingroffed made big.
ir. To thicken; iar, sae make bist
een clofe hard together.
Efpeffificment : m. A thicknizig; an ingrfine or me
hing big 54. compatting,or clofing hard togerher. |
Efpefsiffeure: f.45 Efpefteur.
Espa: i Frightened, affrighted,. affiayed,
made feare,
Frighleny affright wate Far sf
eet effe: A Thèlés malle, 9
ne compatt together.
E Fay À Aer ong] mnt
weed, Wa; ites (anbearbe.) es)
“Epicels KER es =


aL


dde - the


| Espieu: m. ABoare-/peare ; «


uiles couchéesen sde i. Laied ed me
LUS » Sha = fe ee
“Spying, pryin archi marking , ob
narrowly; ii, mn omy ÿ foie
esp alfo,the Spice-apple(whereef excellent
er is made.)


Spicès,or Spice; alfo, the fees. that’be taken
French) Judges , and shetr affiftants','for
Bookes perufedy Confultations ba; and Jentence EH
© uen, ina canfe; (from the auncient manner of grates
‘ © fil füütorss: who, basing preuailed; were woot to
© prefent the Judges, or the Reporters, of their caufès,
with Comfets, ov other Jonkets ; which gratuitie ibey. "yy
» afterwards tumed into mone), and by degrees baye
Suffered i itto et a dutie, and {as it isat this day)
the onely , or Et to Judicial

| places. Jahier)
L'on perd P apparci d'vne poule, à à | faire d a-
cheter pour var liard d’ efpices: Prov. Some to
we ‘follmenmniniagts uft of that which cof them a},


Espice: m. éc : f. Spiced ; feafoned, arPrectened mith
Spice. |
Telle caufe effefpicée. The fees due to the s
+ > por füch H caufe bee taxed ; rated Fees,


lowne.
Efpicenaire : com. Of beth fexesmale and firrale.

icer. To befpice; to feafon,ov fweeten with fpice; al-

$0, to taxe,yate,or fet dowue the Judges fees, or Efpi-

:2ces!, nacanfe,

Efpicerie: fA Spicerie ; alfo, Spices.

Es petis facsfontles fines espiceries: Prov. ‘The
fincfi Spices are in little bags.

iceut:m. A taker,or taxer, of fees.

icier : m.A Grocer,a feller of Spices,a Drug-feller,

Espie :f; Api, feowt, efpicil; priuie marker, obfer-
wer, dogger of people; eaue- -dropper, piying companion,

ics. Ambufhes,way-layings ; malicious obferuing,
=» treacherous dogging,of people,

Efpié: m. ée: f.Refembiing an care of cornes alfoeared;
growne 10 ameare ; (a: le bled eft pies 3) alfa spied,
watched way-layed, narrowly vbjerued. Fi
Lard elpié. Seeke Lard,

Elpiecé : m.dezf. Peecemealed ; cut,broken, or torne |
in peeces,

iccer. Fe diaideipeesemeale; cut,breake, or teare'in
peecess >: ; sa

Espiement sn Afin , {comting, pryin watchin
hal nar rom obfonings à bg ann ES me
wait for: 0 : ait 9

Eipiet. Ts [dis swatch bathe dritinte vire Mets |
b ; 10 dog, le for, orale ere or pseu
-aneare,asa blade afcorne corne. is à. :

Ep im.ée :£Valonedyid from, cleered. of;flenes,


icrrement. A Picking lanes off land, a de pee


enes :
Espieier. 7 To onflone 510 rid from fonts; to pike anes


r re >
icrreur : m. A flone- -picker oneagatherer « w
Es i: fence flaffe, or Faue-
lin; ; alfoya Partifanor Captaines leading-flaffe,” «,
eur im. A fpier,marker, obferuers 3 alfa fomt;-or


wawatchmiams 5: SE
Espieurdes chemins. A taker,puce-taker,theeféon Ne
the es


bigh- one of Fra followers 55 ques me


Nicholas


| riens St


=;


Bm erm ee ena nal ja “Epi


Eff pis crepe A Sticklebacke.
FR pr nie ar bears


Ebinaye: hy À thornie plot, bramble-bufb, place full of
Eine :£. Apinching, nipping, or pricking ; alfo, as


Efpincertes. des ef: f. A paire of Pincers,

Espine : f, Athorne,bramble, brier ; a pricke, fing, or
Prickle ; alfi,a quill,or faucet for a wine-velfek ; alfo,
akind of Caltrop ufed in warre for the galling of horfes

eter,

ifpine Arabique. Tb’ Arabian thorne, er thiftle; a

d of ‘white thiflle,
ine blanche. Milke thifile ; white thifile,our La-

des thifile ; alfo,tbe white t re,or bawiborne.
Blanche espine. The Carline thifile,
Efpine benoifte. The Barberrie-tree.
Espine de bouc. Goats thorne; whofe roots Res
Gumme Dragagant.
Efpine du a The backe-bone.
Espine noire. The blacke thorne,
Espine vinette. as Efpine benoifte.
Quifeme des psc ha recueille des efpines :
Proy.He that Sens thiflles gathers pr
Qui. veut aller nuds ne doit femer des
espines : Prov. Hel sh


no thornes.
Trop achette le miel qui fur efpines le leche:
Prov. Too deere’s the fo. prac bought: with much


afflétion.
as TS m.éc:f. Pricked,as with a thorne.
” filet efpiné. Thread thats whitened , or whi-


Efpinée : £ The chine gr shat aporke,

Es: lle : £. A kind

Espiner.T2 pric ae a es

s'Efpiner. To pricke ; alfo, to intangle bimfelfe, as a-
mong briers,and thornes.

Efpinefes. des es. Splents in a borfes legs.

ES inette: f. A paire of Virginalls.

fpinette organifée. 4 Tirçinall and wind In-
Sen à ioyned together; a fet of Pipes added to à
Virginall,

Espineux :m.eule:f Thornie, brierie, full of bam:
bles ; alfo,belonging to the backe-bene ; and hence ;
Mufcleefpineux. 4 certaine muféle which belpes to
fret out the necke.

Efpingarderie. The Harguebuxerie ; or, 4 troupe of
i mab v.in. (Looke Efpri a +qRab.

Espingardier. 4x Harguebuzier,or

Espingardine : £, 4 finall(ana bord) Chamber,
(Peece.)

are : € Apinte.

I tira fon espingle du jeu. He fipt bis necke out of |


Bag m.ée :£ Pinned ;faRened,ofirnifued with


ith
ler ine ne pre
as Efpingleur; |
net pres Am ie 2 À !


LL Ta


1


| hto matters,


‘ESR


Efpinon : m. Alittle charme; hence af, the tongue Sor
Feng of a buckle.
ye : m.A thicei,gioue,er gre fil of bores
Ep pes plot.
C:f. The fame.
€. Pinfe.
Ein m. À fpie,fcowt , efpiall 5 a prinie obferuer
of; ahd into, = Pots os malicious dog-
Ser, watcher, way-layer of others; alfo, a Bar
Sent out Se fea, fér difcowerie;alfo,the Stearn
ov Beard,
Espionné : m. ée: £.Spied,pried into ; obferued,watch-
ed,way-laied,
1onnement :m.d fying, or prying into ; an der
ming or wate
Efpionner. To fie, or prie inte ; to wate prinily, ob-
Jèrue narrow ly ; to dog, flaulke, way-La
ionneur : m. as Éfpion (In the fir, fence.)
Espis. The two vimoft , and fattefi, peeces of a fide of
Porke, diuided (after the Parifien fofbien ) into three
Ella the legs rem Sift cut off for gammons,
Esplan : ae melt Fafa ;
anade: f. 4 planing, leuelling,enening o; Sy
Come of trees,and mr all ae ace.
ding pe them,
me ve :m.Éc:f. Leuelled,planed,layed enen; dif


Biplanstiee To lenell,plane lay euen ; remoue impedi-
dois from inc! a nu ee
Efplanaderaye. 4 pleine way,or firand.
ané : m. é¢ :f, Made plaine ; levelled, layed euen
with the ground ; alfa erplained, or expounded,
. Tomake plaine ; to leuell, or a euen, with
e he gun ; alfo, FA explaine, declare » manifefl , ex-


Espleuré: m.ée:f Full of, all-to-beblubbered with,
beaves ; whofeeyes ave,by exceffiue weeping , drained
of! moiflure,


Efpleurer. To waile bitterly, and bejond meafure ; to


woe epe the eyes drie. à
Efplingue. ue rapiet @Norm. > ©
Explingu ette: ffl inne : ŒNorm. 4/0, pri-

dag ron ; that pe mess the shed bole of a pcece

is ufually cleanfed.
Efploucher.as as Efpluc her.
louré : m.ée: f. Béblubbered with teares; Looke


pleuré, È

Eplourer. as Efpleurer. . a

Esploye: te: :f. Difplayed ; a ce;
igle iy paca A fpred- Eagle.

ée: f. Picked, or culled, as peafe, ee ;

os plucked, or teifed 346 flowers, wodll dc; (hence)

af, throughly Sfied.or Searched into, examined nar-


7 erufed diligeatl;
tes ae gor culling a pluckingor


feifing ‘ alfo,a dr”


a picke, or cull, as peace ; To
er teyfe, as Rofes, Wool, érc; alfo, to fft
ag nartowly ; examine fully , perufe à dili-

mini? délit à contrepoil, CN lirher and
‘Eee or feratch, thee for thy labour,

a ie espluche les chofes n’a:pas vne vie af:
‘1e rov. He liues unfafely that lookes too neere-


Apicker, cwriouser
; Wane fe ms Plucker steyfer sa


fill fearshing, diligent


Efh. |


Ah kn sit ae ee sae ee ee ae, té
oa K v , . ¥ > 3 j -” ‘
Ÿ ; :


a se tan ES P


Efpluch The cingssorcullangthe plucking, entable: com, ‘Dread; beficll,
Bs (cai is ras Sena paneer
€ ow 0) viuer-fowle.
.ée:f Plucke without ventablemnent. Dread b fully;
cme tee ne | atin are
Es u er,
Espluyé: dm. de pi na led, fpatled , or étre Espoventall: M. A Bug-beare,or Scar-crow ; a man of”


fe tes Clonts to feare birds with.
E EP uyer. To prinkle, pattle , [patter,or caf upon. Espoventaire. The fame.
Espoidtriné, se: Loo Efpoitring, Espoventant. Frighti > fighting, sharing, terrifying,
Espoingonnet. a Efpoindre. amazing with dread. slim with horror. -
inct: m. cte: f. Pricked, parved ; incited, pro- Espovente: f. Dread, fright, eréat feare; terror, bor-
uoked, violently moued vebement}y firved. ror, ghalitinefe eife ; aftoni ifonifhment, conflernation, aviaxe-
Espoinaté: m.ée: f Ppointed,blunted; wbofe point is
dulled,broken,or cut o nent prins l'espovente. They are mightily shaved;
Espoinéter. To unpoint, ov blunt ; to dallsbreckes cut they bane taken a terrible allarum; they are afraid of
off the point of; euerie feather that wags,or pate that appeares ; or,
Efpoindre. To prick, fjurres prouoke surge;incitesflirre they cud away as Feftyand ase ar efiully yas if fire were
vebemently,moue extreamely, at their tayles,
Espointement: m.4a unpointing; a blunting; a brea- Espoventé: m. ée: f. ‘righted, frayed, monflroully a-
ing the point of. frayed,skared,terrified; appalled by dread,amazed by


spointement de queftions.  pacifjing of quar- terror, filled with horror.
relsya quieting of altercationssalfo,a refolution of quef- | Espoventement: m. as Efpovente; or, a frighting, |


tions. frayingsskaring,terrifiin
ap as Espoinéter. Espoventer. To fright, fife me excee-
Espoir: m. Hope,truft,confidence,affiance. dingly; amaxe, appall,aftonifb by feare ; fill with bor-
pe: d'un cerf, The top of a red Deeres bead; 3 of a fal- yoy or terror, or with horrible or terrible appreben-
the Spellers,
+ | Espois. as Ef ez; thicke. Espouillé: m. €e:f. Low/ed,rid of lice.
a iffir. Totbicken; ; Seeke Epeffir. Espouiller. To Invfe.killlice;rid of lice.
Espoitriné : m.€e; f Open breafted whofe bofème lyes ouillereffe: f. A woman that picketh, or killeth,
open toview, ~


Espoitronnement: m. A diftouering of the bofome, a Espoufailles: € An E(poufalls,or Bridall ; a wedding,or
going open breafted, mg
Esponice dheriage:t quitting, abandaning,frge 0 a Ridge
"Bout du du fo


ing, giuing over an eflate in land. cil, The Marygould ; fo called by

Esponce: m. €e: tO leftyabandoned, forgone, gi-.

uen ouer, aca m. ée: f Eiponfe ed,wedded,married.
Esponcer. To quit, leant abandon ofa, ire gine fee: £ A Spoufè,n Efpouftd.

ouer. fer. To ANT soot ore ; alfo, to defend, im-
Esponcion. as Efponce. ace, undertake, intertaine as bis owne, take wholly

once: f. A Spunge. on bim; hence;Espoufer la querelled’aucun.
onges d' sipetge The clottered veot of garden er: fer la gruë. See Gruë.


ufèr vne Lent To be broken oe awheele.
tone ponge d'eau douce. À certaine bearbe shat flotes Espoutffe. as Poufle; adifeafein aborfe.. -
on Eerband ws called,Spunge of the river. boo sm yet m. éc:f. Brüfhed ; dufled ; wiped


x “her rable Bspoutfae: To brnfh ; duft,wipe the di


paper Me thee sen bette, uffette: f. Confer dling
Pierre d'esponge: Looke a borfe x and ben


Porter l'esponge; ou Palle espong, fur. To de Donner des respourettes; (que ie ne die des eftri-
face, por 4 ttes re ne Lightly to touch. Porter)
ette:f A little Spunge. table &. Looke Efpoventable,&c.


ngette du Rofier fauv: ey A Br bul ie Eapoux 1 UX: mil À Spoufe,Bridegroome pew married man ;
er Ro ball ; the round , ungie excreféence, one that is married,wveddedepoufèd.

which cleaues to the branch of pets Rofe, bier Rap, ys. The ee or uppermoft branches of a

or Hepgree._” eres head; LE ess pois.

D oo Be a whe f. soe fill of Spunges; er The dung of an Otter, or tbe fu ver

Bght,or the a
Es tle: £ Avaffals ement of the feruic Bepreinittes Espr:

th duties which owes unto bs Lard 4 me een rh ar nr iia, Laueefe out,thrul
Esporler. 4 10 acknowled duties end

ee Lord. - pe Pr Bent: m, te: £ Preffeds wrnng, firained, =
Esporte: £ A bandbasket out, thruft bard together,
baste zm. ée: E Daf cru fm leapt _ Espreinte: £ A preffing, fraining,

du a *

; to beat, or the te| —

"Deano ee wor eth de wire op fom


| pe eaea ee free ets be oe


mafon:f whe bloudie-flix,
NT wringing of the bowels: @
s) es rendre.To takesfeÿe catch


Id 4
Espreu. Tout à espreu. Exprefeds of fat punpeley for
the nonce.
Esprevains. À Splint,or Spauin in a barfes
Esprevier: m.4 Sparbauke ; alfo,any kind off
ged Hauke.


Espreuve: £. A proof, tryall, experiment, effay, a


reuve. To put unto tryall, or tothe
touch ; to aducature baxard,fee what will bappen,try
what may be done.

Espringalle: £. Anauncient Engin of warre, whereout
, Stones, peeces of yron,and great ss - werefhot at
the walls of a beleaguered Towne, and the defendors
thereof; (now out of vfé.)

pe sae To leape, Fries, bound, fpurt; (an old


tin:


ESS ri Sala. asEfprin,
rie ife: f. T. Meg feifed; alfo,infla-
| _ med, kindled, wholly poffe{fed with,
Esprit m. The Spirit,Soule; seers pv paca
bs 3 wit,conceit ; allo, hfe,courage, met-
lan ait liueline as finar nef ef bu-
ris cé arin raves 3 alo,
Voicy vn? ’cftoffe qui n’a que l'efprit. (Merrily) this
purs is but ficher hath no fubstance in it,
| Les Alemans ont l'esprit aux doigts: Prov. The
Germans wit refls in their fingers, viz. they are bet-
ter Artifans then Artifls,better at handy-crafts then at
bead-craft.
| Espronnade. as Efperonnade,
Esprouvé: m. ée: fProued, tryed ; approned,experi-
8 3 attempted, baxarded,affayed; fearcbed,foun-
ed,
Esprouver.To prouestrys attempt,affay ; found looke,or
À _ search into,
Esprouvette: f.4 probe; a little infirument wherewith
Esp <7, vulters as act i flea.
ucer, To flea ; for 453 to ki
Espucé: m.ée: f he rid of fleas... or
Espuceter, as Efpuc
spuilé:m, ée: f. mad: shall exopcied ira
ry (as a Well of water;) al, dravone out (as water
out of awell,) alfo,withered ; wafled,confumed; (as a
fabftance whofe moiflure 5 fpent) — -
‘Espuifement: m. 4 age. ; exbaufting, emptying,
a Ai out,or drawing dry
Espuifer. To drayne; esha ‘empties draw dry (as a
well of water; ) alfo, to out (as water out of a
Ene ie waflyconfume, fratrie up the moi=
eof.
rm. À drayner; PP Sas UE of mois<
ure ; alfoya drawer ee out of a well.
4m, Any t at ferues to drayne, ie
MES ae of moïflure ; and bence, t
rl here re bee


VF it ae va |


“of 5 clean
ee as epee ds end |


age #2; CUS rt à
pee te nae |


“ Ethics sat Fans


"JET


Z Efqueu illon. 4 Sp


ray |


. To vwame As a broken foie; alfa, torun
OO 3 alfo,to +4 ring,or Squecfe liquor “ss ah |
fo,t0 cleanfe, purifiesclarifies.
urgc:f. Garden Spngesmberenfthive are tye kinds,

a gars and a def.

0 Por ; m. ée: f. Purgedonts cleanfe, cleered, rid
3 alfo.pr.

Espur er. To + PRESS of 3 alfo,to pruine,

or A off the noyfome knobs,on buds of trees:
Espy. as Efpi ; alfo,as Efpée Romaine.
Et Pire: f. À fquadron (of footmen;) Looke Efes-


Élquadron: ms 4 Squadrons, a troope of fouldiers ran- À
ged into a [quare bodie, or ‘butadlion. (This word is
mofl commonly meant onely of ber femen, (Bataillon of
footmen) and sometimes both of borfe,and foot.)

Efquaille : f. as E(caille; « fcale,or fhale.
quailler. To pillsfhale,or feale.
fqualié : m. ée: f. Lenelled, plained, fmoothed, made +

_. £uen, x

Efqualier. To level plaine, fneoib ste euen.

ualle. il Efcaille.
E(quailler.

Efg barcelle: £. A leatherne pouch.

Eiquarquilé Put, fred, wide open ; fet. nered, farre
sees!

iment: m. A fpreading,or feiting wide a-
de vadlin


iller. Yo eus, Set or open, wide ; to put
rap ne 1


quarquiller les jambes. To firadle, Siride, fet ibe
legs wide open.
Ffquarquiller les yeux. Toflere ; to looke big onit,
Quarre : f..4 /quare, or (quareneffe.
Marré; m. ée : f. Square,or fquared.
Euari To fquare ; make Jauare ; bow, ov cut


Biquarriffer. A fquarer of flones,or timber,
Efquarriflure: £. Squareneffe ; or, fquaring.
uarrure : f. The fame.
mb m. ce: f, Quartercds difinembred.
pe yen * m. 4 quartering; a difmembring;
e Efquartellement.
Efquarteler. To quarter; diftmember cut or bay, into
PiSnareel 3 reat or teare,in peeces.
uarteleure: £, as gg parorpaceagrs
ee:
or cafting,pro-
quarters.


ring,or hewing in peeces; alfo,

pére or compofition,af men:be

Efquarter. as Efcarter ; tofcattererc ; alfo, to emptie
ar t- pots


E ote m. ée: £ aor. -backed, or famayed in the


E(quartellement: m. À quarie
eet


tal pened nf atayle, ‘SES
si f. Dregf, Penang 5 excrement


mé or Scourer r fir a peeceaf ‘Ord-
f, Bit of heart ; sleane,poore, pulled


away extreamely,
A long and violent correflion ov beating,


pamees eras:
jetiré : as


Pre Te
ubberne,and untoward lade.
A ‘The firfi rude,or ficigbt draught of a Medell,
eens a building
Bee m.ée:f, inbefieds meh done ty


ES


uicher. To imbolfe; to make arud bt,or 7
“ee sdrauebt ofa 02 pr
Elquierre:f A Rule,or Squire; an Inflrument Fr by|
Mafons, Carpenters, Foyners, ec; al/o, an FRRes: |
wherewith Surueyors meafure land. .

Vn trait d'efquiérre. A perpendicular lineor ick
fi ure; tearmed fo by workemen.

“Ar elquierre. Draps aneniy prabebtys by line |
and leuell,to a haire.

Aux efqu ierres des Cloches, & Eglifes. Iuft onera- |
‘Gainft the Steeples, and Churches 3 Ory as ha as the |
Stecples,and Churches.

Elquicrs. as Efquierres,

Biquifs m. 4 Skiffe, or little boat ; alfoythe bone Sca-
phoide; called fo, becaufe it fimewbat refèmbles a
finall Skiffe.

E iquifon: m. À little Skiffe,a verie finall boat.

Et quignon: m. 4 fefenes Pic. '

Efquignonné: m. ée: f Cut, or broken offyas a lumpe,
cantle,or cruftic beele from a loafe of bread; alfo,cutor
broken i into lumpes,luncheons,or cantles.

Efquignonner. To cut, or breake off a Limpe, cantle,
cruflie heele or peece from a loafé of bread ; alfo,to cut,
or breake into lampes,luncheons or cantles.

Ef ome f. A little féale, or (plint of a broken bone,


Biquilleux: m, eufe : f. Splintie, fcalie, full of little
splints,or (cales.

Efquinance: f. The Squincie,or Squinancie; (a difeafe.)
{quine. Bois d'efquine. The knottiè, and medicinall

:. toot of acertaine Indian Bull-rufb. |

| Efquiper, as Equiper, |

‘Efquirener. To breakethe backe. Gale. Rab.

End ée: f. Shunned, efthewed, anoided ; alfa,

corned. reicéied, defpifed; alfo, feifted gr À fipped


afide.


To fui, auoid,efbew ; to jee, veiett, def


quiver.

pifes 10 fhift arvay ; to flinke,
Esquoñé. as Efcoüé,
Efraciné: m. ée:f Rooted up, or plucked: up by ‘Ne


OF flip afide.


root,
x jer: Tarot ups or,plucke vp by the root.
Efrafflade: f. 4 feratchyor feratching,
Etta m, Ée : f, Scraped, fératched. es
er. Toférape;or feratch,
Effaillé: m. ees. eee, fet “oh open; flaring fha-
led; alo,


{etl rope inde le on
backt; vafit for Venerie otterly
Efrener eee A
remer. qa 29.3 YUT Yu
Effaim: m.@sEflain.
Effaitner. To [warme;ae: tS
din: m. 4 sr si eh 4


de fourrage, Scatterings,or leauings, of fé -
m, ia Eanes br eae F
, t LA WAG 5 à


bef
si LU er Le


hing. sthirfie
pen ner se many rade
Su |


BES: SA
à prie da eee hic a HA wich Pan
be qacached.


re as Effarter. 9.
m. 4 _—— in a wood ; sal, a peece of vntilled '


re m Leif. Gladed; made into a glade;or where-
“in glades are drade ; alfo,lo ped off, as the bouches ofa
tree; 3 or bared, asatree of boughes ; alfo,grubd wp,as
> vedas à ground of! bnfhés, Cre.
Balaccemont: m. A elading; dag gs grabbing Up of,
or cleering. of x ground from.fhrubs
Effarter. To £lade,or make glades'r ina shod alle, 10 lop
“> off the ‘ofa tree,or bare, aé'a tree, of bougbes ;
alfo, to grub up, 0 or cleere a growed of, bufhes, forubs,
thornes,e>c,
€ ur: m.avEffory
m.. An effay, proofe, Bes Tynent ,an offer,
eh ts ataftyor 1 ot rr to-kiow it Hah foe
taff, or Effay taken of a Princes meat, ordrinke ; alfa,
ear veffell whereout,or peece whereof. it is taken. ~
yl de bled. A tryall, or proofe of Corne ; à éourfe
taken to know bow much it weighes, and how much
flower, meale, and branne it yeelds, whenit is ground,
in refpeët of that which it weighed,and wai,before.
Coup d'effay. The Maifler-peece of a young worke-


Manor of one thats but newly come out of bis Jéares;


a beginning, entrance, onfet, attempt, a flourifh, or
preamble, whereby a taft of a thing is giuen, or ta=
ken.


Eflayant. E aging trying, proning,tafling attempting ;
feeling before bam


Effayé: m. ée: f. Efe tried ;proued attempted ; tof


ted, felt fin
Efla nage proue, taft, attempt ; take Ataf,
ve of to feele before band.
” Effa cant a pee To catch,reach, leape at; offer to
Eft eric: At boule.
‘Effayeur: ne te ayer ; tryer, proner ; attempter ;
one that taffs, or ae an afjay; and particularly, an
+ Officer in the Mint , who touches euerie kind of new
coyne before it be delivened ont.
fe. manga ay af, the forme of an S in any
‘workman
Effeau:m..4 coopers biphine:
Effedaires. A kind of warriors in a re ona aa
in waggons,but Sugbton} ae iy GE et
red againe tot


of things.


ncié. as
ere


CE


Sat pa sat ve se
ieee fh at ÿ


. a 7. ne En MA “fo
: PARIS


ef 4


PE Te EU Tee Pi


Sr epee ee Se = eee oe
Pe *v
ES S


Br een ie ioyned,or linked unto. |
nticl: m. elle: € me reall, natural materi-
all; effeciuall; forcible, powerfull.

Eflentier. as pus tcder we
eppe: m. ce: f. S/ocxea,or wi
Efieppet To flocke,or cut the flocke of.
Bilette de Tonnelier. A Coopers Chipping-ax, or Ad-


Effeulé: m. ce: f. Abandoned, forfaken, left all a-
lone.

Effeuoiicre. 4 common Sinke,or Sewer.

Effieu: m. Anaxletree.
Effil: m. A Shinglesor thin boord of wood,fiuch as we co-
uer boufes witb,

Effiller. To lauifh,or bend wafifilly,

Effillicre : € The clout thats layed betweene the legs of


sce is cut.


Effin: m,ée: f. Made leane, drawne dry, pulled
downe brought low.
Effimé comme vn harang foret, as leane as a rake,
er a red Herring.

Effimer. To vafatten, or take away fer fluous fat ; to
pull downe,make leane,bring low.
S'effiiner avec les femmes. To keepe much with wo-
men ; to drayne, foake,or draw bimiele dry in their
companie.


| Effoin. as Eine name


Effoine. as Exoine; alfa, se in Souldiors
to defend, or befiege, a place.


BSS


Sefforer. To weather himptlf, or dry himself in the
weather ; alfo, to mount, or (oare vp, ec; asin Eflo-
rer; alfo, to keepe bimfelfe dry ; to fade or forowd

ps from wetting ; to flun approaching,or threat-


é. as EMforeillé; whence ;
Cette coiffe eft trop efforillée. The eares of this
coife are too fbort,or too little,
aa m, as Eflor; al/o,a foaring,mounting,eleuation,


bigh-rifing ; alfo,a vent iffue, paffage, bole to breath or
-breake out at.


Effourdé. as Effourdi.
Effourder. To deafèn,to make deaf.
Eflourdi: m. ie: f. Growne deaf, made de


deafe.

Effourdir. as Eflourder.

Effoyné: m. ée: £ weakened, difabled of bedie, made
impotent by firipes, blowes, wonnds ec ; hence alfo,
effoyned, whofe abfence is excufed by reafon of bisim-
potencie,

Efioyner. To weaken, enfecble, difable, make impotent
y ips ema alfo, to effoine, or ex-

Effuccé: m.ée : f. Soaked,drayned,drawne dry, with-
out fap, without moiflure.

er ick To drinke,foake,or Slicke vp ; to drayne,to draw


Effiné. as Efluit.
Effueil: m. The tbrefhold of adore.


Effoinner. To fwarme,as Bees,
ings m. Axletrées of Carts Oc.
Droi& d'effongne. Looke Droiét.
Eflonnler. To effoine ; to excufe,or difcharge an abfent,
or impotent perfon oc; as Efloyner,or Exonier.
Effor : m. Drought,dry weather ; dryne ffe,lacke of moi-
flure ; alfo, a withering, decaying, or comming to


Effuiau: m, A difh-clowt.
Efluiau de bois. Billet-wood faflened together with
young Polls,and fo conueyed downe riuers.

Effuier. To wipe,cleanfe,make cleane ; dry vp.

rn m, ite: Wiped,cleanfed, made cleane ; dryed


Effi Tuer. To exile,to banifh.


nought, by excefiiue drought, or dryneffe; alfo, as Ef
for:


L'eflor du iour, The heat, or bot, and drying time, of
the day.

Aller à à 'eflor. To goe weather bim; alfoya Hawke to
fly downe the wind,or goe out.

Mettre à l’eflor. To drayne, foake,draw dry; to waft,
confume, bring to decay by drought ; alfo; to lay out, a
drying, or in the heat of the day; or to expofe unto the
ayre ; to weather.

florbé: m. ée: £ Supped up.


| Efforber. 70 fup up
Efforé : m. ée: f. nd, Far on rénse


dry ; withered, or
red,ayr ed; layed out in the ai d'unto all wea-
thers; alfo,mounted or foared vp; alfo, flowne downe
thewind ; fled,or carried away by dela, gone out;


5 alfo, weathe-


…alfès vented, breathed, iffued, or palfed, out into the
2 Eiparvier. efforé.A fore Sparbawke.


Effuyer.


uyé:m, é¢: f wiped; cleanfed, or made cleane on |
the outfide; alfo,dryed,or dy; a alfo,tallowed,or annoin-
ted with tallow,


Effuye-main: m. 4 Hand-towell ; or cloth to wipe


the hands on.
To. wipe; to cleanfe, or make cleane ( af, to


dry) the outfide of 3 3 alfa, to tallow, or annoynt with
tallow.


Eft: m. PER. The Eaf ; or,the Eafi wind. :
Eftablage: m. Stabling for horfés; alfo, a fee due fer


their flanding in an
Le oe
ble: £. A Stables an Ori, or fillerie; al «
Bibi fould,
ftable à bœufs,&c; an Ox-frall,or Ox-bonfe.
Eftable à oyes. 4 penac,or Coope for Geefe,
able à pourceaux. An hogge-fiie, a fivines-fie.
De grofle table à l'eftable: Prov. He tharimhenfe-
keeping fpends more then he’s able, may fill Seg
PA dar in a flable.
ftablement. Stabling,or flandin for borfes.


ne, dre; alfo, as Eftallage;


Donne Sunnie brow,or banke.
x : mée:f. pere that ath
loft bis eares ;


Toma cree cat of cares, pri |


ler. To fiable; to put into,or ct upin,a poll
:m. 4 fall.


Efabl: m. ie: f. Rp s es affed, fixed,


Sita made dy furely cp-


fe £ Tue flallofa Ton Efablifie


ment ; and hence;
_ Brief d'eflablie. Amrit ~ allie
E or pmo Fae Pall


Origit altrom
JOISTATE UNIVERSE:
Sue 0)


~~ d TE SET CSST OT rte


EST EST


fouldiors;rearmed fo in old time. because they were ap- Eftain. as Elan j alfo,fine woollen (or Ganen) Jarne,
pointed together unto certaine places, or Landings ; thread,or woo
which they were to boldor make good Bouc d'éftain. .The eretsbearded an ng-rned
Eftablir. To eftablifh; to fettle,fix,confirme,affare make wild goat, Ibex.

Pedal fet LE to enaét, inflitute, ordaine, appoins rm. Ste: Extinguifhed, quenched, put out ;


fen, FA abolifhed utterly perifhed; confumed. ome
Bitablffement: m. An ¢flablifament, or flablifhing ; a ” e
fething,affiscing, fixing, confirming ; alfo,an inflituting, at 0 delle eftain&e. Looke Chandelle.
enacting ordaining appointing ; in ‘law,the Piling of a Eftaingmie onier: m. A Pewterer;a Tinner.
poe on; and hence Eftainter:m:ere: f. Of Tynne, or Pewter; belonging


uette d'eftabliffement. Looke E: = vate Tynne,or Pewter. ; :
Eft fablifieur: ni. An eflablifher ; flere ; conf Eftal: m. The sel «feo er boo ay thing whereon
mer enaéter. wares aré layed,and d to be fola, :
| Eftacadesf, A Lifts or place rayled int for acombat. | Eftalé: im. ée:f. Difplayed, opened, fitslayed abroad, :
Eftacher. To fafien,to tye; Seeke Atcacher. fred wide ; expofed unto ‘view, as ware, on a ue
Eftacquer.: To marke for bus owne ; to fet bis marke alls”
upon, Eftaler. Yo difplay,nfould, fer, fpread ur open :
Eftafhier: m. 4 Lackey, or fan, that runnes by the wares on fialls; to expofeunto the view of all paffen- a
flrrup sa fostman, or feruingman that waites afoot, | gers, commers, cuftomers 3 to place, or fet ape 4 &
while his Mafier rides ; alfoan armed Sergeant atten- u. hy
ding on an. Officer of Iuflice, El alier : ni! 2s Eftaillier,
Eftaffier S.Martin. The dewill, Rab. Eftallage: m. Stalage.
| Eftaffiliade: f.4 fripéierkeser lafh with a whip,or rap Eftallé. as Eftalé; or (et, or placed asa ss
of Leather; alfo,a flafh ouer the face. fall.


et m. A florie, Rage, loft,or beight of a bowfé;alfo, | Eftallenient : m.Tbe flall of a fhop ; alfo,the ing out
»alodgingdwelling,boufe,or place f abiding ; alfo, las- of wares upon a flall; a difplaying ; an expofing vnto


tageior the balafl of a fhip. At view.
L'eftage de rez de chauflée. The floore, or lowelt Eftallèt, as Eftaler.
roome of a houfe. Eltallier, as Eftaillier.


Droiétd'eftage.AÀ fee ,or cuflome exatted for the bar-
bouring of forraine corne within the ports, or bauens
of fome tomes in France.
Eftager: m. 4 vaffall, fubieff, inbabitant ; one that
bath aboufe, or dwelling under one Lord, or other; a
ep and dweller ans fisch or fuch a nr
Manor.


Eftagier: m. 4s Eftager.

Fitagné: m. ée: f. Gueltjor lopped, pa a tree.

Eitagnen Togueld trees, to lop, or cut off their bran-
c hes.

Eftagues.Tworopes(faflened to the middle of the maine
yard) which pajfing through the Encornal, ferwe to
hoifev re the His we call thcm,Tyes, —

Eftaie:

Eftaicr. seer Eftayer,

Eftail: m. as Eftal;.a fall,

~ Weur tient eftail. He holds them tdte play.

Eftaillé.{Barbet etaiis Nour clipt,or fhorne;
à cut ,as he lookes like a Eftalonet. as Eftalonner.

Efta aires dé pierres. her pes that fly from | Eftalonné: m. ée: aoayrersing: einige '


Rones in the (quaring of them. Mare,with a hor{e; and he
Eftailliet: rey or the foreman of a Shop ; a ‘eftalonnée. A Mie which hath taken the |.
he that lookes to the. fl and there ee av ns 10


(how, and fale. EAU To affixe meafures : to ad weights; to
Eftails: im 7. the firings,or ropes of fayles. Rab, gine them their iuft {cantling, their due fixe ; "alé, to

aim: m. | ~ #akeahorfe a Stalion; or to turne bim among Mares;

Eftaim ic Corroiiaille. as Eftain doux. > | alfo,to play the Stalion,or cower Mares,

Eftaim doux-The beft kind of Tyane 5 gotten in Corn Eftalonnerva foulier.To tread afhove dowme at the

woll. eles,

Eftaimie lace, another hind, ofed i in the tinming of | Eftambor: m. A peece of wood in a fhip, iliat extinds
“the brckfides of Looking-glaffes ; and for the duft of | fromthe Keele to he top of the Poupe, anid bends toge-
houre: me being of a fubftance moft thinne, finall, ther with it ; we call it,the Sterne pol.

and lit se fable to ging by anie change of | Eftambres. The too ticke peeces of wed that entiron
LS | the ‘bole through wbich rs ad
RIRE Pewter. AUS:


Eftaimmeés m.ée: FTinneds leaded, Etant ed orp A Skee
es rare Eftamé: m. ée : f. ae de wit as
with Tynne, Oe, F


| | glared,made fnvorb,and fleeke,as an eartben


Eftallotr:um. The iuft quantitie, fcantling , patterne, or
. fixesof meafures appointed by authoritie, and common-
Say de in fome publike place of a towne;Looke Efta-


e. as Eftallonnement; 4/0, a fee due for
that affixing; or the power, or priuiledge,to affixe pub-
like weights,and meafures.

none me ée: f. (! = a meafure) pts Sey scam
‘0 the ty tion of the common fixe, a
pedi be lite marke ; Looke Eftalonné, ud
Eftall onnement: m. The alfxing of meafures,


as Eftalonne
Eftalo . as Eftallon ; sal, a Stalion for Mares; alfo, a
Jtale (as aT. he, tc ) wherewith Fowlers traine fillie
birds unto SR Mes, alfo,as Baliveau, a Stan
der in a wood ; alfo,a Sort, and thicke peg, or peece of
reap two Sparres are  faftened ape, rife to-


Fdalon: as Eftallonnage.


Eftamet : m. Cloth-rafh. Lun Ati
Eftameure: f. A tynning.
amier;m, A »Tyane-man; Peter er.
Eftamine: f The ftuffe Tamine; alfoya flrayner,fearce,
boulter, or boulting cloth; fo called, becaufe made
(commonly)of a thinne kind thereof.)
Pafler par l'e{tamine. To firaine ; to Havre the
touch; to put unto proefèsor tryall ; to palfet pikes.
Eftaniné : m. ée: f. Strayned, cet tale ; paf
fed through a flrayner, fearce, boulter ; alfo, tryed, or
throughly examined.
Eftaminer. To rayne, fearce,boult; to paffe through a
fearce ; a/fo,to try,or examine the worth of.
Eftamineux. which vfeth a firayner, fearce or boulter ;
alfi,fit to make a firayner of. sire bah
Eftampe: f. A flampe,impreffion,preffe print, printing ;
alfosasConfole. )
à m.éc:f. Supportedor underpropped,with
trefless .
Eftampeau: m. 4 trefle.
Eftamper. To fupport,or underpropwith treffles,
Eftamperche: £. 4 great upright beame,in building; a
principall poft. ' alt
Eftancer. as Eftançonner ; to flay3to prop.
Eftanceure: f. À jupportin yer Mer ropbin | f
Eftanche. 4 Ranching; '


ence; !
Pierre d'eftanche. The bloud-flone. FT


r


Eitanche : mi : 7 Stanched ; flaked,quenched,quai-
led ; floppe: ed, r À à ar
Eltinchementn.d anche guaylings faténgsfop-
ping, flaying. | 1 ETS.
Eftancher: To flanch ; flop, or [tay (an iffue of bloud,
cht) to quayle; flake, or quench bunger,thirft,eoc.)
Eftancheur:m. 4 flancher ; flopper (of amiffue rh
bloud,&rc) quailer, flaker, quencher (of bunger,thir ft,


dt.)
Eftançonner. Looke Eftanfonner. , r
Eftandart: m. A Standart; a kind of Enfigne for borfe-
~ men,ufed in old time; alfo,the meafiure,or [cantling for
E Price pt we ns pe Standard, af
:m. A great pond, poole,or flandin A
Eftangone m. A ag si map old of
wood wherewith a Vine, rc, 5 underfet. ;
Efanionnés m.éc: f Underfet;vpheldpropped ox flay-
Ca,UD. > ay : = sali
Eftanfonner. To prop,fiay upuaderfet,upbold,
Eftanfonner i; vee d'un rofeau. To fi port
a ly with areed; to maintaine anvntruth with she
or frinolous arguments. o
Etant. Being; fuofifing refings alfofanding vpon bu
feet bolt upright;whence; P%
cal Fa fon eftant. Standing, bolt upright , upon his
eet. |
_. Navirebien cftant. 4 fhip that is tight, found whole,
_. and without leake. ,
Eftamerol Part of a hip verie neere unto the poupe.
| Efta pe: f. A Staple ; a Mart, or genevall Market ; a


blike Store-houfe m a fea-towne, or towne of traf-


APRES


Pins do carrie il
nid pt tad


=. vers of France;in the beginning of a yeares of all the
» , fummes which are to be lenied , iene’ that


serein Marchant rangers lodge ther wine,
ich they meane to

whereto the cour

rouifion of


«more then be payes for, no manner of prouifion other
then be buyes (for fouldiors,in their ee do,,
or fhould,pay for all the victuals they take of she coun-
trey pepe) ; ;
Eftaphe : £. A Stirrup (for a faddle.)-
Eftaphilagrie : £. Stawes-aker, Lomfé-wort ; (an
bearbe.)
appe. as Eftape.
E Pa Oline lents er Suckers.
Eftarnuér. as Efternuér ; 10 fneexe.
c:as Extafe, :
afques. The Suckers, or [ions that (pring vp at the
feet of Oliue trees, |
at: m. The eflate; café ; nature, fubflance, being;
apr afore of things; alfo,the


efateyneanes, wealth, fortunes ; trade, calling; office, |
igmitie ; ranke,degree,which a man-bath,or us ofsalfo, |
the flate,bead;ffue;knot,principall point of a matter in
controuerfie ; alfo,the flate, or pompe of great perfons,
Appearing by the richneffe of their apparrell, or multi-
tude of ther followers ; (Tel porte grand px al-
fo, the fpeciall note and marke taken, re{pett bad, or
account made, of fuch great ones; whence;Perfonnage
de grand cftat.
L'eltat,& bon d’eftat d'un Compte. The Remain-
der,.or onerplus due by, or inthe bands of, an Ac-
eee after all charges deduéied, and allowed


L'eftat d'un Decret. À peer Catalogue or Sur-
» ney of the quantitie , and {tite of each parcell of land
thats (eifed by publike order.
Leftat d'un finance; l’eftat de Ja recepte; bailler
par eftat ce qu'a efté receu, ou frayé &c; A Collec
tion, Booke, or Bill of Receits,and Duburfements;
Lift, Roll, Regifter, Summarie, or Suruey of fuch ite
matters,
L'eftat d'une Maifon. A certaineyand fetled order of
the government, feruice and expence of a(great) mans
boufe; alfo,the Lift, Catalogue, Regifier, or Check-voll,
containing the names, rankes, and finttions of all the
, (gere arme ther


em.

aten matiere de Bags. is that, which in the ca-
es of ether Penefices, and Ecclefiafticall fimttions , is
tearmed,Recreance; Looke Recreance, _ -

L'eftat du Roy ; as ml'eftat d'une maifon.
L’eftat d'un Royaulme. The State; or the flate of a
Kingdome ; the difpofitton, managing, policie, condutt
of, the order, courfe , proceedings beld in, State.af-

res,


Les eftats; &,les gens des trois cftats. The whole
bodie ef a Realme,or Prouince, confifting of three (eue-
ral Members.Eflates,or Orders ; the (lergie,Nobility,
and Comminalie,

Les eftats (generaux.) A Parliament ; or general
Affemblie of the aid Orders , in a Kingdome,
oe: :


c. :
Les eftats particuliers. 4 Prouinciall Seffions, or Af-
niers d'eftat. An eflimate made, yy the Trea i-


ro sd flat
Lettres d'eftat. AWritor Jninnélion for the a
* fuit, for a time, Pipe + 57


the parties is otherwife bufied,.oïthe partie bim-
tr imployed in féruice of the State (as an Embafidor


: i t attend,or. be prefent,in ( ir
2 rase É frame 0


count.


count the Treafurers made of them in the beginning)
are not by the end of the yeare got in,though the Collec-
tors 'ceiuers did their 3
Plus-valeurs d’eftat. The fammes which by the end of
the yeare are payed in, ouer and befides all thefe, that
are Peg in the aforefaid Eftimate (in Deniers
deftat.) .
Rothe dette. The fummes due,at the yeres end,and
after accounts einen up, unto the Receiuers generall,
and particular, by the Treafurers of France.
Couché en eftat.Made Officer ; intertained into fer-
uice,or pay.
Qui n’eft couché en l'eftat. Onerflipt, left ont, for-
er i chofen. à
aire eftat de. To purpofe, or make account to; aff,
to vfe,or make a prattife of.
Faire l’eftat de. Looke Faire.
Faire fon eftat. To doe bis dutie,play his part,execute
bis office,exercife his authoritie.
Mettre eftat en la caufe, To flop, or flay the procee-
dings ina caufe.
Tenir en eftat. To keepe in order ; bold in awe.
Tout eftat,& rien au plat: Prov. All pompe,no bof:
Pitalitie ; the bellie is ftarued by the backe.
Tout eftat eft viande aux vers: Prov, Ewerie crea
_ture is wormes meat.
Eltau: m. as Eftal; 4/0, a bollow aga under the root
_ofatree,that ftands by a water fide; alfo, the yren in-
fivtament wherewith Smithes bold faft their worke in
the forging thereof.
Demeurer eftau, 70 and fill.
Eftaudeau: m. as Heftoudeau.
udi: mie: f. Sheltered, or fhrowded, as under a
fcaffaldor fall. :
Eftiudi


or ftall.
Eftaudy: m. eld,in building ; alfo, before
ey ee Tab ey in ap-


roches or at the entring of a breach.
titer m. A rope faftened to the top of the maine Maft,
and holding it fleadie when the maine fayle is boifed
E ae gs sig! Stay. fore butte
aye: f, A prop ftay.füupporter,fhore,buttrelfe
Eftaye: m. éc: À eus füpported, foored,ender-
ct. PR ? :
Eftayement: m. A boring, propping, fupporting, vn-
HAUTS rropfbore, flay underfet,fuppor
r.To €, et be,
ERC a Awe, 0 os
E(RéS. Martin. The later part of Autumne.
Cela ne fai& ny hyver, ny efté. is neither fib, nor
hs “ neither good nor barme;(and therefore may
€ [parea,
En ibe ie cé pleut; en efté là ou dieu veut:
Prov. In Winter it raines all ouer,in Summer but fome


Efté. Beene,/ubjifled; remained, flood. |
z yaefté trois iours. He bath flayed three dayes a-
out st. :
Tout a efté à autruy,& fera à autruy : Prov. Looke


Autruy. |
Eftei Deri: m.4 quenching, flaking, extinguifbing,
vt ifiment FPE"


Eftcigneur: m, 4 quencher Sn
Elie t af Efaind qu uae ngui
Efteindement. as Ettei à anus


Efteadible: com, Extinguifhable,quenchable.
Efteind te. To extingaips nvr er roi pat out;


er.


dic. 17 fhrowa,or fhelier bimfelfe,as under afeaf. |


-Eftendure:f. 42 extenfion,or extending.


. ta bring unte nothing.
Cela eft plus as tos 47 a efteindre, le


mal. That is mere apt to extend;then to extinguifb, the


fe,

Efteinte: £. An extingnifbment,or extinguifhing.
Gambadans à efteinte de chandelle; pag the
candle burnt,or went,out.

Eftel. as Eftal ; a fall. t

Eftclé: m. ée: £. Starrie, fet with flarres ; bauing (as a
horfe) a ftarre in the forbead.

Rayeeftelée. Looke Raye. .
eler, To beftarre,to fet thicke with flavres.
Eftelet les chevaux; Looke Atteler.
Eftelin. as Eftellin ; a weight of eight and twentie


‘aines, :

Effell e: m. Stakage ; alfo,as Atrela

El. A zod, or Fon wes lssleflarre 3 and the
rowell ofa ey aroufly.)

Efteller. as Eftaler. Te

Eftellin: m. 4 Goldfinithes weight,containing eight
twentie graines,or the twentieth part ofanounce.

Eftcllon. as Eftallon ; a fixe, or patterne for meafüres,
or proportions ; alfo, a patterne of Marchandife, fuch
as fhop-keepers lay forth upon their flals ; alfo, a Stal-
lion.


Eftelloner. as Eftalonner.

Eftelon. as Eftalon ; alfa, a croffe-beame, or binding
peece of timber,

Eftenché;Eltencher. Looke Eftanché,Eftancher,

Eftendant. Extending,retching,firetching out,

Eftendart: m, An Enfigne,or Standart; Looke Eftan-


dart.

Eftendement: m.Agextending ; retching,or flretching
out ; a pulling or'{preading, forth; a lengthening; wide-
ning,inlarging ; alfo,a planing vnfoulding ; difplaying,
fetting,or [hewing abroad.

Eftendre. To extend ; retch or firetch, forth ; pull or

_ fpread out; lengthen, widen.jnlarge ; unfold, plane,dif-
, (et or fhew abroad.
Eftendre la loy.Towrefl.or firaine the Law;to make
large one or vfe farre-fetcht interpretations,
thereof. ’
S’eftendre. To extend, or firetch out itfelfe alfo, to
increa(t,propagate,or multiply exceedingly.
endu:m.ue:f. Extended ; retched or flretched
forth; pulled or [pred out; lengthened, widened, in-
larged ; unfoulded, planed, displayed, (¢t or fhewed a-
broad ; alfo,increafed,or multiplyed, or difperfed migh-


til:
Tout plareftendu. Layed all along,or at fill length;
lying as flat as a flooke.
endué: f. Extent, extenfion; an out-flretched pro-
portion ; length ; wideneffe;largenelfe, greatneffe dila-
tation, fpacioufneffe. : :
Leftendué du ciel. The oxt-ftretcht cope, or cope
of beauen; all the (pace that isbetweene ad
- earth,


Efter. To and ; indure, abide by it, continue in, fticke
unto, r : :
Efter à vne chofe convenuë. To keepe touch; bold
tacke fland to a bargaine.

er à droit. Toreferre bimfelfe unto the Law.
ter en iugement. To fue; to commence,or defend a
füitsto fland to bis tryallsor to referre his canfe unto or=
dinarie tryall; alfo,toappeare,as a partie in Court.
re le beftiail. To litger cattell. ç


as Eftellin;or a pennie flerlingsowr pennie. : |
a. Mm . Efter-


az


FA Raa AE ES


ee |


x
;
g
|


EST


EST


Efterni: m. ie: £. Strowed, pred,difplayed,throwne a-
broad, layed along, ole “0
Eltemit, To flrow, /pread,throw lay abroad,or along;te


play. :
Efterniffi :m, A flrowing, fpreading,difplaying;
laying A pret fr ; 1#à


Efternuement: m. A neexing,or fneexing.
{ternuer. To neexe,or fneexe.


Herbe à efternuer. Sneefingwort, er Sneefewort of
Vee Pellitorie of Spaine.
Efteité, Looke Etefté,
Eftefter. Looke Erefter.
Efteuf: m. À Tennisball,
Courir apres fon efteuf. "Fooliflely to 2e a thing,
which he bad, and might baue held, in his bands ; alfo,
(as foolifhly) to rely on, flrayne bimfelfe for, or follow
after, incertainties. :
Se donner l'efteuf l'un à l'autre, rot , or ferue
one anothers turne,
ll fe mit encores apres fon efteuf. He betooke bim-’
Selfe- unto bis firft enterprife; or, to that be bad moft in
bis bead ; or (as béfore) he objtinately followed that a-
gaine which bimfelfe let goe. °
Ireleva cet efteuf. He apprebended this occafion,be
Seifed on,or made vf ofthis aduantage.
Se renvoyer l’efteuf l’un à l'autre; Looke Renvoy-


er.
Efteule: £. Straw,or fluble growing. ‘ $
Nouvelles efteules. New fable, or fluble ground ;
fo tearmed for the three next dayes afier the fheanes
are bound up, .
Efienne. Stephen (a mans proper name.)
Invention Sainét Eftienne. Ax holyday kept by the
Church of Rome,the third of Auguft.
Miches de S. Eftienne. Stones.
Eftier: m. Looke Septier.
Eftimable: com.£/teemeable,valuable,prifeable.
jar m. An eflimator,valuer, prixer, efleemer
of things.
Eftimation : £ An eflimation, prixing valuing ; a con-
fderation bad,or indgement ginen.of.
jme: £ An eftimate,eflimation, price, value, eficeme,
valuation; an account regard,reckoning made of; the
reputation,or credit ginen to; the opinion bad of.
imé: m.éc: f. Efleemed; thought, fuppofed ; beld,re-
-patcd; pape rae re(petted,regardedsheld deere,
En much by,made account of; iudged ; weighed, confi-
ered.
Eftimer. To efleeme ; thinke,deeme, trowe, fuppofe, re-
pate;bold; weigh,confider ; iudge; Car «ru
refpeët,beld deere, (et by,make much account of.
Efincelle:f. A/parke, or fparkle of fire; a twinckle ;


a flafh.

Eftincellé: mée: f. Sparkled, fparked,pwinkled, alfo,
ia Sat fêt with fparkles.

Eftincellement: m. 4/parkling,a twinkling.


| Eftinceller. To /parke,to fparkle, as fire, to twinkle, as


a flarre, or Dyamond ; to fprinkle


or fet thicke with fparkles. eet te ger


Eftincellette: € 4 little /parkle,a final rwinkling: :
Eliane, ano free panel lig of

eat,and redneffe. F
PRO eau i feidd.pr infeted with S-Antho-


Lies fre j
Fe un mnt nee fe


Eftire:m.The yron toole wherewith a Currier draynes the
cede a the Capone cae St


skins be ve


Eftiré: m. ée : £ Strained, fretched,wrefled,yetched;
et or the tenter bookes.
Eftireinent: m.:A firetcbing,or retcbing; a flraining or
Setting on the tenter bookes.
Eftirer. To retch,or firaine eboue compaffe ; to wrefl,or
hee et on the tenter bookes.
ival: m. ale: f. Of Summer, belonging vato Sum-
mer.
Eftivalet: m. A Buskin, or Summer boot.
Eftive: £. The loading, or lading of a fhip ; alfo,the Hold
wherein moft of that lading is contamed.
ivé: m, € : f. Loaden,or laden (as a fhip.)
Eftiveler, as Etiveler. |
Eftiver. To Summer, to paffe the Summer in ; to reft in
Summer. $ -
Efiver: m. A little Summer, balfe a Summer, another |.
Summer.
L'eftivet de S.Martin. The later end of Autumne,
oc: m. The flocke,trunke,or bodie of a tree ; alfo,the
principal flocke or flemme, dirett and chiefe line, of 4
Familie, Kinred,or Pettigree; alfo, the race, kind, or
fort of other things ; alfo,a Rapier, or tucke; alfo, a


thruft; a¥o,a Vice,
Eftoc d'armes. A kind of trong, fharpe, and fhort
borfémans fword, broad at the handle (where it bath
but one barre for defence) and narrowing to the point-
wards.
Coup d’eftoc. A thruft, foine, (lockade, flab; alfo,a |
ick-caft,
eftoc. Thrufling, foining ; flabbing.
Dreftoc & de taille, Both with the point and the edge;
alfo,both wayes,in both kinds ; or by all kind of means,
gaa gir ah
Setenir à l'eftoc fans s amufer aux branches, To
adbere unto the principal, witkout refpect of depen-
dants.
Eftocage: m. A linage, or the chiefe flemme of a linage.
Pha: € afta ali r
occade: f. À floccado; flab,foine,tbruff,

Eftoccader, To give the floccado; to flab.foine at,pricke
deepe into,thruft through.

Eftoccage: m. ii d vpomthe fale of an inheritance,due
(in fome placesyunto the Landlordand to be payed him,
in lien ofa Relefe, the fame day it is fold. ‘

Eftocquer. a Eftoccader ; or,,4s Eftoquer.

floeuf. as Efteuf ‘

Eftoeuvier: m.ere: £. Ofor belonging to,a Tennisball

Eftoffe: £. Stuffesmatter fübfance;ware,chaffer ; alfo,
the qualitie,;ranke; abilitie, or worth of a man. ;
Chevaliers debonne cftoffe, Knights well armed,
and well managing their Armes.

Eftoffé: m.ée:f. Stuffed; made ous. fuffe ; cal

Sirnifbed with necefjaries; alfo,carued,granen,intayled.

Eile: To fluffe; g make she fuffe; to fiarifh,or flore

with all nece(faries; alfo,to carne,graue;inteyle. —
Eftofferie: f, The art of ingrauing. :
Eftofteur : m. A cutter,grauer, carner,intailer..
Eftoillé: m. The Lixard Stellio, whofe necke is full of
flarre-like pots. a
ftoille: f. À flarre; a planet; alfo,the bearb Sbarcwwert,
Starre-wort,(udwort, 7

Eftoille de mer. An excrement of the fea, called the
Fiue-foot,or Starre-fifh. A
Eftoille polaire: The North flare. See Polaire.
Eftoille Pouffiniere. The feuen flarres ; called by
ome, the Henne and her Chickens. MATE
Efcus à l’efloille Pouffiniere. Counters (fir there are


Rad * sid | “Herbe


EST

Herbe deleftoille. Buck-horne, Crowfoot Plantaine,

Harts-horne Plaintaine, Sandwort , bearbe luie, or

hearbe Eue. é

Ordre de l’eftoille. An Order of Knighthood,inflitu-
__ ted bylohn King of France in the yeare 1351 ; aban-

doned long agoc by the Nobilitie, becaufe st grew too

common ; and retained at this day onely by the ordina-

rie walchmen of Paris. .

Pierre d'eftoilles. À kind of Orange-coloured car-
buncle, wherer (fetting it betweene and the light)ma-
ny golden, fpackling, and fiarre-like drops may be dif-
cerned, ;

La belle eftoille. The name ofa Village that lyes in
the high way betweene S.Denis and Pontoife. |

“A l'enfeignede l'eftoille. (Coucheral’en. Tole
without dores all night) under the Canopie of the faire
beauens, |

On les fait croire que les eftoilles font des papil-
lottes. They are made beleeue that fiarres be (no bet-
ter then) fpangles ; viz. They are extreamely gulled,
or abufed. 1

‘A midi eftoille ne luit: Prov. Atmid day no flarre

Shines; Looke Midi.

Eftoillé: m. ée:f. Starrie, fall of flarves ; pondered, or
fet thicke, with flarres.
pillée : f. The bearbe Lyons foot, Ladies mantle,great


Sanicle.
Eftoiller. To fet with farres. 1
Etoile : meuf: f. Starrie,full of fiarres,fet tbicke
with flarres,
Eftoillins: m. 4 Order of Friers,that weare flarres om
the breafis of their gownes. 7
Eftoitlette: f 4 kind of rich fürre.
poe f. À flolé, (for the necke of a Prieft.)
Eftomach: m. The Stamacke; the gorge; alo, the
: bulke, bofime,or breaft (being the feat of the ache;
-alfo,a Romacke ,luft,appetite unto,defire of meat.
Vn eftomach de perdrix. The wing,and brawne;the
breaft (the beft) peece.
Les viandes nouvelles font rebondir l eftomath:
Prov. Looke Rebondir.
Eftamaqué: m. ée: £ Angrie at,in a rage againfl.
s'Eftomaquer à! encontre de. To be angrie with, to
take the pet,or pepper in the nofe,at,
‘Eftomiffeur.Vn vieil eftomiffeur de facre. 4m old
_ bangling,or ing Saker. ’
Biome, m. (OnE ened, benuamed,dulled,made


eleffe. eres
j Effonngsmiée:t Daunted, aftonifbed, amazed, ap-
_ palled, agaft; abafhed. = bats
_— comme canes. Difimayed like (o manie
Ducks, ‘ ren rats
‘— Eftonné comme vn coupeur de bourfes. Confoun-
ded like a Cutpurfe(takenin the manner.) >
_ Eftonné comme yn fondeur de cloches. Much out
: SR UNE worke mifcar-
ries,
Eftonnement: m, An aftonifment,aftonifhing,or fon
a pe a PA sas a or benumming;a fence-
…defaee; dulne fe ,amaxedneffe; dullin ee
 Eftonner. To affonifh,amaxe, daunt, appall, bef pat
out of countenance; make agaf}; alfo, to ftonnie, be-
numme,or dull the fences of. 1,2 oy 4
_ Tout ce que tonne ne nous eftonne point: Prov.
All dl latishander distant Eacpletan sit


ftophe. as Bay re Fok ve Fe us mi
uant. foyni ing pricking ,gining
: D rayling at. sii


sh -


Digitizéd-by Go. gle


Eftoqué : m. éc :f. Thruptfayted,pricked flabbed into;


EST


_ alfo,reproched,reuiled,rayled at.
er.To thruftor foyne at's prickesor fab into;alfo,
to reproch,reuile,rayle at, (cold with.
ay on f. 4 ad. wring, wrinch ; alfo, a bad part;
ard meafure offred an vnhappie turne played.
Et as Eftordre. È vi fi 4
Ordant. Wringing, wrinching wrefling, writhing,
Eftordre. To D rod, wref, er ; chart vis:
lently, take wrongfislly ; pull out of, or from betweene,
the fingers of another.
Eftoré: m. ée: f. Built,made,eretted,edified ; alfo, fir-
nifbed, flored,garnifhed with, prouided of:
Tenir à Cour fefte-haute,& eftorée. To keepe at
__ Court a plentifull,or bownti
Eftorer. To build make,e


flore,
Efren


Eftorfement: m. 4 wringing, wreffing, wrinching,
writhing; extorting,violent pulling out of the bands of
another.

Eftouble: f. Stuble,or fram growing.

Eftoubles. Stuble ground. ~ - -

ftoudeau.as Heftoudeau,
Vn ieune eftoudeau fuperbe.A proud princox boy.

Eftoufté: m.ée: f. stifled, fuffocated, fmothered.

ouftement: m. 4 ftifling,finothering, choaking, [uf:

HA flopping of the breath.

ouffer. To ftifle, fmother;choake, wbirken.fuffocate,
top the breath, 4

Eftouillon: m. A fanne to gather wind withall.

Eftoupade: £. 4 loppage,or flopping.

Eftoupade des reins. A certaine kernell neere about

+ the reines. '

Eftoupe: € Towe,heards ; Ockam.

Cleu d’eftoupe, 4 Speeke,or fheathing nayle;vfed in


dire tas


FERRIERE:


Souleraux eftoupes. To (belpe to) continue or in-
creafè, atrouble,or troublefome bufinel[e ; to keepethe
wheele agate.
Ia tiff linavec eftoupe: He bath mingled or ium-
bled good and bad pr .
Eftoupé: m. ée : f. Stopped,clofed.flut,madevp,
Eftoupement: m..4 flopping,or fhutting vp.
Eftouper. Te flop,to clofe; to sence fe i
Eftoupeux:m. eufe: £ ies flaxie, full of towe.
Eftoupillon: m. 4 floppleor thing that floppeth.....
a : Fas Eftoupade; or, a tent,or fopple,(of
tome, dc.) 2” Fun 49 22 :
Eftour: m. A fight,combat ,conflilt,{euffling fhocke,in>
counter; np ofa pe fortreffe.
Ehouiiène m. — ni Fu
ourdi: m.ie:f Dulled,amaxe ifbed, dixxie-
beaded or whofe hend feemmnaey hr AE
alfo,peedleffe,iconfiderate,cnaduifed witlefJe, uncir- |:
cum|pett,rafb,retchleffeor careleffe ; and foitifh; bloc-
kifh,lumpifh lusk-like without life ymettall, spirit; alfo,
malled, felled, or knocked downe. à
Eftourdi de bafton, ou de bateau. Extreamely bg.
nummed,or amazed ; molt unfitor unreadie, for a fud-
dain imploments pen bis Le wbenbe “ fuddain-
» Ly put to any thing; alfosin a.defperate,or pitifüll taking.
à lrcftourdi. art db: Pol ht R
def ately,carelefly;rafhly,atrandome;as one
that minds not the worke be is about, or knowes not
what he does ; alfo, dully, fottifbly, blackifblys beauty,


ms


se De bouc eftour i Refhly, turbulent adele:
Mm y - Plus


THE.OHIO STATEANIVYE


re :
Re


Otiginal-fror


Et LEE


'


ee a ef ee ee


EST


EST


Le Ronn que le premier fon de Matines;Looke


Ettourdie! f. as Eftourdiffement.
‘A Peftourdie. as,3 Peftourdi.

Eftourdir. To aftonifh,amaxe, dull,trouble the braines,
depriue of wit,and beed; make giddie or dixxie in the
bend. ; alfo,to mall or knocke downe.

ourdir fes morceaux. To chaw his meat iM, or
Swallow it downe without chawing (bauing rouled i it
once about bis mouth;) we fay,to make bricke walls.

Eftourdiffement : m. A dulling amazing ,aftonifbing,
depriuing of | be alfo, an amazedneffe, a-
flonifhment, fencelefne 2, dixzineffe, or the fivimming
of the bead ; alfd, bee lefneffi, inconfideration, vnad-
uifedneffe, raflone(fe,retchlefhelfecarelefne ¢; and,  fot-
tifhneffe dulne(fe,blockifoneffe ; alfo,a malling felling,
or kaocking downe.

Eftourgeon: m. A Sturgeon; the fifh Sturgeon.

Eftourneau: m. A Stare, or Starling.

Eftrace: f.Raw filke thats fo ruffled or  ahclal it can-
not be wound,and therefore they are faine to cardsand

~ afterwards to (pin,it,

Eftrade: f.4 fireet; away,a bigb way.

Batteurs d'eftrade. The Scouts, Forragers, or Fore-
runners of an Armit; alfo,Purfe-takers,Boot-balers,or
S. Nicholas clarkes.


-| Eftradiot: m, A light-horfe, an Albanian borftman; «


Carbine,

Eftradiote, Chevaucherà l'Eftradiote.7o ride long,
or with long flirrups.

Eftragon: m. The bearbe Tarragon,

Eftraigné : m.ée: £ wrung, or griped within the ff.

Eftraigner. To wring or ges with the fift.
Trop embrafler,& peu eftrai gner. .To banetoo many
yrons inthe fire atonces to deale ta fo many trades (or
matters) that be can thrive by none.

Eftrain: m. Straw; litter, fodder of firaw,or fluble.
De grandtrain fur Peftrain: Prov. From (keeping)a
great traine into the flrawsviz.vnto beggerie.

Eftrainéte:f. as Eftreinte,

Eftraindre. To firayne, wing bard, bind fat, tbruf up
clofé together ; Looke Eftreindre.

Hess athe af but lofebuckle

inte: f. as Eftreinte; alo, a tlofe buckle,

or clafpe (moft commonly of filuer) ufed in the faftnings


of clokes, batbands, womens girdles, ec, and much
ae clofe, and comelie then ordinarie buckle, or
clafpe.


Eftraires. as Elsa: or as Efpaves. |:


ms f. dn Efcheat, or erguiie 5 ‘an Efthea-


Eftramacon: m. À donme-right bem hr era
gst ap.


a cuff,ban


Eftranch
É: f. alt 5
+ ne
oe pee Serpe are
— barlh;rude, re empire er

{trangemént : m. PE EG or alienating bim-
fon he rom others; a fhunning of companie sa quitting


ee


te er de. To bun, anoid ; leaue the haunt of, >
indo he pohly oran fe,from.

Eftrangeté: f. Strangene[fe, umwontedneffe, vncouth-
neffe; alfo, a frange act, or accident ; a rare, or won-
derfil matter ; (In which fence tis mofi ufed in the
Plurall vs Ps rudeneffe, barfhne[e, foward. |


neffe, peruerfe
Eftrangier:m. 4 sj À ar sane outlander,
or ns if man; alfo,a fremme bodie,that is neitber


a dweller with , nor of kinne unte,vs ; one with whom
ER ner no funiliavitieor bold no cortefpondencie.
lé: m. ée: f. Strangled,ftifled, choaked,tbrot-
re irkned, finoothered.
Eft rangle- leopard: :m.Libbards bane,Crayfi{h wolues-
bane; (an bearbe.)
Eftrangle-loup. wolues-bane wolfe-wort ; (a mo per-
nicious hearbe.)
ftranglement: m. 4 firangling, fiifling, throtling,
whirkning ,choaking


ae “5 To re choake, throtle, ftifle,whirken,


fmother.
on. Poired'es. A choake peare.
Pomme d'eftranguillon. 4 Crab,or Wilding,
illons: m. The Strangles; a difease (in bor-
(¢s,¢,)
Bean £. The punifhment called, the Strappado.
apaflé: m. rhe f. Harried, ouer-toyled, oppreffed
=: labour here too much i istaken. .
Eftrapaffer. To barrie, ouer-toyle, oppreffe with labour,
take too much of.
. To mow,or cut dovene fiuble.
Eftrapoire.as Eftrappoire,
Eftrappade. as Eftrapade.
Eftrappé: m. ée: £. Mowed,ov cut downe, as fluble,
{trapper. To mow,or cut downe,fluble,
Eftrappoire : f, A hind of little, and long-bandled Sic.
remit a fluble is cut downe.
Flbralfie mé ba cr Pit vf i,
raflier: m. Onethat cards,or ae
Eftrave: £. The ftemme,or TT
Eftravé: m.ée: £ Prfhackled; freed from ackles,
Lu ce er. Tovnfhackle; to fee, or deliner from fhac-


Pet: m. ere: f as Espave: com,
Ene eres: f -Efebeats ; the goods of firangers dead
out French-borne iffe ; and of baflards , dead in-
- teflate, or without iffue.
Eftte: m. 4 fubflance, or fubfi fflences an ¢ffeace, being ;
flate; alfo, the flocke, lemme, or direét line of aPetti-
a indred,or familie.
tres d'une maifon. The imvard conueyances,
: Pron windings or turnings within, entries into;ifues.
out of,a houfe. © -
Se maintenir toufiours en rs ne pct
one flay , continue in one eflate's keepe =
ra be be alwayes the Pera aa oe ee


Bie To be, (ubfi'; remaine,abide fiand,
fh be To De or de A


alfo,to deale vpon aduantage to fland
4 Her por ges alfo,


site as one that kyowes he bath


Sect wb b

u’un. Ti € Carne, wil

Mes rn ep a se
E e deffüs. To fiand; Looke Deffs.

Dire To feat; va tb


pr


EMAC?


l'eau. Tobe ;
De tte ir pme Frc


Original from


THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


EST


Eftre entre deux fers. Looke Fer.

Eftre de garde, To continue long in good piges ‘te
face 3 bearehisagewell.

te du guet. To be cal napping; al/o,to be gulled,

or to {wallow a gud eo.
Eftre à la grofich reer os ogsbesor gafpe for breath;
tobe almofi cleane out of
Eftreilherte. Looke sages
Eftre du lard: tout y eftoit du lard. All wént on
pres there; there ws no boe with them, they were
à luftie,
Eftre en fon lourdant, To (ell Sowce; tobe ficke of
the Mumpes ; to be troubled with the fidlens..
Etre malade. A woman to baue her flowers.
Eftre de Rhodais. The fame.
Eftre à foy. To be bis owne Maifter,or Man; tobe at
his owne commaund ; to bane the abfolute couerament
of bimfelfe ; alfo, to find bimfelfe; whence ; Faulcon
qui eft à foy; a wild, or bagard Hawke; a Hawke
that preyes for her felfe.
Eftre fur. Femme qui n’eft point fur les hommes,
That is verie chafi, or continent ; that is not eager of
the Man; that cares not verie much for aman; Hence
alfo; Eftre fur le Vin. To loue Wine ; alfd,to baue the
right fi imacke ofjor a right taft for, Wines
Fuftqu’aucun raccontaft. Whether one tell of.
Eneftre. e < voulez vous eftre ? Will you make one ?
(at play. &
Eten fais it And 1 am of the fame opinion.
Ten füis ainfi. Such is my cafe, it is euen fo with me.
Qu en eft il? What of that 2 Que vous en eft il ?
What is that to you?
Y cftre. ly eft. (at Tennis;) the Ball is in the haxards
& Il y eftoit. 4 bad beene there but that 7 faucd


Vous yeftes, You arein the right; «you baue bit its }


you vas faid as truly, done as fitly, as is pofible ; alfo,


you flirre not,or cannot flirre; youfticke faft,or are (et
ful, therein.


throwne, wide.
Vous n'y eftes de rien. You base nothing to do in the
matter.
Cem'eft Dieu. Sobelpe me God (corruptly.)
Quand cefut à faire cecy, ou cela, When it comes to
the doing of this,or of that...

“Quin'yeft h’y afa part: Prov. He that comes not,
Shares not among them.
Tour defté à autruy,& fera dauttuy: Pro. All came
from,and will goe to;others.

Eftreci:m. ie: f Streitned ; piathed, fhrunke ‘in
plucked neere by ail ; contracted, abridged, ee
or dravene fhort brought into a narrow compaffes *

Eftrecir. To freiten, pinch, draw, or fhrinke in, pluc
neere together; to contract, abridge, make fort, va
into a narrow compaffe.

Eltreciflemenit: m: 4 [iveitning,pinchingsfbrinking i ins
a contraéting abridging, drawing neere, bringing mar
row, toczether,

‘ Eftreciffon : iA À rimes fret: 4 Sorinke, rns
rte abrid, PS
freciflure : F4
Fie € A boufe; an abating place of sheds. s
ftrcignément : m. À training, wringing, (quee
fener lig eres it
up together,


à Si) ee! Mi Orn nf
(treiller. cs BAe. :
einct:


fat; alfa, fireitned,pinched,fhrunke vp,refrained;
cov bard,kept faft in; alfo,ftrait,fir + de
. To wring; firaine, Squeeze; to flraiten, re-
Pog pele bard. es up clofé together.
dre les feifes. To twindge in the buttockes, as
one thats hard fét,and mufi not yet goe to it.
Ec plus gele ct plus cftrein@ : Pro. The more it free-
xes the harder it growes.
eee Sid New-yeares Sift, or Prefent 5 alfo, a
ê t
En bonne eftreine. Fa good time,a Gods name, luc-
kb may it be,

‘A bon iour bonne eftreine: Prov. Onfo holie a day
bappie fucceffebetide vs (Sometimes tis alfo applyed
(Iromically,and in a contrarie fence)unto one that on a
great day arensicxp gricuous e) be bath ban-
felled the di de fairely; or faire betide bim fir bis s goodlie
aët on fo godlie

ftreiné: m. ée: £ Hand(elled ; that hath the bandfell.
or fr f ufé of; alfo,beaten, Hee is irs FF cor-
rected.
Eftreint : m, te: f. 4 Eftrein&. ;
Eftreinte: f. 4 ftrayning,cvc; as Aura 2

4 flraine,gird,wring narrow,or fore pinch ; alfo,akind
ne ‘filuer girdle, for women ; or as Eftrainte.

ftreintif: m. A refiringent and binding medicine, or


laifier.

Bikers. as Eftrayers; alfo,eftheatings.

Eftrelin: m. 47 Eafterling; one of the Eaft parts, or of
the Hanfe-townes, of Germanie; alfo, a drunken buff-
fauff, fivaggerer, fvafb-buckler.
frelin: m. ine : f. (wbence;) Livre Eftrelin: .4
vound [ter ling.

Eftrene: f as Eftreine.

Eftrend: m.éc: f Hardfelled; or,that hath hada New-

eares gift’; alfo,cudcelled,(windged,corretied,

Eftrener. To handfell, or befiow a New-yeares gift on;
alfo;to. beat finde cudgel, correct.


| Eftrette: fi 4 gird, pinch, nip, wrench, yerke, wrin,
Vous n'y eftes pas (at Bowles ;) you are, or ‘baste | fis


alfo,a violent onfet onan: enemie; 5 alfo,a Ya A puni
ment à
Efttez. A Croffe of Gueules, {in Heraldrie.)
Eftribort. rhe Starboords or, the vight fide of a fhip.
eee: méc: f mr ARE


Eftricquoy yes. Iton Pinftis. =.
Efttié. hod of bread, or pafte, ides foes ned


oe wees white wine,


Ets Vn se eee


dry, bywenching. "Ve
Eftrref: m. One of the three little bones that be. fated
fer within the eare, and fer as infriiments of bearing.
bam A foraps yp aon AEN ate FACIT
Alonger les eftriers. To lengthen bis (laftinious) de-
bho de iota it cata og ashe


Elfit-rodromeer da diy fk dra iar,
fap, inice, coc, from. ans 00
Eftrieu..¢s Eftrier. i


Bites m. rer ani ge


Eftrille: rs = Méca siicerrp coetbe, oigod
: ‘Vnmanche d'il. ADwarfe; Rp 2


Efhrillé: m.ées£ Curried alfà, bangd,


atin flendercouns lene tnt eS à


Cerf. Strayned, orn, fqucered, gis Biller To cor cre (ue) aban à


45 | | i


peta:


Original trom


M. THE OHIO. STATEAINIVERSERSES


. ACL" " ake
~~ Pe SS eee »


Sing


FPS
Lot les


+ ot cé oi


Ent es


Re de


+
À
:
.
4


RS in i


BST
combe se lammecadge rag, tack her,


iw - !
0 pr n'a cure qu'on I cftrille: Prov.
pbed cares not for currying.
_ Tel eftrille fauveau qui puis le mord: Prov. The
lg iade bites bum that does bim good.

ir:m. That whichis wrapped about thread,in

ing to keepe the fingers from being cut therewith,

_ @Orleannois. ,

Efttindore. A kind of Brittifh daunce. qRab.

Eftripé : m. ée: f Vntriped, unbowelled, with bis guts,
or bowels about bis heeles.

Eltriqué : m. ée : £ Pulled on,as a boot dre; alfo, as
Eftricqué.

Eftriquer. To pull on boots, or boot-bofe ; alfo,to force a
wild beaft out of bis denne, or out of thj ckets Uno the
plaine. #/
S'eftriquer. To pranke, tricke, decke or trimme vp
bimfelfe. vs

Eftriver. To put foot into the flirrup ; as, Il eftrive
trop; be puts bis foot too farre intotbe ftirrup; alfo, to
prise debate, varie, contend, brawle he brable
with, RE

Eftriveur: m, 4 (colder, brawler, brabler, contentious
Perfon,

Eftriveux:m.eufe : f. Contentious, litigious, brabling,
vnquietbraveling, full of debate que wrangling with

Greece Ed terhates à

tere : eo ip . |

; — leseftrivieres. To beat,or lafh with a flirrup

ather.

+ Endifant cela il donne des expouflettes (que ie ne
die des eftrivieres)à l’autre; 1 faying that,he fome-
what touches (perbaps be taxes) or, be lugs (if be lafh
not) the other,

Eftroiciflement : m. 4 contrattion, flraitning narrow-
ing,reltraining.

Eftroiét: m. A firait of land betweene two bils, or of
the fea betweene two lands; and (more generally) any
firait,narrow place, or plot.

Mettre à l'eftroiét. To driue to a narrow firait,or to
an extremitie; to put unto the pinch, or to bis plun-


ges.
~ Ranger dleftroict. The fame; orjas3
Tennal cftroiét. To reftraine,keepe fhort,bold unto
hard meat,or conditions.
roidt: m. éte: f. Srait,narrow,chfe; contra&led,
fr 34lf0, firiét, bard, pinching ; vigorous, au-
ere, feuere. i
Large de bouche, & eftroict de Ceinêtures Lberall
of tongue,but [paring in purfe.
: Voila yn cheval qui eft eftroict, viz. Thats warrow
before, @Parifien. i i
Eftroictement.Straith narroply clofely, firittlh bard-
lp; auflerely, fenerely,
Eftroiffeur: f. Straitne({e, narrownelfe,contraétion,
Eftroifli:m. ie: f. as bee
\ nf , Ta aiten, pine! reftraine 5 contract
| marro a eral i, to


The
à


e.


none + La
m.ée:f.Trunked,or cut off bythe trunke
nher. Totrunke,to cut off by the trunke,
Lame, ipl mayined aliing,ovantingfome


Eftropier. To mayme,lame,becripleor make a cri PRE
Eftrouble.asEftouble, Sable oe
Eftroufle:£ An abfolute fale, and delinerie of a thing | +
unto bim that offers the moft for it, 4" Shae
é:m, ée: f. Vpacked, vatruffed; alfo, fold |
outvight,and deliwered tobim that offers mot. © = |
ufler, To untruffe;unpacke ; vnty,or undo a truffe, |
or packe ; alfo, to fell,and deliner a thing unte him that |
cers gines,moft for it.
:f. A Studie; a private Cabinet or Clofet to fin
die in; alfo, fludie; diligent (earch, mufing, meditati- |
on, beating of the braine about matters of learning ;
and (more generally) a care, diligence,labour,indeuour
to compaffe any matter ; alfo, an affection, fancie, bu-
mor efire appetite,cood will,great mind, unto.
Eu rer : m. À Student,a Scholler, one that followes
us booke.
Eftudie: f. as Eftude. ‘ *
Eftudié: m, ée: f.Studied; mufed, meditated on, feri-
oufly thought of; alfo, indeuoured, laboured, diligently
sal af éd ied.
ier. To fiudie, mufe, meditate ; beat the braines
about ; indeuour,labour caft bow to get ; ufe diligence
injbend the mind unto,befiow great care vpon ; alfo,to
affeét,or fancie in the beart.
Efturgeon: m.  Sturgion fifh.
P des Efturgeons en l'air. Seeke Pefcher.
Eftuve : £ 4 Stoue ; Hot-boufe, Hot-bath.
Eftuvé: m.ée:f. Soaked, bathed, flued, wafhed in
warme liquor,
Eftuvéc. Vne carpe à l'eftuvée. A flued Carpe.
Eftuvement: m. 4 fozking,bathing, fluing. -
uver. To flue ; foake bathe; alfo,to warme.
S'eftuver. To fiveat in a Hot-boufe ; to wafh bimfelfe
in bot waters.
Quand vous avez fi longuement demeuré à vous
eftuver,& crié à gorge rompué.wher you bane flay-
ed fo long foaking in the raine,erc;
Eftuves: £. Stewes; alfo,Stones,or Hot-bonfes.
Eftuvier: m.ere:f, Of, or belonging to, a Stewes, or
Hot-boufe.
Eftuy: m, A sheath, cafe, or box to put things in; and
(more particularly) a cafe of little inflruments, as fix-
xars, bodkin, pen-knife, oc, now commonly tearmed,
anEttwee.
Eftuy d'efcriptoire. 4 Pennar.
LERuy des grains. The buske,pill, bull or bulling of
corne.
LEftuy d'un'Image. A Tabernacle ,cafe,or Conering


Bihuye sess d,cafed ; couered with.
é:m. é¢: f.Sheathed,cafed; couered with,put in-
10° fut up in,a fheath,or cafe. .
Eftuyer.To fheath, cafe ; cover with, put into,flutvp in,
4 Joesth: cecal : 9A
olle: £ The looffenelfe, and piling, or clefisjof the
skin about the root of the nayles.
Efvachir. Te flag; to flacken, or grow looffe; and ratch,
‘or firetch by loo ffeneffe. A ue.
Efvaluer. To value;rate,prixe,e
Efvanide:com.Feeble,wea:
uitle fe dec. i


int,of no force; withered,

without vigor; ftale,paft the beft.
Vanoui: m. ie: £ Vanilhed; flupt our of fight, gone on
a (uddaine ; alfo,fivooned,or ina traunce.

sEfvanouir. To vanifh; to flip out of fight,be gone ona


7 daii +4 3! fwoone » i art
vanouimen A Dites; a asile
out 0) Ë s FT =

Efvanot uy. Vanifhed 3 fwooned, fallenintoatr toatraunce. £


me fos


Efvafé. as Evalé,

Efvafement: inf id 5 anopen and
broad concanitie,

Efvaler. as Esbafer ; and as Evafer..

Efvafüre: f. An opening wide ; a gaping ; widening, or
Setting wide open; alfa, a hollowing, or inward floa-


peli: m, ée:f. “Aaked madrid out of cp
alfo, auicke, vigilant,watchfill, beedie, warie, care-
fill, induftrious diligent, wittie, veadie to take bold of
any aduantage.


a &non efveillé. Betweene fletping and wa-


Plus “efveillé qu’ vn chat qu’on foutre, More nim-

ble,or obféruant then a cat with a whip at her breech.
Efveiller.To waken,awake,romfe,raife from fleepe ; aff,

to excite,or flirre vp,

Etveiller le chat qui dort. To awake the fleeping Ly»

on ( fay we; ) Looke Chat.

eo :m, An awaker or waker ; a rowfer a vaifer

om fleepe.
ent: m, The vent of a wine veffell.
Vin qui fent l’efvent. wine that bath taken wind,or
unto which too much vent bath beene ginen,
fventail : m. as Efventoir.

Efventé. vn efventé. A giddie, humorous, fantafticall,
barebraind, ra{h, undifercet Jight-beaded fellow; one
whofe words are but wind ; bence alfo,a boaller,brag-
gard, fwaggerer. ,

Esventé :m.6e : £¥inded. tainted ard with wind, that


bath taken wind ; windie ; flale, ot of feafens niv the


beft; alfa, difeonered, vented, found
red abroad;alfo, fanned. yen act
; cooled ; or breathed with wind,
Esventelles. The [ailes of a wind-mill,
Esventemnent : m. 4 fanning,or winnowing 5 agining
aire,or wind unto;alfo a venting ; or taking,or gining,
of wind ; alfa publ fhing or d'fcoucrins.
Esventer.To  fanne,or »o.nnow;alfo,to puf}< blow breath
giutor yeeld wind, alfo,to dejérie, difconer, vent, or
fas out ; alfo,to drvulge, publ:fh,or fpread abroad.
: enter. To take vert,or wind.
Efverieeur: m. A fanner,or winnower of corne ; alfo, a
venter or vent. Macuser .
Efventilé: m.€e:f, Fanned,winnowed ; blovone, brea-
thed on ; whereunto wind 55 giuen.
Pense durs winnow, blow, breath on; giue


7 pti :m. 4 fenne; flip-flap, flie-flap,or flabell to
gather wind, gine aire,or dr pass “ sas ah a

Esventoire: fas Efventoir.

Efventoife : f. A vent incaske,erc.

Efveré : m. ce: f.wormed,as a dog, ére.

Efverer. To worme a dog rc. 4

Efveux : m.eufe:f.#aterifh, Fill of vester.

Efvier : m. À finke,er channell to-void water by.

Efvifagé: m, éc:f. Plucked by, or feratched on, the


face.
Ecvifager To pull by,or feratch on,the face.
ule: f The hear lila, Diuells-milke, Quacksal-
= Turbith, Quacksaluers Spurge: ( Apotbecaries
gine euerie kind he} Tithymal, or Spurge, - name f
args
ule ronde. Pettie AT
Beales m. ée: f. nc impudent, brafér


iaconftant, rene
headed. ll,
Sie oa


Be TI


eso ster, 34 bawke.
olement. Rafbly,ouer-b Ly; fhamelefly, i. dent
h; aq rconfamb 307 a fleight pr
ale :f Fafling, meat-forbearing.
Ee And likewife,alf>,afwell both
t puis. Well then; what thou: ob; what of that ; fisp-
be pren cafe it be fo, Loo Puis.
melle: ÉEternall euerlafling,immortall,con-
gi perpetuall, moft durable, ay-during, without


Eternellement. Eternally, immortally, enerlaStingly,
same de popinily 5 far euer , euermore , al-


wayes,.
Eternt: imie:£ Throwne or flrucke downe, layed flat


Era EEtermitieimmorsalie;euerlafingnefe, end-
leffe continuance.

Ficmisés :m.ée: :£. Eternized,immortalized À vs 4
ted.

Eternizer. To eternixe,perpetuate,immortalixe,

Etefies. oe winds which commonly blew in
the Dog-dayes.

Etefté: an ée:f, Headleffe ; beaded; topped, lasped,

Eteftement:m. 4 beading; a topping, or lopping of
trees.

Etefter. To make beadleffe; to top,lop, or cut off all the
branches of. atree.

Etheré: m.ée: f'Airie,of aire.

Ethologie : f. A moral; an Enterlude of a moral fub-
ieët, or wherein mens manners ave atied , and ex-
prefjed A

ÆEtique:com. Ina confimption, meager, languifbing.

Etiquet. A ttle note,breuiate, bill,or ticket ; efpectally
fuch a one,as is flucke vp on the gate of a Court, figni-
fying the feificre &rc of an inheritance by order of fe
tice.

Etiqueté. Noted, titled, intitled ; alfo, lodged by billet,

Etiqueter. To note,marke,or title a booke,bag,or bill,on

the outfide, the better to remember, or conceiue on a |
fuddaine, the fibieGt of it ; alfa, to lodge by ticket, or
billet, as Harbingers doe.
Etiqueter les teimoings. To deliver vato a Fudge,
Examiner jor os breuiate, containing the
witneffes names and the points whereon une are tobe
examined,

Etiquetier :m. 4 Harbinger

Psiquesses f. A ticket fittened within the mouth ihe
Lawyers booke-bag, and containing the titles of oh
Do the names of them to whom they belong ;

mpinfe ripe, eee ae ton
th'outfide of a thing, thereby to find it out Era rent à
alfoya token,billet,or ticket, delinered: the benefit, St.
or aduantage of bim that receines it. eee

‘Befongner al etiquette. 7 Telfer Le ie
tinually ; or ,to worke taske-vworke.

Etirement. Looke Eftirement. Tx

Etiveler. To whiflle,or whoope as a bunter, ‘see

Etmoide. Os Et. The bone A the top of the ny
is made,

Etrichoir : m. That which, winding oftbread, is(to

Sane the eee wrapped ,or put about it : @Parifien,
er, as Etiquet ; &, tiqueters” :

Etta wrt Etter Setke Eftaye; &,Ertayer. =

Etymologie:€ WeEtimologie ; er true expo of Fy


| ryneiog cr inal ie xpd :
: ds tr ely. Ly. we
Evacuatif: m.iue: F Enacuatine; posait.


Eve | Eee


an


REV: À


Evacuation : £. An cuacuation, voiding emptying , pur -


ig.
Evacié :m.ce:f, Euacuated, voided, emptied ; pur-
ged.
Evactier. To ewacnate,emptie, void ; purge.
Evade: m.ée : . Euadedyefcaped; flipped, paffed, or
got, away without burt.
Evader. To efcape,ewade, make an euafion, give the flip ,
get away fafely,paffe without danger.
Evagation : f.4 wandering rouing, fraying abroad; an
uncertaine courfe of iourneying,
Evaguer. To wander, flray, roue, trauell uncer tainly.
Evaluation: f. An eualuation, eflimation, rating, pri-
ring valuing.
Evalué:m.ée:f. valued, prized, efleemed, rated at.
Evaluer. To rate,prize,cfleeme,value, fet a prife on,con-
fider of the worth of.
Evanyile : m. The Gofpell ; good newes.
Evangelique : com. Evangelical ; of the Gofpell, be-
longing tu the Gofpell,
Evangelifé: m. éc: f. Preached,d the Gofpell.
Evangelifer. To preach the a de f
Evangelifer vn procez. ¢'eft verifier la produ&ti-
on, oulerapportd’iceluy, fur les pieces, & pro-
duétions des parties : &Ragueau. ;
Evangelifte : m. An Euangehl; a reporter, or bringer
I SBeereriit d'vn procez Are two Counfel-
Les By: iltes d’ vn « Are ounfe
lors appointed by the Court as affifiants unto the re-
porter of a Proces: (Le Confeiller qui verifie le rap-
port d’ vn proces,fur les pieces, & produétions des
parties ; Etle Maiftredes Comptes, qui tient les
acquits du comptable, lors a I Auditeur rap-
porte au Bureau , font appellez Evangeliftes:
@Ragueau.)
Evanide. as Efvanide. ‘
Evaporail :m. 4 bole , pipe , or place, to breath out
at.
Evaporation: f. An euaporation,breatbing, fleaming,
vaporé : m.ée : £ Euaporated,breathed out,
Evaporer. To euaporate ; breath,or fleame out,
Evaré :m.ée:f. Frightned,affrighted, (cared.
Evarer. To frighten,ftare, make afraid.
Evaf£: m.éc: f. wide open, wide (pred, gaping wide.
Evafement: m. A wide opening,or wide fpreading; al.
So, the veide,open,and hollow circumference,or conca-
uitie of a thing. ;
Evaler. To ani ab ; toopen wide; to gape, or fet, wide
… opens alfo,as Esbafer.
Eucharistie:f. The Eucharifi ; the Sacrament of the
À badie and bloud of Chrifi.
Euchariftique : com. Belonging to the Eucharifl.
| _ Jour Euchariftique. 4 Communien day.
Eudemon. Ones good Angell : Rab.
Evé. The fhrubbie bearb called wallwort,Danewort,and
| _ Dwarfe-Alder : &Langued.
tf. Water. Ruiz


i uen watered,moiftencd,or mingled with wa-


¥ *


Bie. A) de


roe
— sex 4


A


y Se)


- f
bien: Go gle p
ù A * Ps Fi


Event: m.as Event; 4 vent. eee AE
Poulce & event. A thummes breadth given berweene
cuerie ell in the meafiring of cloth. ue

Eventation. A venting; aljo,the opening of a veine,

Eventé :m.ée:f. as Efventé. 2

Eventer. as Efventer. :

Eventré: m. ée :£. Drawne,paunched, bowelled.

Eventrer. To draw,paunch, bowell ; 10 pull the guts, or
garbadge out of.

Eur. To water; te moiflen,or mingle with water.

Everduné : m.ée : £. whofe frefhneffe, or ficfh taft (and

Shar pene fe) is decayed; alfo,drained of iuyce.

Everdumer. To wring, or fqucexe the greene inyce out
of + ta depiine of gr cenenelfeiefeaeffieh ‘flarp-
neffe.

Evergongné:m,ée:f. Shameleffe impudent, immo-

e


Everfeur :m. 4 fübuerter,ouerturner, onerthrower.

Everfion: f. An euerfion, [ubuerting outrtkrow, ruine,
ouerturning.

Everti: m.ie:f.£uerted, fubuerted,ouerturned,ruined,
ouerthrowne.

Evertir. To exert, fubuert ruine ouerturne,or turnevp-
fide-downe,

Evertifleur. as Everfeur.

Evertuement. Luflily,effcGiually, with whole power, or
vitermof indeuor.

s'Evertuer. To labour, firive, indeuor, trauell ; infirce
himfelfevfe bis vimoft firength, in,

Evefche:f. 4 Bifbopricke.

Evefque : m. 4 Bifhop ; A Prelate,
Evefque des champs. One that is bangd in chaines.
Les Trois Evefques. The mame of a Pañifian Colledge
(built by three Bifbops) wherein the kings Leétures be,
at this day, read.
Debatre de la chappe à I’ Evefque: Two to brabble
about a thing that belongs toa third,
Devenir d’ Evefque Aumofnier. To become of a
Prelate à private man ; to fall from a bigh, 10 a low, e-
fate ; (Many fay rather, d' vefque devenir Mut
nier; for wbich, Lee Mufnier.)
Evefque d'or. croffe de bois, croffe d’or Evefque
de bois: Prov, as in Crofle,

Evefi¢. Marrcd, poiled,uined undone ; (a word moft
ufed inieaft; and by the inbabitants of Blois.)
ucux: m. eufe sf. Waterifh, waterie, fill of water,

Euf. as Oeuf.

Eviction :f 4a eviction, conuincement , or comuic-


ting.
Évidemment. Euidently,plainch, cleerely apparently,
per(picuonfly,that all the world may fee it.
Evidence :f. An enidence; amaniftfiation;cleerencfft,
plainneffe, openneffe, per{picuitie; apparcninelfe. —
Evident. Evident perfpicuous, clecre, apperent ; mani-
féfisplame,open.
Evier : m. Seeke Efvier. .
Eviere : £ .AnÆwersor Lauer, 2
Evieux: m.eufe:f. waterifh, waterie, fill of water.
Terre evieufe. Sobbie earth, foyle fill of fprings. .
Evig. without: €Aleman, €Rab. i OS
Evincé: m.ée:f. Eninced,euitied conuinced,conuic-
ted ; overcome byoucrthrowne inlaw,
Evincer. oe oe ; connince,or conuitl ; oner-
come by,oueribrow in ler. oh |
Eviré:mée:f. weakened, enfeebled without frengtb,
without force,without vigor. arya
Evifceré: m.ée :£ Drawne,sbowelled pauncheds»
Pont bowellpannchs draw c s,0r


+ Bede


~~ Origmal trom : |
SHEOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY .


~~ a _ gs |


: EVO

Mh ese ° Evitement, . . ER

vité:m.ée ed, fhrunk from,

Evitement : m. An eféhewing;voiding, anoiding, flaun-
ning.

Eviter, To auoid, efchew, fhun, fhrinke from.

Euloge: m.A praife,or benedi€tion; eos made,
or teftimoniall ginen, of ones praife, or difpraife ; alfo,
an Epitaph ovr fuper{cription on a tombe; alfo, a Tefia-
mentor laftwill,

Evneuque : m, Au Eunuch ; a gelded man.

Evocation: f. An euocationsa withdrawing pulli
calling backe; a calling aut,or forth ; alfo,a calling be-
fore one by authoritie ; a transferring, or vemouing of
caufes unto a bigber Court by commaund of the Judges
thereof; a calling from one to another,

Evohe. The crie of madde men; or th'ardinarie acclai
mation of Bacchus bis madde Priefis : €Rab.

Evonyine. Spindte-tree,Pricke-timber tree.

Evoqué: m, ée:f, Called out, forth, backe;or away ;
withdrawne, transferred, remoued ; called from one
to another; alfo,affembled,or called together; alfo, fur

© mened,or cited before,

Toute la force de la ville y fut evoquée. Al the
troupes in the towne were drawme together into that
quarter, a

Evoquer. To call out, forth,or away ; to withdraw, re-
moue, transferre, call from one to another ; al/o, to af
Semble,or call together; alfo, to call, commaund, or
Summon to come before a Fudge,crc.

Eupatoite :m,The bearbe called Agrimonie,and Liuer-
wort ; Looke Aigremoine,
Eupatoire baftard, Baflard Agrimonie, water Agri-
monie,water Hempe. ‘

Euphorbe : m. The poifonons gummie Thi ¢ Euphor-
bium ; a/o,the cauflicke, and congealed fap, teare, or
iuyce thereof, fold erdinarily im Apotberies fhops by
the name of, Euphorbium. ;

Euphraife: f. Zye-bright..

Euphrofine. Bugloffe ; afo,as Fuphraife.

Eur; &, Eurcux. Looke Heur ; &, Heureux.

Euftagues : f. Ropes in a fhip called, the Ties,

Évultion: f.An evulfionsa pulling vp;a drawing outsal-
{0,28 (or miflaken in Maifon Ruftique,fér)Emulfon,

uyte. as Oeuvre; 4 worke.

Exacerbation :  Anexafperating.

Exacerbé: m. ée : fi Exafperated.

| ‘SExacerber. To be exafperated , or verie angrie; to
growinto great challer. i 083 :

; Ea ae : LExatted ; extorted ; extreamely dealt

withall, teins otek ce heres 5

Exactement. Exactly, perfectly, fully well,

Exacter. To exadl, extort, take rl of, deale ex-
treamly with take violently from, Savcredds

Exacteur. 4a exafler, extortioner, bard dealer, merei-
le(fe colle Cor ; feuere corrector; one that takes,or looks
for,the vimoft, or extremitie of adebt.or dutie, :

Exaction :£. Exadion,hard dealiagsa taking tli vtmo,
or extremitie of a debtor dutie. J

Exagveration :f.. An exaggeration, or heaping tage-
ther ; alfo, an ag grauating, or adding of wrong unto


Exaggeré : m.éc : Exaggerated; aggrauated; increa-
fèd,amplified. |


To exagcerateagcrauate,lay on load; adde
beape es + AM heape one on another ; to augment,
| amplifie, increafe, N a USE

Exagitation+f, 4nexagitati


mn, seg agen ee


Ha


‘Datsun GO gle |


E X A


Baits: m.ée: f. Exagitated; vexed, difquicted,tron-
1d ; toffed, canvaffed, burried, turmorled, fhaker
Up; afo,debated or difcuffed throughly.
iter. To éxagitate; vex, tronble,turmoile difquiet;
canualetoffe, burrie, fhake vp; alfo,to debate, or dif:
cuffe throughly.
agone : com. Six-cornered.
Exaltation :£.4n exaltation,or exalting ; an extolling,
fish railings encroroing. Zant
xaltation fain&e Croix. Holy-Rocd day,
heal :m.éezf, Exalted, bigb-raifed, extolled, liftep
on bigh; magnified, renowmed, glorified, exceedingly


©
Exalter. To exalt, extoll raife high; renowme, glovifie,
magnifie ; commend exceedingly, lifivp unto the skics.
mineuxperles cxalumineufes.Bright, fining,
orient Pearles, J
Examen : m. as Examination, RE
xamen à futur, 4 preexamination ofwitneffes, by
Commiffion before a fuit be begun, or before the vfiall
time, when it is begun, vpon doubt of their death, or
abfence, when they are ficklie, aged, or ir imployment


that nece(jarily will require thew prefence elfewhere,.|


Examinateur. 42 examiner, an inquifitor.


Examination: f. 47 examination inquifition ; fearch, À


inquirie after ; difcuffion of.

xarminé : m,¢e: f. Examined; fearched into, inqui-
red after; difnffed, pondered.

Xaminer. To examine ; or minifter interrogatories tn.
to ;tofearch into, inquire after; difeuffe; weigh, pon-
der, thinke of. : ,

ingue: com. Bloudlelfe; timerous, feare fill pale,


wanne.
re ner final pocks;alfo, wheals,or pufhes on
the skinne. si
Exarcat : m, The chiefé place of dignitie under the Em.
perour ; the Lientenancie of the Empire,
Exarche. A Vice-Emperour , or Liewtenant of the Ent
pire.
Exafperation ‘fc Am exafperation ; provocation, vr-
ging, exafperating, vexing, bringing out of quiet.
xasperé : m.ée:f, Exafperated; made rough, fharpe,
» harfb, angries aggrauated, incenfid, proucked, urged
unto curfine[fe,flirred unto choller,
Exafperer. To exafperate ; make fhatpe , baifh; rough,
© OF angrion to aggrawate,prouoke,vex; incite wnto clu»
eltie,urge vato curfinelfe,whet unto cheller, = =
ulcé: mw. des £ Exalted,extolled3 alfo, beard per-
fecily and to purpofe, NAN À


EL eran tag |
Exsilecs. ae praife highly; ak |


fo, to beare perfectly, and


Care VAIO: ©


Gtually; to lend a gentle


xauthoration, A degradation, or difntharixjng.


xauthoré: m.éc:f. Exauthorized , unauthorized F
<. put fromdeprined of, authorities 20) "2%
Exauthorer. 0 exanthorize,er vnaisthorize; to difpof
Serre oh or degrade from, autboritie,
Ex Cif: m. ine: Excalfattine; beating, chafing,


Excay of dm excavations a bollowing,a making
ee: mÉc:f. Exceeded, paffed; gone beyond.


1. Toexceed,paffe,go beyonds- °°; re:
t.Excellentiy, exceedingly, notably,


ww. lasse Ky hi \
Eugene Aninclination, or prompineffe onto
anger anger fone taken, {oone kage thy z


Original fron


THE-OHIO*S TATE UNE Baer


> ©


ry


hat ARR Rae PAR.


VU
AVR


 Éxcez : m. Superfl
(RS oat otre


| nantes exalt


Le férioh :


Ex C


er


bigbef degree, palling well, moft wortbily. .

Excel En tied, exceeding worth , prime
wortbine|je,principall goodneffe. AE:

Excellent. Excellent excelling in worth, exceeding in
goodneffe ,paffing in value, fur paffing in worthinef[e.

Exceller. To excel; 10 furmount in worth, exced in wor-
tbineffe , pafe m value , farpaffe in goodneffe , all
others.

Excentriqué: m. ée:f. Difélofed, laied open, brought
forth, drawne ont of.

Excentriquer. To diftlofé, lay open, bring forth, dram
out of, ! :

Excepté: m.ce :f, Excepted, referued, foreprifed ; re-
firained, limited ; feperated from ; alfo,befides, o1 ower
and befides.

Excepter. To except, foreprixe, veferue , take out of;
reftraine limit ; feperate,or diuide from,
Exception :f. 4n exceplion,referuation, foreprifall, re-
Stramt,or clanfe that refiraineth a generaltie; alfo (im
Law)a flop, or flay wnto an Adtion ; a Barre pleaded,

or put in, by a defendant.


Exceflif:m. iue: £Excefiue,exceedingsunmeafurable,


immoderate,extreame ; riotous, lauifb,outlafhing.
Exceffivernent, Exceffiuely, immoderately, extreamely,
too much,aboue meafure. Lo.
efliveté :fExcefiueneffe ; extvemitie,immoderate-
_aoffe vnmeafinrableneffe. nier
, excelfe, outlafhing, intempe-


xcez de main non garnie, A thump,or blow giuen
by a weaponleffe band, |
cipet.as Excepter;Or,to put in an exception,or claufè
of alfitrance; to gine, or take fecuritie, or warrantife;
to take bond,or be bound, for.
Excifion: £ A wafling, deftroying, raxing, breaking
downe.
Excitatif: m, ive: £ Exciting ; rowfing, raifingup.
Excitation. 4m excitation, exciting,awaking, arow-
fingsraifing.or (lirring vp.
Excité : m.ée:f. Excited,raifed,rowfed, flirred up.
Exciter. To excite, incite, firre-up,raife, romfe ; incou-
rage unto, k i
Exclamation : f 4m exclamation an outcrie, or crying
out, .
Exclamé. Exclaimed. ;
Exclamer. To exclaime,crie unto, make anseutcrie, to
call alowd. 5 swt 3
Excluant. Excluding, fhutting out ; reieéting.


| Exclure. To exclude, {but out; veieét,refufe.


Exclus: m. ufesf Excluded, put or flut outs
Exclufe. Afluce,or pond bead, eh
Exclufivenent.£xclufinelydebarring,orout-[hutting,
call others; alfo, outwardly,or, out of the compaffe of;
alfo,definitinely,or without bope of appeale,
ufiveinent tous autres. Abjolutely his owne;
Parsee! ee ee “si ra ought = 2
cogité: m. ée: f Excogitated ; ferioufly though
dof; inuented, or aie by an
ar udionfy devifed.
À 3 ferioufly to
to confider, intentinely to fludie of ; alfo, to inuent by
inki uife after an exact confiderati-


Excufeur : m. dnexcufer ,an effoiner.


excommunicating.


: Excommunier. To excommunicate.


Excoriation. An excoriation,a flaying ; or fretting the


skinne off. ,
peri m, ée:f, Excoriated, flayed ; fretted, asthe
skinne, :
Excoriet. To excoriate, flay; plucke frip,or fret the skin


Excortiquer. as Efcorcer; To flay, pill, or pull off the
rind from, |
cremens :m. Excrements ; or, the purging of any
part of the bodie ; (bence) alfo, dregs, ordure, filth, or
filthie euacuations.

Excrementeux : m. eufe: f.Dreggie, filthie, full of ex-
crements. 4
Excrefcence. An excrefcence; a fuperfluous, or Onna-

turall growing out of a thing, as of a wart, wen, ec.

Excretion: f. The purging, or voiding of the Juperflui-
ties,and excrements of the bodie.

Excroiflance: t. 4n excrefcence;a fwelling,or hooting
out beyond the parts about it; asin a bunch, knob,
bulch,wheale,cre,

Excrucié : m.ée: fExcruciated ; tormented ; extream-
ly vexed,or affibied.

Excrucier. To excruciate ; torment, vex, grieue, afflil
extreamely.

Excufable:com.£ xcufable; that may be excufed,thats
worthie of excufe.

Excufation: f. Aa excufing,or excufe-making; fome [a0
tisfattion giuen,or iuflification alledged.

Excufe :£ An excufé; a colourable or tolerable anfwer,
Shift, helpe ,auoidance ,purgation,er fatisfuttion; and,

in Law,an Effoine,
Elle a perdu fon excufe. Said of a wanton widow,
which gotten with child now wants a husband to fa-
ther it on; ov awed by that want , is affaid to eat ber
fill of the difh that fhe moft affeëts.

Excufé:m.ée :f. Excufed; effomed; tollerably anfwe-
red, indifferently clecredsprettily well anoided,

Excufer. To excufe ;colour ; effoine; to anfwer tollera-
bly,anoid prettily, fhift off tndifferently well, an obiec
tion,charge,or imputation. ry
lene = puis excufer de la mort, fi, I cannot eftape
deathjf. . :
Tels’excufe qui s’accufe : Prov. Some when they
meane to excufè,accufe,themfelues. a

Execrable: com. Execrable, accurfed, abbominable,
deteftable. -

Execration : f.An execration,cur “able banning,
or blasphemie,a wifhing at the diuell. EE


‘Execré.as Execrable ; 4/0, execrated, curfed, banned,


abborred.
Execrer. To execrate,curfe,banne,abborre, detef}, wifh
_ atthe dinell.
Executé : m. ée: f. Executed,a£led, accomplifhed ; put
. to death; difirained.or feifed fir a dibtet. 7"
Executer.To execale perfirme oft oh a
nifb ; to execute,or put to death; to di Seixe,or
«le ore. «1260
Le mort execute le vif. The heire, Ge, of a creditor
- may put an Obligor in execution ; but not bis heive ; for
all perfonall Executiens end withthe Obligor.
Executeur, AnExecutor,effciler,perform er accomplifh-
er of whathe bath in charge; alfo, the Executor of a
Teffament; alfo,on Executioner er Hangman. —
+ Sergent executeur. That difrarnes, or feixes a deb-
tors goods,erc,in the bebalfe of the creditor.
Execu-


Original from


THE OHIOSTATE UNIVERSITY


el a


+} teppei fami


’


STE...


Execution :£ An execution, aft, performance; th’ac-
complifbing, or doing of a thing ginen in charge ; alfa,
an Execution vpon a ludgement,or for debt,erc.

Extoutaite: ya pts ig Execution; or, authoritie
£ruen by commi(fion,to diftrain,or fixe a füuitors goods
for ak of fuit awarded ; or for the fes due tbe
Court.or vato bis Counfell,erc.

Executoire :com. Executorie, executing, or importing

E wean Ee leo finer
xeinplaire: m, A patterne, fample,or fampler; an ex-

* ar: prefident, de rire for others A follow, or
to take beed by; alfo, the copie, or counterpane of a
writing, 7

Exemplairement. Exemplarily ; far others to fallow,or

to we example by.
roe c: m. An example, (ample, patterne, or prefident
10 follow; a copie, or counterpane of a writing; one
Fo alledged to proue, or inforce another that refem=

* bles il,

Exempt: mpte:f. Exempt; freed, difehar ed, prius-
led 8 aloveid of,without os in, abi
Exempté: m. ée:f Exempted; priuiledged , freed

frum,difthar ged of.
xempter. Toexempt, free, difcharge ; acquit, releafe,
from; to priuiledge.
tible ; com, Exemptible ; looffe, free, quit, pri.
uiledged ; that may be remoued with eafe.

Exemption :£. Exemption; freedome,immunitie,priui-
ledge, franchife, difcharge, from.

Exenteré : m, ée: f Drawn,paunched,bowelled who/?
intralls ave taken out, r

Exenterer.To bowel pawach,draw,pull out the intralls


Exequant. Finifbing, performing, executing ; alfo, pro-
edt pug aoexprefirg, FE kg -

Exeques. Funeralls,er finerall folemnities,

Exercé: m.€e :€ Exercifed,vfed, praltifed ;executed,
managed, medled with,

Exercer. To v/é,praétife,exercife; 10 execute; bandle,
manage ; to meddle with,
s’Exercer. To prattife; to enure him(elfe.

Exerceur :m. An exercifer,a prattifer.

Exercice : m.Exercife ; enurement,ufe,prallife; attion,
execution.
Eftre en exercice. To wait ; (as in alternatiue Offi-
ces wherein attendance is to be giuen by tuines,or one-

for a time.

s'Exercitant. Exercifing, vfing , praétifing , enuring
bimfelfe...~

Exercitation, An exercifing, ufing, prattifing, enuring.

Exercité :m.ée: f, Exercifed, vfed, praétifed;, enured,
filed,much occupied,of good experience in,

Exercite : m. An boaft,or armie of men, :

Exercité: m, ée : f,Exercifed, prattifed in, fed or en-
ured unto,

s’Exerciter. To exercifé,prattife, oft, enure bimfelfe,
meddle or deale with,verie much, = :

Exfoliatif. trepaneexfoliatif. That goes no further
then the fuperficies of the skull. : ;

liation d'os. An opening,or taking up of th'onely

Sisperficies of a bone. |

Exhalaifon :f as £ jon. | -

Eh: f An exhalation, flame dampe;vapour ar

8 fromthe earth, © ile

Exhalé : m. éc:f. Exbaled, breathed forth, puffed

out, £ > e | ?


Exhaler. pa fo » breath forth, caft up, puffe out, a


» Exherber. To plucke vp,or weed out, bearbes , graffe,


affirming that be 1 fickesor not able to appeare.
Exonié


E X I


Exhanlfé :m,ée:f, Exalted, raifed, mounted, ddnan-
ea,


Exhaulfer. To exalt, mount raife,aduance.
Ex Eee £ Cleane weeded, grafleQe, bared of
\ grafle.


weedes,
Exheredation: £ A difinberiting.
Exheredé : m. ée: £ Difinberited.
ereder. To difherite,or difinberite, todepriue of the
ta of inheritance,
Exhibé: m.ée: f, Exbibited; prefented,offered,ginen;
publickly fhewed,or fet forth,
Exhiber. To exbibit,offer,prefent ; cine deliner 3 alfo,to
Shew,or fet forth publickly; or as Exiber.
Exhibition :£. 4 prefenting , offering, exbibiting 5 a
gift,anexbibition ; a fhew,or féiting forth.
Exhilaré: m.ée:f, Exbilerated, gladded, reioyced.
Exhilarer. To exhilerate, glad, reioyce , make frolick.
ae as Enhorter. | :
xibé: m. ée : f. Exbibited, prefènted; fhewed,or layed
out unto view ; alfo, offered, minifired, brought iz
Exiber. To exbibit, fbew, prefent, lay out unto view;
oon offer, minifter, befiow, bring in, things necef-
arte.
Exigence:: f. Exigence,neceffitieextremitie.
Selon l'exigence du cas. According to the need of the
bufineffe eutn as the cafe requiretb,
xiguer. ,To redeliner, or gine vp a beaft kept unto
balues; or to part tbe profit that bath bene made,or in
creafe that bath come, thereof.
Exil: m, Aa exile,banifbment relegation.
Exilé: mée:£ Exiled, banifhed relegated,
Exile : com. Exile, flender, thinne, fine, fmall; worth.
Le f2,of little value.
Exilement: m. A banifbing,an exilement,
ilement de pais. The difpeopling ofa countrey,
Exiler. To exile,to banifh; or,as Exuler,
Exiler vn pays. To deftroy, depopulate, make defo
late,a countrey.
Eximé: m.ée : f, Leane,drained,dravone drie salfo,ex-
empted, freed, difcharged from.
Eximer. To exempt, free difcharge deliuer from ; alfojas
Efsimer.
Exinané :m. ée:f, Emptied, euacuated. ;
Exinanition : f. 4n emptine(feyan evacuation,
xiftiméd. as Eftimé, ; | |
Exitial:m.ale:f Banefull, deadlie,defirnction-bring-


ing.

Exiture: €. An egreffe,ilfiue,departing,or going forth; al- À
fo,a ripe impoflume.

Exoine: m. ApEffoine ; or excufe; à difebarge of, or
toleration fev ,abfence ,vpon a lawfull. caufe alledged;
4 delay in Court, vpo an Atturneys oath,or affirmation,
that one of the parties is ficke,or not able to trauelt; al

0,48 Exoniateur. ,

Exoiné:m. ée : t. Effoined ; excufed,or borne with (al-
though abfent,or not appearing) by reafon of fickneffe,
or fome sx law fill impediment,alledged, or depofed,
by another,

Exoineur: m, An Effoiner ; or as Exoniateur,


Exoinié: m. ée: f.#5 Exoiné, \
Exolution: £ A fainineffe, or loofèneffe in all parts of
the bodie


Exoniateur im. Aa Effoiner; an Atturney,erc,who fuf-
ficiently excufes th'abfence of another, by Swearing, or


m, éc : f.Effoined ; or excufed; ax Exoiné; or,
: J #5


ipa


a


De »7


mae?) :


Cite


E X P


as Efloÿné ; alfo, faued barmele(fe. oi

Exonicr. Toeffoine ; to excule ene from appearing in
Court,or going tothe warres, by oath, that be is
tent, infufficient, ficke,or otberwife nece/farily pe
ed; alfo, to faue barmeleffe; Looke Efoyner.

Exorable: com, Exorable ; fit,or eafic,to be intreated.

Exorbitant. Exorbitant ; monflrous, irregular, enor-
mous exceeding great. abe

Exorcifine: m.An exercifine,or exorcifing a coniuring ,

* an adiuring,

Exorcifie : m, An Exorcifl; or,Coniurer.

Exorde : m. An exerdium,begmning,entrance,vnto.

Exoftole. 4 {welling of the bones.

Exotique: com. Strange, forreine,outlandifh: Rab.

Expatriation :f. A banifhment, abfence, or being, out
of his owne countrey.

Expatrié: m.ée : f. From home, banifbed, abfent from,
or out of bis owne countrey.

Expeétatif: m. iue:f. Expeftatineexpetting, —

ag ory a f. Anexpettation,attending,longing,loo-
king for,

Expcétative. as Expeftation. fon Expectative.
Benefices conferez en ative. In renerfion,or
expeélance; or, which muj: be waited for,

dié : m. ée : € Difpatched, performed, finifhed,ex-
of the way.


peditedyrid out ÿ ; A
Ocuvreexpedié.Such a fetting of pillerserc,againft
a wall, as makes them, afarre off, feeme part of it, al:

_ though,indeed, they touch it not. :
ient :m. A belpe, fit meanes,deuice,tricke fhift,
- enafion,to auoid a mifchiefe,or compalfe any matier;ér
(particularly) a propofition,courfe, or meanes of agree-
ment, to prevent further {uit,or charge in fuit.
Expedient. Expedient, fit, beboue fill ; needful, necef-
Sarit.
Expedier. To expedite, atchieue, sigue PE
through with, baflen to an end, rid out of the way.
Expeditif: m. ie: f. Quiche, ppeedie, expeditine,
prompt, readie, ridding , difpatcbing, foone atchie-


uing.

Expedition :£. Expedition, riddance aifpatch of; alfo,
an expedition,v Ae enter prife.
Prendre tou Looke Prendre,
ta chofe fera de longue expedition. will be long a
doing.

Experience:.f Experience ; cunning,skill, knowledge,
ps No gotten eats practifé,and many trials,

Experiment: m, A triall, proofé,experiment,

Experimenté,Tried,proued,expertmented, alfa,as Fx-
pert ; of good experience. re

Experimenter. To experiment, prooue, afJay, trie ; at-
tempt.

à Expert ,skilfull cunning well feene, much expe-

F rienced in Te. bite
xpertife : f. Expertne fe cunning, skilfilneffe.

Expiation : f. An fire argatio fatisfattion,

Expiatoire: com, Purging, fatisfying , facrificing for.

Expié: me: f. Expiated; purged by facrifice,erc.

Expier. To expiate to purge, or cleanfe ly facrifice; to

amends,or fatisfaction for.
:m,ce: f. Pilled, fleeced, robbed,extorted upon.
iré: mce:f, Expired ; breathed out paffed or va-
pure breath; dead,perifbed; determined ended,


spirer- To expire to die,perifh, breath out bis laf; to
paffe «way, as a breath,or vapor ; to determine, end,


Esplanade: £4 plainepfege uen pt ef way.


«


3 » Go gle …


Explanadé: m ée: f, Plained,planed,lenelled.


Explanader. To plaine,plane,lewell.
P #5 To expound expre(ft,explaine, make plaines
eclare i |


Expletif: m, iue : £. Filling making vp ; fullfilling, per-


letivernent. Fillingly,compleatly perfectly.
Boom f. An pu NA ha OO,


Expliqué: m.ée: ££ xplicated,unfolded, explained in-
Expliquer. To explicate, unfild,explaine interpret, ex-
Babaheiir :m, An explicator unfelder, explainer, in-
Exploder. To explode 3 publickly to difgrace, or drive


E XP


Pubtieky exploded ; difgraced, or driues a-
way with biffing,or clapping of tbe bands.
lauder, 2s Exploder. :


expofition interpretation.


terpreted, expounded,


lerpreser expound


out, by hiffing or clapping of hands.

RES fet An NL all,aétion, deed, worke, exe-
cution,difpatch atcbieuement,matter performed ; alfe,
an adiournement,or Citation ; alfo, an Execution of, 0r
upon,a Judgement ; and a feifure by vertue thereof;
alfo,the poffeffion, vf, bolding,or enioying, of a thing.

loiét de Cour : C’eft vne expedition de caufe
par defaut, ou congé, ou Congé defaut, felon la
qualité d'icelle,au profit de y qui compare a!’
audience,contre le defaillant.
Exploiét libellé. See Libellé,
Exploiét de Sergent. The warrant which bee bath
for.alfo,the report,or returne be makes ofan Adiourn-
ment Arvefl,Execution,or feifure of perfon or goods or-
dered by the Court.
Les derniers exploits, & aétes de poflefsion,Looke


Ade,
Exploiétable: com. Seifable; Gable un an Executi-
on,or te feifure ; alfo,as Exploitable.
Exploiétation de biens. 4m Execution again] goods;
or a feificre of them by the King,a Court, or Landlord,
Exploicté : m. ée:£ Difpatched,exploiéted,céted, exe-
cuted, done, performed ; alfv, feifed, or taken by Exe-
cution ; entred upon, by a Lord; af, poffeffed, vfed,


enioyed, :
C'eftbien exploiété à toy. You take great care of,
or make great baftin , the matter fure ; (Ironically.)


Exploicter. Te exploitt; performe, difpatch ; aët, exe
cute,atchieue ; alfo,to fiife , enter upon ; put in execu-
tion; ane bold,enioy .polfeffevfe.

Exploiéter chemin. T0 make bafisgoe fafi,rid way a-


ace,
Ésploier Je fief à pure perte. Looke Perte.
Exploiéter le vaflal. 4 Lord to enter on,and take the
‘wits of bis vaffalls land.
“A mal exploicter bien eferit: Pro, A faire pretence
for a foule aét ; good words afier euill deeds,
oicteur :m. An affer, atchicuer, executer, perfir-
mer,difpatcher, doer of an exploit; alfo, as Sergent


She eur. Bete.
Exploiéteur. ding, performing executing ;feruing an
Execution vpon. Dose
Sergent exploiéteur. Th'ordinarié Sergeant , er
Meffenger of a Court, for Seifures, Executions gc.
Exploit. Seeke Exploiét. ieee ;
Exploitable: com. loieableghipapthable rida,
véadie to be per formed,ecfie to be done ; alfo, as Ex-


9 “Explo.


ploiétable,
Exploiter. as Exploiéter.


EUXA BL


HN "pne An explorator, e(piall, fcowt , priuie

carchet, . ’

Exploration: f, 4» exploration, fearch , or tryall by
search, >

Paes :m.ée:£ Searched,or proued by fearch;looked

€ into.

Explorer. To explore, Hie, fearch or looke farre,into; to
proueor trie,by fearching. i

Expoliateur: m, A (poyler, robber, bereauer, or depri-
“er,

Expolié:méc:f. Difoyled, robbed, bereaued, or de-
prined of.


| Expolier. To poyle, difpoyle, rob, deprive, bereaue,
0


Expoly : m.ye: £Polifhed, finootbed, fleeked, burnifh-
ed; cleanlie neat, fine,trimme,polite, |
Exponce.asEfponce. 4 lamfiuquitting,leauing,or for-
saking of the poffeffion of land,erc.
xponction. as Exponce.
Polé : m. Ée : £ Expofed, fet out, put or layed open to;
‘a faire marke for ; alfo, expounded, interpreted, ex-
plained,


Expofer. To expofe, lay out, put or fet open to; alfo, to
explainer.
Expres :m.efle:f Expreffe, peciall ; of purpofe ; di-
— pofely; a ne diretily ; ferouf}. .
effion; f. da exprefion; prefing, fr
ved, pronounced, fignified ; expounded,or tranflated,
fpentin the matter ?
Exprobation: f, An exprobation ; Ke À re-
of.
dur. fou of all ie in.
ce.


Enfancexpofé. 42 outcaflor vnknowne child, that
expound,interpret,explaine.
Expofition :f. An expofition, interpretationSexplana-
rech; manifeft.
Par ex
ExprefSement. as Par expres. Rastide
| 1g yering~
ing thruflitg.(queexing bard tozether.
or no power to purge downewards,
: Eftoir il aflez exprimé de paroles ? Could more baue
Exprimer. To expreffe, declare, fhew , fignifie; utter,
Proaching,twitting in the teeth ; laying m the di
Expu : com, Expugnable,pregaable,which may
Expugnateur :m. An expugner, forcer, fubduer, ouer-


bath beene left in the fields,or at fome dosre.
eur: m. Anexpofer; an expounder,interpreter,
tion.
pres 5 & tout expres. Exprefh, fpecially,pur-
Expr
Lesexpre{sions.4 great motion and defre;but little
Exprimé: m.ée: f. Exprefed, fhewed,declared,vtte-
beene {aid to that purpofez were there not words ynow
pronounce; alfo,to expound,or tranflate.
Exproprié:m. ée :f. Expropriated; put from the pro-
be forced,or wan by far
thrower of townes;érc.


ner throwing of tornesby violence. |
Expugné : m.ée:£ Expugned, forced, won by affault,o-
É sa ahge > «2 Le 210 iy
ugner. To expugne ; force, breake open, or into’
= 2 3; winby afjault; vanquifhyconqueronercome,
Expul{é : m.ée: £ Expuifed, expelled; thruft, or chaced
 Obsby force, MN 00 : I
Eu ape aka gl thrufl ont,
ulfeur: m. An expulfer,an expeller. a,
L Expulfiainias expiré a à forcible putting,
ee. fr at ‘
uis : m.ife: € Exquifiteexatt excellent,perfectscu-
“ious die check, +
22 -


|
a4
be BTS


Exterminé :m.ée: ££Exterminated ; driven firth, caft


Extinction : £. Amextinétion, extinguifhment, extin-


ie =
‘Extipiscine: ££ Dinination, or fomtbfaying by th'infpec-
Extirpation : £ 4n extirpation, yooting out,or plucking


Spee as To extirpate; root out, or plucke w by the

| Extiture :£ An apparance,e her landing forth. |

E tion: £. An expugnation, forcing, fubduing,p- | Exto d from.
pete, ma à Un a me || Extorquer. To extort,exaé, wreft fom by fircesakeds


Extorq
Extorsion: f. Extertionexaétion


Extraction: f. An. extraction, iffue,deriuall, originall,


- bred; come of a noble flocke, a great boufe , a worthie
Extrait: méte :f Extratted,drawne,derined,iffuing


ax 7


Exquifement. Exquifitelyexadtly,excellent El

i hee LE choicely ; dainty caren. Paper fe
iccatif:m.iue : ÉExfccatine; of a "Jing properfte,

Exficcation:f. A drineffe,or. drying up of.

2. An extafie ; or trance; a rauifhment,or tranfa
portation of the fbirit,by paffion,<rc.
Extatique :com, in a trance, in a fivoone, in an exta-
Sie ; in anextreame paffion,

Eucok im, An extender, drawer, fretcher out at
igth, :
Extenfible. Extenfible
drawne out in length,
lon. An extenfion or ettending;a wrefling wire-
drawing drawing, or firetching out ; alps a find of
crampe ; (extenfion desnerfs, )
Extenfion dela loy. wr efting,ftrayning, largeex-
poftionser far-fetcht mierpretation,of the Lam,
Les trois 1ons.. Fhe three meafures; length,
breadth,and depth. :
Extention.as Extenfion,
Extenuation : f. An extenuation,or extenuatings a lef.
Sening ,impairing,diminution. ROR IT a
Extenué: m. ée: € Extenuated 5 made flender,or thin;
leffened , impaired, much wafted, or Fer: à fallen
away, growne lea®e, pulled downe ; looking verie thin
onit.
Extenuer. To extenuate ; make flender,
Sen,diminifh,impaire;
make leane,


3 which may be extended > or


or thins tolef-
waft or decay much; pull down,


| Exterieur : m.eure: f. Exterior outward,


Extericureté : f, Exteriorilie outwardaeffe ; the fuper-
Sicies,outficle,er upper part.
eriorité : f.as Extericureté,
terininant. Exterminating,
Exterminateur: m. 4 exterminator, banifher; de-
Strayer, \
Extermination:f. 4n extermination, or exterminating;
a cating, or drining forth; a raining, or deflroying
(thereby.) ;


ont,chaced away;c ,ruined,undone deflroyed(therby.)
Exterminer. To exterminate,cafl out,chace forth, divine
away ; toruine undoe,deftroy(by banifoment.)


suifhing an utter ftinting, or putting out ; an abb-


tion of the intralls of beafts : Ra


up by the roots.
irpé : m.ée: f. Extirpated,rooted out. -


700,


rqué:m.ée: f. Extorted ; wre


way by violence. A a


ueut : m. An extorter,exaéter violent dealer:
a violent wringing,


or wrefting of things from others!


drawing from. res.
De noble extraction. Verie well diféended,.0r


er comming from ; alfo,taken from by force. …
‘ im. An extrait, i vi


Er xX F


fimmarie collettion , or draught out of; alfo, the
right of fucceffion in the goods of inteflate baftards.
aire: m, as Extrait ; or,as Eftrayere.
Extraire. To draw, write,or copie out ; to abridge, re-
duce into a briefe, or make a fhort collection of, the
principall points in a matter.
ait: m, as Extrait,
Extrajudiciaire: com. Extraindiciall ; done out of
Court,
Extraiures. æ Eftrayeres. <
Extraneïfer. To chace, driue, or banifhinto a forreine
countrey : (Rab.
Extraordinaire: com. Extraordinarie , umvoonted,
vnufuall, out of cuflome , againft the common , fa-
ion


Offices extraordinaires, s'entendent ceux des fi-
nances, Aides, tailles, & des greniers à fel, à la
difference de ceux de la Iuftice ordinaire, & du
Domaine: {Code Henry.
Vn procezextraordinaire. A criminall attion, er
Suit.
Extraordinairement. Extraordinarily; vmwoonted-
ly,unufually,out of common order,
Extravagance:f. Anextrauagancie; an idle digre/-
fion; a giddie,vnfteadie fantallicall action.
Extravagant. Extrawagant; idle, aflray, ont of the


way.

Extravagation: f.as Extravagance;Or,an extrauaga-
tion,or extranagating ; an idle digreffing, vaine raun-
ging, fantaflicall gadding out of the way.

Extravagué : m.ée:£ Extrauagated, idly digreffed,
vainely raunged, gone,in a humor, out of the way ; al.
So,extrauagent wandering digreffing.

| Extravayuer. To extrauagate; roame, raunge, wan-
der, errein abumour, digre[fe from the purpofe, or
matter; firay , or gad, fantaflically out of the way.

Extrayeur de procez. A Reporter,or Abridger,of Cafes;
a breuiate-maker. :

Extreine: com. Extreame ; worfk, fiutheft from a
meane,or from goodneffe; exceeding ill; alfo,the laft,or
vitermoft.

Extremement. Extreamely, inextreames ; mofl bad-
ly, moft violently ; beyond meafure , without order,
Extremité :f. The extremitie ; end , or top ; bemme,
* skirt, edge brinke,brimme,or border ; th’utmoft peece,
laft part, furtheft point,of a thing ; al/o,an extremitie ;

vice,or violence. À

Exrinieque : com, Extrinfecall ; outward from with-
out,on the outfide, à

Extrinfequement. Extrinfecally outwardly.

Sanmuelence :f An extumefience; afwelling , a

ifing up |


ri 4
Exture. as Exticure.
ce: f. Exuberancie ; fwelling , abundance,
great plentie,or fruitfilne(fe,exceeding flore, of.
se mer elas splenteous, abundant, welling
with flore of fruit.
umaion abound, be plentifull, (well with fore of
— frnit,beare in great abundance. ;
Exulceration :f. An exnlceration an eating into, or a
raie ofsthe skin,or flefh,by 4 frettingbumor.
C ire: com. Exulceratorie ; exulcerating;
Va era cies. male, fine hating tate


Broleetes mabesE Msweraed; poled, fritedite
eaten nioetheskinnegr feb alogapraie, file
led withtancor, 5

Exulcerer 1 exulcerete or make vicerous; to gall,


FAB


t, breake,or eat into,the skinne ”
Lapeer fits,
Exuler. as Exiler; Or , to be banifhed; or, to live in


exile, .
Exultation:f. Exultation, great glee much gladneffe,
triumphing, leaping for ioy.
rance:f, Paffing {tore , great abundance; as
Exuberance,


Exuftion: £. Aa exuftion ; parching,or burning.
F


Abagine :£ Judas tree ; the kind of tree whereon
tus thought )be banged bimfelfe.
Fabal. le fa:de febues. The chaffe,buls,or fhalings
of beanes ; the cleanfing of beanes.
Fable: £.4 fable, fib,lie,leafing, falfe tale unlikelie thing
re el ted; alfo,a Comedie,or Enterlude.
pee te To tell tales,talke idly, prate foolifbly ; to fa-
> £0 fib it,
Fabre: f. A forge ; a fmitbie.
abregue :f. An odoriférous garden bearbe, which put,
and Aer in a veffell full of water thriues excee-


dingly.

Fabric : m. as Fabrice.
abricateur : m. A Fabricator, framer,builder maker,
forgeng inuenter, deuifèr.

Fabrication :f. 4 fabrication ; framing building, ma.


forging.
ue 5a, Fabricquer. as Fabrique,&c.

Fabrice :£. The fabricke ; reparation, or maintenanceo
4 ie Church; alfo, the flate, or eflate of the Pari
at felfe.

Fabricier: m. A Churchwarden; or an Officer , that
lookes to the fabricke,reparation, or maintenance of a
Parifh Church ;the chiefé Officer ofa Parifh , andbe
that ia publicke meetings repr efents it, Ù

Fabril: m. ile: f, Febrile; of lone,or tinsber; of,or be-
longing tothe craftof a Smith, Mafon,pr Carpenter.

Fabrique : f..4 fabricke ; a worke ; frame, or building;
alfo,the Artofi f 4, or building; al/o, the

icke, fatlure, framing,or forging of things.
Fabrique d’vn’ Efglife. The fabricke, raparation, or
maintenance of a Church ; affo,the renenew,or affairs
thereof alfo,th' Officers that bane the fame in charge.

Fabriqué: m.éc: f.Fabricated, framed ; built, forged,
made; plotted,inuented,contrined,deuifed.

Fabriquer. To fabricate ; frame ; build, make , forges
fafhion, forme; plot inuent,contrine denife.

iqueur. & Fabricier,


abuleux : m. eufe: f. Lying, fained, fabulous, full of


fables.
Fabulifte : m, 4 fabler,a fibber, an ordinarie teller of
_fibs,or fables, HAE E


Fabulofité Bhi ial 3 th’iauention of lyes,tales,


les reports, _
pede. brie forefront, forepartoutfide,or reprefenta-
oa outfide, of a houfe,
ifon qui a belle façade. faire goodlie, feemelie,
…flatelie boufèser front ofa boufe.
Façadé. Maifon facadé. whofe forefront, or oxtfide is
pourtrayed;alfo,of a goodlie forme, faire outfide beau


Face: f. A face; vifage ; looke,cheere countenance; alfo,

the forme, figure proportion, fhew, reprefentasion, ve-
“Jmblance; (alistbe) Sper fices, vpper fide, outward
part,or fide of; alfo,a Fefé,in Blazon,


Face


FAC


Face d’Abbé.4 red,or illumined face ; a fierie facies.
La face de’ architrave. The face of a enc


trawe 5a large fillet or bend,that commonly, makes a
Sift part thereof.

De-primefaces At the fi sat fi fits as fone as
exer 1 [ave him


Facé. Feffed,or barred; ; 4 tearme of Herauldrie.

F acecie. as Facetie.

Facendes : f, Bufine(fe, doings,affaires dealings in mat
ters,trafficking and plotting one with another.

Facet: m. 4 Primmer, or Grammer for a yong feboller.

Facetie: £ Wittie mirth, amerrie conceit, a prettie in-
couater in fpeech.

Fz scetleulerment. Mervily, conccitedly, wittily, plea-
faat ye

Facctieux: m, eufe:f. Facetions ; merrily conceited,
wittily pleafant,

Faciate: £ A forepart, or forefront,

aciendaire : m. An Agent, or Negociator; one thats
imployed in a bufinel[e,or made th inflrument of eff ec-
ting it , for another.

Faciendes: f. Looke Facendes.

Facile : com. Eajie, facile, eeth,prone; gentle , gracious,
traékable,pliable, foone pleajed quickly intreated,

Plus facile recompenfe. À recôpence fooner come by.

Facilement. Es/ily,with good facilitie, with little [irre,
with (mall trouble, with no great adoe; alfo, lightly,
quickly ,readily ; gentlyspliably,trablably.

Facilité :£ Facilitie, eafineffe ; proclinitie,pliableneffe,

apine{fe,promptnelfe readine(fe ; lenitie courtefie,gen=
tlene(fe,good nature.

Facilité : m.ée : £ Facilitated made eafie.

Faciliter, To facilitate,or make eafie,

Façon :f. The fafbion; forme; outward frame,or Shape; a
making,propor tion, workemanfhip ; oer bebauior,
order; cuflome,guife,wont.

Les de la femme en la vi
worke ina vineyard, (is twofold;
plants,or yong {hutes vato their poles; youd the dus À
them of their Juperfluous, or'noifome fprigs.)

Les façons des terres labourables.s many fewerall |
breakings,or turnings up,as the feed that is to be lod-
ged in them requires.

Les façons de la vigne. Are foure; la vaïlle; le
houage; lebinage; & letergage ; (For whith looke
in their feuerall places.)
Selva! yn homme gui a fes once man is a little


bumorous,or fantafticall,
Il atoutes fe spires mided of through-
ly junds need of; he bath all :
that be fhould haves be tb bi fl due; ls
ILluy a nile vomees fes É bath courfed bim .


Soundly, bamperd bim throughly, paied bim beme ; be
forbore bim nt, dalled na with him; aed
JS Aue.
pat livre ci defa façon. Is right. of bis pra, or
4
Il rrouva façon de faire cela. Be fund  meanesto
doe that.


oiterance,of afweet
aconde:


4 ms
Face ce: Feed formed fon rap |
r je s aifeguannered, bcbaned.


ioued fhaped,made framed;
Song pinata bnp Pani.


Facond :m. de: fige well poker a grace 4 men flender phic


F AD


, ,


Beconner. To fafhion; forme, figure, proportion, fhare,
ony or 88 my of) aff, Eu re
sor make fit for.
Se façonner à. To applie,or conforme bimfelf vnto.
nier : m. A Cloth-worker.
Faëque : m.as Faquin.
F Facdue: :f A little pocket,or pouch.
aéteur :m. À faéior ; an Agent; a dealer for another.
be uy facteur demain fraêteur : Prov, To day
a Banker to morrow a bankrupt.
Faéteure : :£, Faëlur e,workemanfhip.
ieUx. Factions, féditious,troublefome,contenticus.
ion:f. A faétion,or feet; à fide, or partie, diuided,
or diffeating, from others; alfo, a mutinous companic,
turbulent crue, feditious troupe ;alfo,an enter prift,ac-
tion,or matter in aétion.
Factionnaire: com. Fattious,yiutinous, turbulent, fe-
ditious,much ginen to feels ,or fiding.
actifte : m. À maker,a Plan -maker a Poet that writes
Comedies ec.
pom : f. as Fa@urerie. fi
acture: f, The faéture,workemanfhip, framin
“ 4 thing ; alfo,a factorfhip; or, the dutie, pi sa


Lettres de facture. Bills of lading.

Fee A Faëlorie; a houfe fin ‘fatlors to trade,and
abide

Faculté: £. Facultie; leaue,licence; aptne|fe readineffe ;
power, abilitie ; 5 occafi on, force,opportunitie.

Facultez. wealth, , fubjtance riches poffeffions goods,
‘adas. as Fat; Sottifh, foolifh.

Fade : Pere us 4 tafileffe, wallowifh, waterifh ;
weake, faint;

De Vafauorily,tafilefly; alfo, weakely, faintly ;


piece. 1e Taftlefnelfe, want of fauor, wallowifhefe
2 eat ake " Pinel

Fades, Follies, tapes, trifles, fopperies, fooleries put-

Ties.

Fadeferies: as adda: -
“ain :f. as Fadefe.

Fadoche. The aame of a certaine peare.
:Fadrin :1. The Maiflers mate in a {hip;in a gallie, the
p af imo week Pabedeps

u:m.ué:f. Puffed up; fat cheeked; a chops,

Faftelu: m.ué: sé as Fafcla fr tes à
Fafiloches :f Rauellings of imensor cloth
Fagot: m.4 feet; a bundle of fickes.
ovo Les ‘tripes du fagot. The fnalep ickes of the fr


got.


rm ape together auf pin bn


agoté: m.ée: a de êhe reste
“À bad fi gots ; ie fig ed, yg 4
: sarl sth totie,or tru sitar
3 tobuddle,or clap up together.
oteur : m, A fagot-makers 0 | à
M de tabus, 4 contentious per pus qd
Fagouë :f.4 certaine Jere endlenthe biked bone(in


ke in beafts)alfo, nn.
nellte part,next ph org ne ene à!

-Fagoule: f4'Grit,gram ar ; @Marfe

Æ uenat sm 4 filthie rammifh/mell. igs à

avule: f. The Cra Canticle Phage 1: buis

jen 4 85 4 , a6bion in,

à ses “performance, jexploit;al-

© Siren, argument, or pe ne in

Na ÿ


LOS it à |


iis


6. St À Gk sei ete.
* 1


‘


: Fait à j'en veux. chaperon


.


Faiét: m. faiéte:f. Done,a6ted,made,wrougbt


: undone.
C’ en eft fait. The matter is alreadie paffed, difpat-
: ched, finifbed, at an end.


(7. CES "EE,
: Tefte bien faite. 4 wek-bred fpiritsalearned, and


Faiétis


dfomely,: i
É seat quais) ith cere


F AI


Le faict fort, The ice of the farme of moneyes;
the full rate of “ali (agreed hoe the fr
ming thereof) yeelded unto the King by the Maifler of
the Mint, whether be bane made any money,or no.
Les faiéts nouveaux. Looke Nouveau.
Faiét à fait que ie!’ eferis, As ff as 1writit.
“A faiét,&,de taict. Serioufly,tbrougbly, roundly, in
god earnefi unto purpofe,indeed,

c faiét aduifé,ou de faiét à penfe. Aduifedly, wit-
tingly willingly, of purpofe, to bis knowledge, with his
fill confent. |
Tout à faict. Througbly,wbolly, alltogetber,
Par voyede faiét. By pres violence.
Il fait bien fon petit faiét. He manageth difcreetly
his meane eflate ; or, by bis diligence be tmproues by bis
forecaft be mcreafès,the little be bath,
Faire fon propre faiét de. Louke Faire.
Du dire au faiét y a grand traiét : Prov, There is
great difference betweene words, and decds; we haue
an old,and triuiall rime fomewbat ta this purpofe;Say-
ing,and doing end both with a letter; faying is good but
doing is better.


ed,
compofed, framed; fofbioned ; per formed,exploste at-
chieued,compafed ; finifhed,accomplifhed.

Faiét auhola. Dutifull, obfequious, readie, comming
at a becke running at one call. a
fait &c: A bold fipag-
gerinz, and lafciuious queane.

Faiét à la vieille mode. Seeke Vieil. pia 1
C’ eft fait de moy. Lam utterly ruined,ouertbrown, |


faict. Full fine thoufand,


Cing mille de nombre


Je fuis fait tour au reboursde vous. Jam of a con-
, trarie humor or opinion; 1 thinke ; oriudge otberwife | :


then you. |
C’ eft vn papelardtoutfaiét. He à a ranke diffem-
blersa notable counter fèit a veriebypocrite. : 17 7 |
Sonproces eft faict. He is alreadielconuicted, and


condemn


diftreet beadpecce. AE AT O
Cela vault faiéts or, la chofe vaule faidte. The
matter is welnigh difpatched,or,as good as done.
Ries Big wi re as : Piov.: One feldome
ofes by a go ng. ‘Sars |
Tontesfois eft ia ce qu’ enuis ont fait: Prov.
“Though gain 74 wills they did it, yet tis done. ge!
ictis: m, ifle: £ Made according to, framed after
likenefje, forged unto the refemblance, of anotber ; al- |
fosncat,feat,comelie,band/ome,proper well made cl |
ed, wellfet together. en |
nt. Neatly,ban D filly,


=)


ièture :f.as Fadtures


. A iour failli, At darke night whé day was cuen done.


Li
i


© bim thats bungrie any bread feemes good; we [2yxhir-


; 2m, A Beech-tree,


Faineance: fas Faineantife:.


MNT


BA FE


Encore n’ apas failli qui a à ruer: Pro,He hath not
mifi that bath one throw to caf; or,be bath not yet mift
F Be ati WR;
illir. To faile; flip, flide ; erre, miffe ; miflake , mifun-
derftan offend toe aftray,doe amiffe; af, be
lacke,want;alfo,to quaile,decay, fade ; faint, or tive;
A tai difappoint;alfo,to furceafe,leane,end,| ,
aillir parle bec.To want words; or,to faile for want |
words.
= d de promefic. To breake promife,to go from bis
- word,
Faillir au
in his plea.
U faillit à.He was welnigh,or verie neere; be bad like
to haue.
JIfaillit belle. He bad a faire (cape.
In’ eft fi bon qui ne faille: Prov, The
their faults,the ae their errors.
Les plus fages faillent fouvent en beau chemin:
Prov, The skilfulleft are often deceined in ordinarie
matters.
Faillite :£. 4 failing, as of corne,erc,in an vnftafonable
yeare ; a deceiming,difappointing ; decaying wafling ;


inting,
faire fille: To breake,or fall bankrupt.
Faire faillite à. To coufin,deceiue, difappoint; breake
bisword with; frufirate th’expetiation of.
+ Payer fes creanciers en faillites. To pay bis creditors


- im papers. |

Failion. (Dieu Colas faillon.) # Compagnon:
€Lorrain, qRab.

Faim :f. Hunger.; a great appetite, or exceeding flo-

macke, unto meat; and hence, ancxcecding defire of,

or great longing: after any thing ; alfo, dearth, famine,

exiveame want of vitiualls.

Manger avec vne faim de bifcuir, Lacke Bifcuit.

La faim chafle Je loup hors du bois: Prov. Huager À

drines the wolft out be wood. | À.

‘A la faimil n'ya point demauvais pain : Prov.To


flyle. To commit an ervour in pleading, or |


Left men bane


grie dogs loue durtie puddings.
Faingt ae rf. Feet hd forced, adultivat ed,
| counterfeited, fuppofed; falfe, difjembled, fecrung o- |
ther then it is; Feiné. fire ;
Oeuvres fainétes. Things in Mafonrie fo ioyned vr-
toawallthat rhe balfé, or part of them Leaves out, the
refi being faftened,or [uppoftd to be,within it.
re, To faine; forge difjemble; See Feindre.


Faine:f.Beech-maft,or Buck-mafi; the fruit of the Begch-
æ tree, 210 - as
: msdn idle, drowfieither ft} fill luske; a
beartleffe loytrer,alaxie felow;one thats without wit,
without vertueswithout fpiris; a droane, a dullard, a
lewd sed sara om)'"\


5 faintbeartednes beavtlefnes'; dulnes.


no a Ae ie be T


Origmattiom
TH eOHIO, STATE-UNIVERSITY


Po. we


| Kad of card-pley


_ old coile,a horrible [lirre s to make a buriybur
Fairefes ÉD


L'ONU ER ER ee
4


F A I


Faite les affres dure fright,feare, a.
Faire aiguade, Towater, or ae fe water eee


analy ul ti kr si


| ; dire ambezate.Tacoftaumes-cce;LookAmbedarz. |


Faire armés. To fight; alto fight-valiantly,

Fairelafne. To play tPiAjfe; aad reel a

À toloofea double Hake; loofing a

game which be vadertooke to win. \«

Faire la babaye; ouslababou. Scoping to spe, or

make amouthaï. snibls

Faire la banniere. H fairla ban : Said Je ‘4 | theénifh

Powe who in cuits oul a éme ans fé Bt
reas.


aire barbe, To afemble together in troupssas bets do, |


“before,er about,the doors of their binesswhenthey pur-
pofe tofecke out a newlodging; a phrafeiniufe among
the countrey people of. Languedoc. \\\

Faire Ja barbe à vn: To barbe one; ae sovithfand,
beard,or brauc bim to bis teeth,

Fairebarbe defoarre à. To contemne, feorne; cou-
Len,delude; abufè.

F aircharriere à deTo flop ;raile or bemane in; alfo,to
backe ; {browd,or fhield.

Faire de tout boisiflechés. Te make vfe of any thing


, that comes in bis way.


Ine feair plus de que! boisfaire fleches. He knows
no longer what to doe nor whither to betake bim.


À Faite bon i SPA Foanfiver, undertake, or. give bis


word for’ alfa,to play the game “


: Faire vn faux bond, Loo


Faire la bouche a, Te ab uët sete giue bim bis lef:


fon, beforehand...
Fairela petite bouche.To mince,or fimper itsto jme


a da ge on nice tearmes ; Looke Bou
Faire e voler. er at tenis; oryasin “+ val
Faire Me meurs La drinkeunto.l 1
Faire la buée. To lay,or wafb, a bucke.
Faire la cavalcade.To courfe up and downe ambi
backe.
Faire de cent fous quatre. To bring am
ence ;.to confime a great fumine quickly.
Faire vne chambre. To dreffe vpachamiber.
Faire vne charrüë de Regnards. To (pend the time
in moft trifling imployments.
aire les cheveux à. To powle,barbe,trim,
Faire fes choux gras de.Greatly to inrich,or improue


to: nine-


his efiate
Faitele contre: Tofecond,or belpe


Mafékesio teers aiburdenser fing she ec
eare a burden,or fing the plain fang wher-

on pen 98 defcants ; alfo,ata ide tob A or va-

dertake,the pacer ‘anotbet. :

Faire corvée. To doe a thing omvillingys oronely of

duetieywithout any hope of pren

Faire d'autruy cuir large co: e. Tocut a. ‘ols

fleene out of anothers cloth ; to pend fre on another

mans pure.

Faire la cuifine. To dreffe meat, as a Cooke ina Kit


| chin ; or to dreffe up a Kitchin.


Faire la culbute. To playthe tumbler, to flie top over


Le le demy fault. Tocaper on a paire of gallowes.


Faire le deflus. To domineere, to fignorizeit; alfo, to

holdyor fing a treble part.

Pe yn Diable deux. To make. an ill thing wore
un rs mend it... )

Faire le Diable de vauvett. To playreaks: open


diligences, ea ub © = eh


\ ebjaiiaedp er gle


tae OR RE Les:


2 Faire la dotmevaille.
though be et afleepe.
> ti
ay odbake s dlfo,to take in frefh water,


| Faire del’ To anfiner from the AA


as thougb be under flood noter as one that will not vn- ||
undeds \\\


derfland,
Nr ):Toldéale with, tobe à
LUN CCENE i yea WE TA
P ef uiflünniere. ‘To play the truant; 10
swbenbe eat bis booke,
Faire? Se prifonnier. ‘To write his name
” inthe Goalers


a al Tei le ip
opurpofésor nae account ; 3 alo, to


aire cftat de: Topurpofe
8 At 4 praétife of.
cadre tete #0
zc SO aR aE
aire? eftar on. To td
a insto nes or ote a sy ner


mer fon effat.ro Seis dti to execute or exercife
“his Office;to performe whats fit ‘fr one of bis calling,ov


“ee Ic fait, Sole a To doe and vndoe ; 5 to

weane Pexelopes web.

Faire fon propre fai@ de. Tomanage a bufineffe as
+ well,or take as great care of it, as if 1t were bis owne.

Faire faillites To breake, or fu bankrupt.

Faire faillite a. To deccine, don, faile, breake

« with ; alfo,to offend,or trefpas again|t,

Faire faite. To caufe, procure, or force to be done ;

faire faire fes cheveux.Te get bimfèlfe powled.

Faite faucces To pierce breake through, rune in vp-

on,runne thro

i Faire faute à. ofaile or forfake.

. Faire ferme. To aa fat ; 07, to make a fand; alfo,

10 flop,or ma

: Faire fefte LookeF eft.

Faire féftede. To reiopce ator iay in; alfo, to brag,

boaft,be proud make much, of.

Faire fin. To "nif, conclude, end ; alfo, to thrive,

cheeue,profper.

Faire le fin. To make it daintie,, feeme firange where

he rogers be bold,refife.a thing be would be inuited to

Îake

Faire finance, To gine money for an Offcesalfo,to| ga-

ther a flocke of money,

Faire folie. To play the wanton,tread ber ten atbry

Faire force. To indeuor, Puel

Faire force de. Looke Force, »


Faire les forces. À borfe t tobold bis wont open, +


often turne bis chaps from oncfide to another,
Æairefoy de. To gine credit unto, ~


_ Faire vne frafque à, To an emicthqu a |


tricke Y
Faire do far fredon. Tovfe many nicéor curious
: ne one upon the necke of another.

aire la fringue, To iet brag fprucei it wantonnixe it,
Faire les furs fiens. Looke Fruict.
: Faire gambades à la terre. To bang ona gallowes; or
| Bice fi be fi

aircgille.To flieje/tape,gine t
Faire glane. To gleane afters capers Loke Glane.
Fairegloire. To take pride in.


Este: grobis, To grow proud,er takea furlie flate


ce Pape legroinu re sde à


Nn iy F.


Ori IOs i ig om
THE OHIQSFATE NAY ERS
Le Sees see


e.To Pom fepsomat a | |


ose


to ae


FAI


. >

Faire vne grofle grauité. To be furlie,or take much
que ee him, : R

aire de guedon guedon. To make it goodlie, fèeme
loath ; or, fay nay me take issatmasdertbat would be
no maids)doe ;SeeGuedon.
Fairele guet. To watch,to keepe watch.
Faire le guet à Montfaucon. Te be banged,
Faire le guet au temps, To obferue narrowly the
change of Jéafons, aaa of the flarres, revolutions of
the skies; to affect, or fludie for, weather-wifedome ;
Alo, to let flipno aduantage that tbe time offers, or


afjooras. L
- fie gros hahay, To make a buge flirre, or mightie |


aughter.

aire halte. To flop, fiay,make a (lana. 2217
Fairehautle bois, To drinke for the beauens ; alfo,
foldiers, aduancing their pikes,to flop,or make a fland.
Faire du herr. To play the maifter ; to take more vpon
him then be {bould doe ; Looke Herr.
Faire le hola. To flop, flay, bid land.
Faire hon de la tefte.Tofeeme loath,or flew bimfelfé
vnwilling,to do a thing. , ,
Faire iambesde vin. To drinke bard when he is rea~
die to take a iourney.
Faire {elon la jambe le coup ; as;
Faire felon la jambe le pied. To cut bis coataccor-


- ding to bis cloth; or,to doe things proportionably


Faire la jambette. À borfe to goe,or manage,on three
legs , anid gracefislly bold up the fourth.
Faire iarret. See Jarret.


Faire le je&. In a florme to caft omerboord the loding |


of a fhip. oad) a"!

Faire ioug à. Toyeeld,or fubmit bimfelfe unto,

Faire jour. Day to breake,or appeate; Laoke Jour,

Faire jour À. To make way unto.

Faire jour en. To paffe,or pierce through & through,

Faire du lard, To line idly, fare daintily, grow fat

with eafe,p'eafure,and good cheere.

Fairelargefle. Princes to throw money among the
eople; Sec Largefle,

Faire larguc. To make roome, giue place, leaue fpace

ynougb.

Pare la lexiue, To wafh the bucke,

Faire lidtiere de. To {corne,contemne,abafe,tread, or


pull under foot ; to abufè, violate,prophane.


aire lignade. To take firewood into a fhip. .
Faire le lime fourde. To make as though bee beard
not,or cared not,wbat were fpoken.
Faire de liperquam, To fhew bis authoritie to be ab-
Salute , to take verie much vpon him. .
Faire lelogis à. To prowide, prepares or take vp , a


lodging, fir.

Faire le long. See Long.

Faire longue. Il ne la fera longueen ce monde.
He is no man of this world, bee cannot liue any long


time,
Faire leloup à la carriere. See Loup.
Faire le Joup plus grand quill n’eft. Zo report,or i-


4 gina mile iefe peg yaks F2
aire : To powt, fe fowcesbangt ip.
Fairela ie bonne de, To warrant, PPT


anfive dert E 3
Nu vntothefword. "|
Faire main force à To ioyne firongh with


Faire pres 8 nm; See Main mife,
: Faire fa main. Toinrich bimfelfé, or feather bis neaft
Â


Pg mg CE TL LL (ape ft" Pes


diners ufes; or after the ufe of it one may to imploy it
another oa


Faire mal de: (mon coeur luy fait mal.Ils me yeu-
lent faire mal de vous.) To fall ons with; to bate,
loath, detefi,wifh ill unto ; Looke Mal,
aire vn marc. Looke Marc. |
Faire le mauvais. To cracke, brag, fwagger, keepe
linking flurre.
Faire mine. To feeme or make a [bew of,
aire des mines. Looke Mine.
Faire la mine. To lowt,ov lowre upon.
Faire les mines. To aéfit,or play on a flage.
Faire bonne mine. Looke Mine.
Faire bonne mine,& mauvais ieu, Tofet 4 good face
Fe a 0 matter, diffemble, play th » 5,
airele mitou. To diffemble, play the bypocrite; to
lcoke bumbly,poorely, fimply, fowrely on Pr ‘4
Faire la morgue. To locke fadly grauely, feuerely,au.


erely,

aire mort, On le faifoit mort. They gaue bim ont
for dead,
Faire Ja moué aux harengieres, To be fet om the pil-

lorie,

Faire vn nez de Cire à. Looke Nez,or Cire.
Faire la nique. To mocke,by nodding of the bead, or
lifting up ofibe chin; or,to bid a tehr dc; asin Ni-


uc.
Paire fanui@, (when a man fellsvp his boufhold-
fay(in fome parts of France)Il fait fa nuiét.
aire defes ocufs ps To count bis chickens be-
€ they be batched.: L
aire l'oreille fourde. To give no eare, nor beed un-

10,10 be deafe of that eare.

Faire leurs orges. To fpeed exceeding well ; 10make
a good market,or their mouthes vp to the fill.

Faire de tel pain foupes. Looke Soupe.

Faire le Palais. Toplead,or argue at the Barre.
Faire du pall-allant.Toffaulke,or flrout it ; to march
with a pores gate,

Faire Îa part au plus efloingné ; ou, au plus ieune.
To part and chufe ; or to allot one but a finall part but
a poore fhareoutof. IR Se :
Faire vn faux pas. To flip,miffe bis footing ; erre,mif-
take. |
Pate les Pafques. To receive the Sacrament.

Faire la patrouille. To be driven to linger, and fpend
his time idly,as one thats forced to watch.


… Faire vn peigne. To flie,auoïd,giue the flip.


aire vn pertuis dedans vn trou. To be idle,or bufie


about nothing.


Faire le pet à.To bid a fart for.
Faire vn pet. Toleta fart.
Faire le petit. To kumble bimfelfés or ufé many cour


\ tefies ; alfo,to pretend great infifficiencie; or take ve-


Behe Sen di SGA Gr
i it pain.To line necrely, to nigard.
spa hitlle insie hentoe ie
breed Fuh ceiling ftb yen ones. :


.… Fairele gore To make an entawatdlle, or


Clovenifh leg ; or to vft a fiolifh lifting up of the leg in


A : dawncing,érc. ;
… Faire pieds nevfs. To caft bis boofes, asa borfe; to be


deliuered of child,as a woman. ;
Faire de pierres pain. To make we of any thing; to


turne tobis aduantage,or applie wnio bis purpoft, any |
maiter what{oencr.


__ by prifes taken,purchafes gotten. Faire la pirouette. To wbirle,er turne cfienabeut.
Ts Pare d’une main I’ To applie one thing unto Faire du plade: To talke,babble, or Peer, ad
2 DE ie


Originaire


[HAQHIO:STATE-UNIVERSITY ::2


8 5


TA mss


Pr ge mu) ne


LE


F
bis fe.


F "er


ter old coyle,a filthie ftirrejafcurwie adoe with bis
ongue, ore a
Faire planche à. Looke Planche. |
Faire de fon poing vn maillet. To make bard fhift,or
to be ignorant of the right ve of things; or, fortifaly to
ut bimfelfe,or bis unto ouer-rude ufes, ities
aire la poule, To play the coward, tes
Faire pourquoy, & ne fera pourquoy ; and there
Shall be no caufé why. (Rab.
Faire le precedent. To fit firft, or to come firft unto a
fitting. - .
aire le preftre Martin. To anfiver himfelfe ; to play
both Prieft,and Clarke,
Faire le procez à: To indite, or arraigne.
Fairele quant à moy. To be well conceited of bim-
Jelfe; alfo,to fèeme daintie, or fland on nice, and curi-
ows tearmes,
Faire quartier neuf,ou faux quartier. A borfés boofè
to riue,or cleaue from the top to the bottome.
‘Faire quartier à part. See Quartier.
Faire la queuë. To drag,or come bebind the reft; aff,
to play the coward, or be ia the rereward when blowes
are a dealing,
Faire quinaut. To pofé,or driue to a Nonplus.
Faire la quine à. Scoffingly to point at with the fin-


ger.
Faire quinquenelle. To fall bankrupt ; to breake.
Faire race. To get children; alfo, to breed, or begin a
race of horfes, dogs, rc.
Faire fa rafe. To get many purchafes, to take many pri-
fès,and thereby feather bis neaft,or fatten bis purfe.
Faire vne rafile. To fiveepe, or {natch vp all that is
before bim; See Raffle.
Faire rage. Tobe very briefe, or very bufie ; to wor ke
wonders,to keepe a great coyle,a flinkiag fiirre.
Faire de fon Raminagrobis.To counterfeit grauitie;
See Raminagrobis.
Faire le Regnard. To flinke away, to flip afide, when
a danger approches, libood of being taken in
the manner ; alfo, to play the truant,
Faire derenvois. Looke Renvoy.
Faire fa refte à. To fpeake roundly unto, handle rude-
ly, deale roughly with.
Faire le Roland, To fwagger ; Looke Roland.
Faire la ronde. To walkeor goe the round.

ire la rouë, To turne,or wheele about ; See Rouë.
Faire à quelqu’un fon roulet: To promptor appoint
ene what he {hall fpcake.
Faire le faut. To breake, or turne bankrupt ; allo, to
leape, or be turned off a ladders alfo, as Franchir le
faut; in Franchir. 3 :
Faire le faut de la carpe, To turne oner topfie tur-


nie. € ‘ à

Faire fcalle. To land, fet foot on land; alfo, to aftend,
mount,or goe up unto. ;

Faite Séeflion. To breake,to fall bankrupt.

Faire le fenaud, To play the knaue ; alfo,to miche it,or
a rich man to make fhew of pouertie.

Faire la fentinelle. To fland Sentinell.

Faire ferment. Totake bis oath,

Faire la ferpente. To wriggle, writbe, wind in and


out,

Faire foleil. Il fait foleil. The Sunne fhines ; in which

fence this Verbe is not fo neerely ioyned to Lune; for

ioe  o0 a but, fait cler de Lune.
aire ftoques, Looke RER

aire le fucré, To frig,to wrigglesto commit Diogenes


Digilizec by Te gle


- |
lattes D À CL
oe a D à


A


Fahl) > a FB e


SDA tT


—


. Faire lafuctrée. To mince it,or make it goodlie,


aire fon temps. To lead bis life,to paffec his sime, Ua
fon temps; be és growne old,or out of date,


Faire cenir vne chofe à. Te fend or conuey a thing.


Faire dela terre le foflé . To difpofe of bis owne at
his ovwne pleafüre; Looke Fotlé,
Faire teftea. To rejifi,ov wubfland,
Faire tin; Looke Tin,
Fairele tour du labyrinthe. To returne, after much
turning, into the way be fir{t tooke ; or to deale witha
Sy Mag rT endleffe bufinefje,

aire tout fous foy. (a child) 10 beray bimfelfe.
Faire remblerle lard aucharnier, To fivagger cx-
treamely, threaten horribly, tovfe big, or bugs words;
(ironically. Rab. 3
Faire vn trou à la nui@; Looke Trou.
Faire la veille. To watch,keepe watch; liflen, or looke
about bim while others are afleepe.
Faire bon ventre. To looffen, or fofientbe bellie, to
make foluble,
Faire verfure. To make fhift in the world; or as in
Verfure. edad. .
Faire vifage de bois à. To (hut the dore againfi;to ex-
clude,or {hut without dore.


Faire le voiage de Baviere. To get, or trauell for, the |


Pox.
Faire voile. To (et fayle, to make out to fea.


= Faure voile en Levant.1' fayle Eaflward;to be flolae,


or pilfered away,

Faire voile à toutvent. Jaconflantly to follow all fa-
fhions, adbere to euerte faction, profèffe any religion
thats in uft,authoritie,or fivay.

Faire les yeux. To winke,or twinkle with the eyes,
Faireles doux yeux. To make it goodlie, counterfeit
ciuilitie or modeflie, feems coy; a'fo,to winke, ot {mile
pretilywith the eyes; alfo, to be betweene fleeping and


: ty GS to fleepe and fee nothing.


Faire les doux yeux à. To play at boe-peepe; or to
winke lafcinioufly, to looke flatteringly, or pitifully, at
one. thereby to get fomewbat.

Se faire; whence,Se faire tous lesiours en meilleur
poinét, To battle, or to grow fatter and furer cuerie
day then oiber.

Se fairehonneur, To win,or gaine honour; to procure
to him[zlfe great bonour.


- Se faire tenir. To be lle play the gallant,take vpon


bim,doe whatfoeuer be lift.
S'en faire accroire. Looke Accroire.
S'en faire fort. To depend,rely buiid,or be beld,on ; to
make (re account,or full reckoning, of:
Se laifer faire au clerc. To ler the Clarke take bis
pleafure of her,or doe with ber what be will, *

A que faire? Towbat pur pofe,to what end ?

wl ne feray ie. So will I not,or no more Iwill, -
Ce fais mon: So I doe indeed,or,fo 1 doe,fo 1 doe. _
Cela ne fait rien. It boots, or anailes not ; it makes xo
matter. Eu
Cclafefaifoit au temps iadis. That was the old fa-

jon; or,thats at this day cleane out of fafbion. .

Ie n’ay que faire à luy. 1 haue no bufineffé, no traf-
ficke,no commer ce,with bim.
Ten’en ay que faire. ft touches,or concernes,not me;
I weighit not,I care not for it.
Il fait bien fon petit faiét, Looke Faie, °
Ii me fait mal de Juy. 1 am forrie for him.
Il ness’en fait que mocquer. He doth but mocke


= them. n° - 2
Les faifoit moult bon-voir. They watt Sas


THE DAIG:


4
f


SRE) re


al:


IF SA 1 FI AA LI


worth looking on, it was a paffing coodiefebt to bebold | ::\Faïfeur d'oeuvreblanche. as Taillandier,

them. no! Grands vanteurs re Soa faifeurs:  Prov.Great we
Le diablevous en feroit bien mal ponte hé diuel | _ fers a performers,

were in't if you fhould not be well witball;or;yos muft | Faïfbi


ee : com. Fesbleymatesble célable, doeable.

needs be well withall:1 tro. Fai } 45: Faifceau, fi

Mon autre mari nemé faifoit pas ainfi. My otber Faiflelle: £, 4 chesfird, or Cheefefit, of wicker; eof -

busband vfcd me otherwift. __* earth, pierced in the bottome to let out sd whay aye

Se peur il faire + is it poffible ? camit be? » thecheefe veceiues it forme. :

Avoir fort à faire à. Te be extreamely pefitred with, | Faiffer. as Enfaifler.

or bufied about, Farffine:f. A bundle,or faggor:

Bailler fort à faire à. To imploy much,taske bard, lay Sc as Faifte. »

many bufineffes upon,put onto toyle enough, e: m. The top,height,rid eros sal tbe better

Efe àtourfaire. Tobe fer all purpeferyt be fit for all end of a peece of eloth. siete 3

ules,be readie for any thing be is put unto, À oa fin faifte: Stviftly, fraithy, veto the comp

Fais ce que tu dois, advienne ce que pourra : Pro,

Doe thou thy dutie happenwbat hap may. Faiftiere. A ridge-tyle, Creaf-tile,Rooft- tile.

11 fait aflez qui fait faire: Pros He docth burt, or ese aod jf,

good cnough,that makes it to be done. aitard: m. de: £. Sluggifh, drowfie, laxie, b

Mal fait qui ne parfait: Pro. 1d does be that all does idle,negl Pa ir ew el.

not; difcontinuance of worke difbonours the worke- by laxineffe. |
Faitardement dm ti fuggifblysalfo,


Paeadifer f, A Sth flogeifbnefe, idlene[[e,drovofi neffe,
laxineffe, negligence; Alf lulnes;er fuat-beartedneffe


man. ‘
Tel fait la faulce qu'un autre boit: Prov. One doth
the {cathe,and another hath the fcorne,

Tel fait le mieux qu'il peut qui ne fait chofe qui


vaille: Prov. Some doe their beft, and yet doe nothing (bred thereby.)
well ; or, forme though they doe their bef doe uothing | Faitifs. as Faidtis.
_ well. Faitis, The fame,
Affez dort qui rien ne fait: Prov, As mé one fleepe | Baitiflé.as F


as be idle and doe nothing.

Bien dire fait rire,bien fairefait taire: Pro: Good
words breed laughter, ond deeds admiration,

De ce que tu pourras faire iamais n'attens autruy :
Pro. For that which thou canfi doe thy felfercly not on
another.

Entre dire & faire il yagrand adie: Prov. Be-
tweene faying and doing there is great difference.

U faut acheter Maifon faite,& femme à faire: Pro.
Looke Femme.

Il ne {Gait rien qui ne veut bien faire: : Pro. He n0-
thing khowes that will not do bis dutie, Des is the
shill thats without vertue.

La ae fait rout: Prov. The end prowes all ; or, isall


aiétis.
prunes Fldlenefe-lexineff faint- rare,
vheartlefneffé


Faix: m.4 packe,loador burden; a weightie deere:
Pierres de faix. Great,or weightic flones.
Plier fur lefaix, ‘To fhrinke vader bis burden; to find
» or acknowledge, we charge layed on bim too beauie for
bim


-Celaa prins fon aes. That thing is fete finke thas
farre preffed dovme as muchas dl willbe.
“‘Ahaute montée le combre: Prov. Toa bigh ears
climber a burden is fi a
Faizander, Pme à He
or,as Faifander. . |
Fal: Sa je og alba !
Falaize: £ A banke,downe, lotte fes fide ; alt
fine on — by a water fide,


aldes és to vide with,
Fais fala qu deceit ile, tromperie;e caf.


Qui bien fera bien trouvera: Pro ‘et thrives be ‘
that does well; one that does well cues well,


. Fais*.in, À bundle; Fordle, packe,bunchofs alfosany bez-
uie load,cha¥ ge,burthen. te rriehe
Faifable: com, Feafible, doeable, + ses pren, Fullacienn ea . Fullof fallacies ; falfe, craftie,
which may be performed,atied,or done “wwylie, deceitfull,coufening,cheating, beguiling ; coun-
Faifan: m. A Phefant, ‘ter feiting ; vacertaine.
Faifan bruyant. The pret ke ares oe Falleré: m. ée: f. Barded trapped: decked rchod ap.
Coq de bois, evuches:f. The fparkles, or fieric and finall flakes,
Faifances. as Corvées. Norm. that arife from fürnaces wherein mettals arc melted.
Faifandé: m. ée : TE Mu CRM ei (there- Fallois. ni 3 or vfed onely in the third


by)as daintie as a Phefant. l
Faifander. To mortifie fèvole,érc ; to make it tender, by Il iri Apought jt muf,it fhall.it pre.
: Tis a matter of necefftie :


bangin a de
à | Re meme pa
= it,no firining againftit… Eee
en fault. Itsmiffes,wants,lacks, + 4!
à Iines’en


t,coufening denice,


yi gig De luy. Hefayled but little

‘ well-migh; was pes > Ver ie li

: iv abr à
Tice fault trop de chofes. Thon ath t00 nice, daimtie,
cpu 3 motbing pleafes thee or, enough contents thee


d Tantsen fautque hiy. So farre is font,


=a


Ordinate ten


eee POLITE UMVERSIT LR


F AN


painted fantaflically ; alfa, affeéted.. "2
Fantafier. Teimagine deuife, conceime, inuent; caf a-
bout, thinke ofreuolue in miad ; reprefent-by imagina-
tion; alfa,to fancic, or affcét, Les à
Fantafitie. as Fantofme,
Fantafque. as Fantaftique. :
Fantafquement. Fantaftically, bumoroufly, conceited.
1p ,skittifhly giddily,
antaflin: m. A footman in warres.
Fantaffin: m. ine : £. Of, or belonging to, a footman;
and bence ;
Forces fantaflines. Footmen, or a power of foot
men.
Fantaftique: com.Fantafticall,bumor ous new-fangled,
giddie, skittifh ; inuentine,conceited.
Fantaftiquer. To conceive imagine, deuife, caf} about,
veprefent in the imagination; alfo,to affect fantaftical-
ly; to fll with,or feed on,idle fancies.
Fantaftiquerics : f, Fantaflicall trickssbumorous toyes;
idle thoughts,vaine imaginations. s
Fantofine: m. 4 fpirit, ghoft, bug, hobgoblin ; wvifion,
apparition ; falfe imagination; hence alfo, a skarre-
crow,
Fantofineries : f. Strange fancies , extrauagant con-
ceits, idle vifions , odde imaginations, cafiles in the


ayre.
Fann. as Cenchre; and fhould be Falvife, or Fa-
-mufe.
Faon. as Fan: m.A Fawne.
Faonné, Fawned.
Faonnemént: m. 4 fawning.
Faonner. 4 Doe to fawne,or bring forth yong.
Faque: f. A pocketyor poutch; a fatcell,or fackes
Faquin: m. A Porter, or Packe-bearer; any bafe-con-
itioned fellow, k
Comme vn faquin. porte faix ainf:vn: bafton la
paix : Pro. Looke Bafton. wi y
Faquinage ; m.Portage; the feesor furniture belonging
toa Porter. oh os
Far: m. A high Tower, or Beacon at the mouth of a Ha-
uen, wherein continuall lights are kept anights for the
direction of fea-faring people; a Lanternc.on a Watcb-
tower by the fea fide, abn)
Farain. Pain farain, Akindof great,and verie yellow
houfebold bread,of the better fort. ;
Faras: m, A great confiféd heape ; alo; amixture of
: fundrie graines togetherscalled Bolymong. «. : ae
Farafle: €. 4 Creffet; alfo, the courfeft of Hempe, Swin-
_  gle foot herds, courfe towe. eme YA
Farce:f. A (fond and aren
terlude; alfo,the Iyg at the end of an Enterlude,wheie~.
in fome pretie knauerie is acted; alfo,a Pudding,Hag:|


-C'eft vne vrayc farce, Tis a metreieaft, avery
be HARA US


, eerie. per) ps Se x ee
I jouë fa farce. He playes bis prankes:; be alts-bis
SEEDS sc) She BSN 0 ARE
dei To


FE AR


Fantafié: m.ée: € Fancied,imagined, fined ; made,or\ Farci: m. ie: € Stuffed,franked, fed filed up.


Tout farci d’efcus.That bath flore of crownes;a great


monyed man.
Farciere : f. One à beg three skins which envrap an in
€.


fant in the wei

Farcin: m. Scurfe ; a leaprofie proceeding of melancho-
liescholler or fleagme exceedingly aduft,and filling the
‘shia with blacke wan (pots,and dry parched [cales; al-
So,the farcie in a borfe.

Farcineux: m. eufe: f. Leaprous, feuruie,befcabbed. -.

Farcir. To fluffe,cramme, fill up ; 10 franke,to feed.

Farciffeure: £. 4 (tuffing cramming, filling vp.

Fard : m.Fard; painting (properly,Cerufe,or white Lead)
alfo,any coloured,or adulterate beautie; a deceit, pre-
tence, falfebood,coufenage,blearing of the eyes.

Fardé: m.ée : f. Farded ; coloured, painted, of ana-
ne lufler ; whofe beautie is difguifed,or borrow-


ed.
Fardeau: m. 4 fardle,burthen,truffe,packe, bundle.
Donner le fardeau felon le chameau . Looke Cha-
meau. -
Plus coufte la corde que le fardeau. The fuit coun-
teruailes not the charge one hath beene at about it.
En grand fardeau n’eft pas l’acqueft: Prov.Great-
meer makes not a burthen gainefull; or the gaine refis
not in the greatneffe of a burthen ; tis not the great, but
burthen one thrines by.
Petit fardeau poile ala longue: Prov. We fay, light
< burthen farre beanie,
*Avn chafcun fon fardeau poife: Prov. Enerie one
finds bis owne burthen heauie enough.
Fardeler, To truffe,or packe up; to reduce, or make into
fardles,burthens bundles.
ardelet : m. A fardlet ; a little fardle.
Fardement: m..A painting, a colouring with fard; a
‘beautifying with borrowed,or falfe colours;a pranking,


or fetting out of things,the fooner to fell,or the better 10 .
he,


them.

Farder. To paint, colour, difguife,tricke up, (et out, with
falfe beauties ; to polifh ba! 4 borrowed lufier; to vfe
pretences ; to deceine the eares, or blearetheeyeswith
faire,but counterfeit, matters.

De toute femme qui fe farde donne toy foigneufe-

ment garde; Pro, Take heed of any woman that doth
 Fardeur: m. 4 painter ,colourer,difguifer counterfeiter;
| atricker up, or fetter ont, of a thing with borrowed, or
ge ornaments. -
| ardeur de chevaux. À Horfe-courfer.

as Far. ;

Farfadet: m. 4 little pirit, yong bobgoblin.
Farfanterie. Looke Forfanterie.


as long ; or,as Fafelu.

{ nte. AWrenne _: 5 :
br come) ée:f. Se en ARE
| seu TT,


ee :


into


r ler. To rufflestowfe,crumple, ; with ri
to fearch diforderedly,or unt y3 or, to dif
AN En rhin sousueaeor ya adie
ORDER nt cent hase
| 4 nifles, flim-flams. s
| ‘ie Ape Pari, talesof a tub,or of a roa-
t € head ;
| Farigoulier. as Fregolier. TheLotetree. = ”
La farine de Fébvrier. Snow, ape
Fa-


A Farfelu: m. ué: fDreggellie,fhert and thicke,as thicke.
£4s,Linering; any fuffing,in meats, 5" 0. 5:11 || rt


Farine folle. Meale-duft,or Mill-du[t; the meale that
fie up and downe a Mill.

arine volante, 2s Farine folle,
Badin fans farine. Az arrant Doult,noble Affe, no-
table Cobersegregious Cocks-combe.
Paiftry de folle farine. compounded of light,or fleight
fuffe; a vaine-beaded; or idle-bumored weodcocke ;
one that bath no manner of fubftance in him.
Pour recueillir farine il verfe l'huile, (Of an undif-
creet busband,who tofane a pennie loofes a pound.)
Vanner fa farine au vent, To fy away bis re-
uenue in vaine,and idle humors.
La farine du diable va moitié en vent ou au fon:
Pro. Little good comes of that the diuell bath,or doth ;
or,ill vx goods come to little good.
Safle bonne farine fans trompe ny buccine: Prov,
Fdre well,and bold thy peace.

Farineux: m. eufe: f. Mealie, beflowred, bemealed ;
made white, or done oucr with meale ; alfo, dry, as
meale. P £ À
Lepre farineufe. The white Leprofie. -

Farine :£ Anrifh Rug. repre

Farloufe. The little Medow Larke,or Heath Larke.

Farne, 4 kind of Oake. :

Faroû:m.Theweeke of a Linke,or Torche.

arouche: com.Wild, fänage,untamed,fierce;vntraëta-
ble,fel,cruell, froward fhrewd,curft.

Faroucheté: m. ée:f. Made wild, fauage,untraéta-
ble,cruell,fbrewd,freward,curf.

e: m. A mixture of fundrie graines ,and feeds ga-
thered from the winnowings of corne (as alfo, diners
forts of courfe graine, ps pulfe mingled) and fowed
pell-mel together for Winter forrage,or fodder.

Farragiere: f. m1 plot,or peece of a [owed ere =
wi ings of corne ; or with courfe corne, e
mingled al together. \. .

Farre. as Foarre.

Fafché: m. ée: f, Difpleafed,angred, offended ; vexed,
grieued,molefied,difquieted, annoyed; troubled,impor-
tuned wearied,cloyed, brought unto a loathing of.

>: Fafcher. To angér, difpleafe,offend; pe À

Es + miel; annoy,trouble,molef ; importune,wearie, toyle,
“+ arrie,cloy, bring toa loathing of.

: rie: f. Offence,vexation; anger,difpleafure; an-

3 noyance, trouble, difquiet, care, griefe ; mmporsunitie ;

4 irkfomene (Je, wearine[[e, loathfomeneffe, or a loathing


} Fafcheufement. Offenfiuely, troublefomely, tedioufly,
‘a ee À moft po ak painefully; angrily, fro-
Fafcheux: m.eufe: £ Offenfiue, troublesome, tedious,
importynate irk(ome ne; barfh,grieuous,pain-
fill noft unpleafing ; alfo,angrie, froward,unquiet,pee-
uifbouerthwart,crofe,aduerfe. LE
Fafcheux à ferrer, Stubborne, furlie, obflinate, bea-
die, vnrulie, (elfe-willed.
je it An ill,bard,ill fanered,or vnfortu-
nate fealor.
| Faire le fafcheux. To make it daintie; to fland on
firiGl nice,or curious tearmes. ;
afcinateur: m. A Charmer,Sorcerer,Inchaunter.
Fafcination: £ 4 charme, or Inchauntment ; a bewit-


Fafcine: €. as Faffine. |
{c ings ée: f. Charmed bewitched ,ey-bit l ‘aw.
aa : ur transformed er se nou ENER
Fafciner. To charme, b ite, forfpeake; to dis- | Fauce-foy: m. A faith-breaker, atrecherons compäni-
_figuresor transforme by rit on.


Fafcoles:m.Fa/éls, long Peafon, Kidney Béanes,Sperage


“RAT


Beanes, French Beanes, Romane Beans, Garden Smi-
lax ; Looke Phafeoles. ?

Fafqué: m. ée : £. Loaden.

Fafsade. The forefront,forepart,or out fide of a boufe.

Fafle:f. as Nafle; a Weele,or a Bow-net.

Fafline : £.4 faggot banin,kidd,or bundle of flicks.

e:m, Pride, fcorne, contempt, difdaine, lofiineffe,
5 1 Hla rude


:com. Tedious , loathfome, irk(ome, unplea-


fing.

Faftidiofité : f. A loathing,or abborring,as of meats, by
an ill difpofed flomacke.
aftuéux: m. cule: f. Proud, loftie, fcornefull,difdain- |
füll,arrogant, bigh-minded. :

Fat. Foolsfh, foppifh; vn fat; a fot, an ideot, a ninnie, a
noddie,an affe,a gull.

Fatal: m.ale: £ Fatal, defined; appointed by, belon-
sing to,deftinie ; alfo,ineuitable,unanoidable,

Fatalerent. Fatally,by deflinie.

Fatalité: f, Fatalitie,or fatalne[fe; alfoumauoidablenes,
as of a thing appointed bydefisnie.

ce +4 deflinate,appoint,er defigne unto an ineui-
table t{/ue,

Fatidic: m. ique: f. Prefaging, prophecying, fore-tel-


ing.

Fatidique: com. A Prophet, prefager, fore-teller of
things to come.

Fatidiquement. Propbetically,prefaginely.

Fatigable : com. wearying,tyring ; troubling ; or which
may be wearied,tyred ; trouiled.

Fatigation: £ A wearying tyring,cloying troubling; al-
fo,as Fatigue. !

Fatigue: f, wearine([e, tedioufnefe ; trauaile, trouble,
vexation; labour,toyle oner-much paines.

Fatiguer. To wearie, tyre, trouble, cloy, oner-toyle 3 to
‘gine no reft unto. .

Fatifte: m. A maker,or a Poët that makes Playes,

Fatraille. Trafb,trumperie,things of no value.

Fatras: m. 4 gr heape, or bundle oftrafb, toyes,

+ triflesvaine and idle things, fooleries fopperies.

Vn fatras de clefs. A bunch of keyes. (Rab.
Il fçait rout le fatras. All the packs; al that roguerie,
or rogni{h plot is be acquainted with.

Fatraff¢: m.ée: f. Patched,botched,il fauoredly fet on;
confiféd!y beaped, foolifhly put together; alfo, trifling, |:
vaineidle; made, or confifiing ofstrafh.

Fatraffier. een ; alfo, confifèd, bung-
ling,budled or fumbled together botcher-like.

Fatret. To botch, patch, or bungle vp a thing, like an-un-
ski!full workman.

Fatrin. as Fatraille,

Fatrouiller. To trifle,toy, foole it,play the fop ; inwent,or
buss bio about idle and friualbus-vansties,alfoas
Fatrer; to botch. ;

Fatrouilleur: m. A trifler,dalliervaine fellow ; alfa
botcher, patcher,bungler, à -

Fatuité: f. Foolifimeff, doltifbueffe, blockifbne[e, dut.
nefesideotifie, fottiflmefe.

Fau: m, A Beech tree.

Favade: f, Beane flraw,or a Beane ftalke.

Faval: m. The chaffe, falings bullings ,offals,or clean-
fing of Beanes.

Favas: m. as Faval; al/o,a Beane clofe ; alfo, (but leffe


a crooked blade; 3 See Faulfer.
A mowing ; or the bire of a mower.


reaping , mowing ; barueft.
fae ne cut che by the ground, or cleane a-


i a FRE & fené. He bath made a cleane bou{e,or
p 3 be bath left himfelfe aothingin them ; all is gone,
, confumed, lof.
ne m4 mowiny.
Faucher.To mow: to cut clofe ty the po to fweepe,
er cut cleane away ; alfo,to difpatch,or rid ulna a-
pace; 3 and bence(of a Clarke.)
* Hfauche bien, He writes verie fwifth.
Faucher l'herbe fous les pieds à. To Fipplant alfo,
| _ to prenent.
À Fauchefon: f. 4 mowing; or, feafon good to mowe in.
Fauchet. 4 Sythe,or toole to mowe with.
Faucheur: m, 4 mower.
Fauchon: m. 4 Fauchion,Curtleax, or Hangar.
Faucille: m. 2s Focille; and (in a horfe) the bought, or
peftle of the thigh. .
Faucille: £ ASickle.
Le ne mettray la faucille en fa moiflon. 7 will not
meddle. with bis matters, deale in bis profeffion, in-
croach upon bis inter eft, looke into his dealings ; 1 will
not procure to my [elfe any gaine ; affine to my y felfé 4
reward, thats due unto bis labor,
Faucillon.. little fickle,
Bois faucillon, Brujb wood, fmall wood.
os See Faulcon. Li gs ut
auconniere: f. À Faulkoners powch, -
Faudefteul,& Faudeteul. as Faulderueil
Faudiere: f, The Pouldren or skirt-peece of, an Ars
mour, ~
Faudrinier: m.as Fourdrinier
at m. À kind of, fall Beanes; or,as Faverot-


Faverottes: £ Earth-nuts, Kipper nuts, Eartha
Fave £. Jar. grace, good apnrings tind hindneffe, ot
” eprtedion sale fe


nd worne for the giners fake.
| Riviere Ta ta fâke


Deus aspibe hens 71


Faulcon: m. AFaulcons a and{generally)any long- =
Hawke, or Hawke thats made unto the Lure.
aulcon a A Faulcon gentle ; the beft, and bol.
deft kind of Faulcon ; fomewhat lefe but much better;
then the Pelerin.
i a es . AGerfaulcon,
> nm lanier. 4 Lanner,or a Lanneret.
Fe Faro de mer. 4 kind of finall-mouthed Mullet
that bath lone finnes like ie ©
Faulcon noéurme. The night-Fauleon ; a kind of


Serie

Laoke Pelerin.
con RTS hy
|" n Tunicien. À Br batie Fanleon,
| ES Akind of Pollax, borne fometimes
1 Iythe Pecres of Re ou
à: vives
auicot Dpt orden calc tes


Faulconniere : £. 4 hawking bag.


Faulde: f. 2s Giron. {Langued.

Fauldetueil: m. À low,large,and eafie foulding chaire,
bauing both a backe and elbowes.

Fauldiere : f. as Faudiere.

Fauls: m. bak te Faux.

et Falfe,counterfeit untrue, wing de wi

cing fiber 3 double pollow-barted,

balting with friends,
Fauls adveu, The vaffals sails or hee
fa of awreng lufticer, or Landlord.

auls germe. A Moone-calfè, Looke Germe..

Fauls pas. Looke Pas.

Pauls rompu. Vn f. 4 re félow,one that bath bin
much beaten to the world.
Fauls vifage. 4 Vi ifard,or Maske.
Queué faulle. An unfleadie, much whisking, oftfien
wagling,traine of a borfe.

Faulfaire: m. 4 forger of writings, a fulfifier of Euiden-
ces ; one that counterfeits another mans band with a |
falfeintent y alfa trecherous violater of bis faith;Look

aux.

Faullé, as Fauflé ; pierced,erc ; al, forged, falfified,
pce ns ited ; al Standing, or made crooked , as a

wor


REA fA 1 falfe braye (in fortifications) Looke


Faut. f, Abreacb (as ina wall, ee;) alfo,a trans-
Bie rs piercing; firikingsor charging,tbrough
and thy |

Faulle-foy. Vn f. A faith-breaker.

Faulfement. Fafely, vntruly, deceitfülly, counterfeit


yy.
Faulfer.To falfifie, forge counter feit; to dealevatrulyin;
alfo,as Faucer.
Faulfer compagnic. To for/ake,or abandon the com.
panie which one bath fivorne, undertaken, or promifed
to kecpe; alfo,to part,or breake companic,toleane anie
companies \\
Faulfervn ue vnhaubert. To pierce, to frike,
or to runne; thro wigh a field, dc; 10 makeabreach
intoit. ©.
Puller le les gonds. To. force, or breake finder, the
indges. :
Faulfer vne troupe. To oan through, and trough


a troupe...
Faulfet: m. 4 fain as; alfo,a difcord.
Chanteren faullet. To fine; alfo, to fing louder and
- louiler, or torife from note to note,in finging.
Voix en faulfet. Looke Voix.
Faul{et : 1.4 faucet; See Faufler.
Faulfeté: £ Fal/ehood,untruth,lying trecheria: °°
Faulfetenx:'m: eufe: f. Mop falfes fianghtwith un
truths, fill of yes.
ia U fault. 1 ought, it bébooues, che; Leoke Fal-


is : f. A) svice,deliét, ,
~ sbi ere


halt,

lackesnetd, pouertie penuiefear-

citie of ;. af, a pasite wntilled betweene two fir-
rames.


Paulte domme. Looke Homme: ;


Sans faulte. Pre, innocent, pat
leffe, fauliles ; Are nly,without doxbt,


Faire faulte à. To fayle,di
Fa le ë re à


à faulte. isi bis sane


leffe, blame-


FA V


thewronz incutrethe penaltie.
aoe faire qu' pre par Prov. Th’ one
es the pranke, and th other payes fort.
Faultif: m. iue:f. Faultie, offending,mi{doing,fayling,
Sibieét,or apt to doe amiffe. 3
Faultrage. asPreage. ©
Faulveret.A little bird like a Reed-Sparrow,which buil-
‘deth her neaft among Beanes ; or,as Fauvetre.
 Faulx: m. 4s Faux, ;
| Faulx:; €. À Sythe (to mowe with.)
La faulx paye les prez: Prov. The keene Sythe giueth
Meades their due.
Faulx: m.faulfe: £. 45 Fauls.
Faulx-bourgs: m. The fuburbes of a towne 5 Looke
Faux-bourgs,y .
Favorable: com. Fauourable,gracious,propitious;kind,
friendlie,louing. L
Foire Fanourably, propitiouly kindly,graci-
oufly, louingly. : :
Favori: m. .4 fasourite, or minion ; one thats in-fa:
| our,
| Favori: m. ie: f, Fasoured,graced,cosntenanced:hind-
‘| _ lyufed.
} Favorifant. Fauowring , gracing, affecting , cheri-|


ing.
| Favorif£ : m.ée: f. Fauoured,graced,countenancedsaf
| _ felted,loued,cherifhed.
; eae To fauour, grace, countenance; affect, loug,
|» eberifh. | "

| Favorifeur: m. 4 favourer, (upporter ; fiutherer. - ,
_] Favorit. # Favori. té)

| Favorite: & 4 Princes Miflreje; a Sweet-beart,or fhe-


~ fanourite,
Favot de febves: m. 4 Beane-(t he; alfo,as Faval.
} Fauperdrieux: m.4 Hawke fimewhat leffe then a Kite,
| yet higher;her beake, and tallons not (6 crooked as thofe
of other Hawkes; ber legs finall,and yellow; her traine,
and tip of wings, blacke ; the top of her bead, and bot.
tome of ber throat ofa reddifh white;the reft of a darke
tawnie colour.
| Ar me m. A fhaliag wry-legd fellow. Pic.
Faufonnerie: f. À forging, or falfifying of Euidences ; a
À fa counterfeiting of another mans hand.
Faufhice. as Faulfaire ; or,an Impoftor.
Fauflé. Pierced, runne, thrufl irate 3 Affe, violently
burf,broken,diuided ; Looke Faulfe.
FE :f as Fauliée,
athe ey. a à
 Fauflet:m. À faucet, for a Hogs-bead,érc.
à | Aa a Niggardly, fparingly, (cantly, in
.  fin1l meafure.
1 Faufterne. Thehearbe called round Birthwort.
| Faut. Il faut; it ought,it mufl,dre ; See Falloir. :
Faute. À fault,offence; want of; See Faure. ,
Fauteur: m. 4 fastor, fauourer ; fartherer,belper;fup-
porter, protector; a partaker,a companion. ge |
Eautier. as Faultif; faultie,blame-worthie.
Fautrage. Droi&tdef LookeDroi&. ‘
Fauve: com. Fallow, deepe-yellow, Lyon-tawnie,light-


duane.
Beftes fauves.(A generall word ind of Deere.
wild Goats, and (ach like bea, ee ore
Farine A dunne borfe ; alfo,a Puffin,or Fork-
opi uD, Ÿ , * ’
Tel eftrillefauyeau minis Sn Prov. Some
2 of 4 good turne; or, L atefall


make but badre
À: ufe chofe wor


my oe
; “tee


FAV


Qui afait lafaulte Gilaboive: Pro, Let bim that did | Fauveau. Yellowifh, darke-yellow, dunne, fomewhat


ow. ‘ ‘
Fauvette:f. 4 yellowifh bird fomewbat leffe then the
Nightingale, whereunto fhe vefembles both in finging,
» and fhape; fome call her,a Linget.
Fauvette roufle. À certaine ruddie bird, whichis no
bigger then the end of a mans finger.
Faux: m. 4 Beech-tree ; alfa; falfebood, falfeneffe, or
a falfifjiag ; Hence, the Crime tearmed among Lawy-


ers;
Le Faux, which is the falfifjing of writs 1nfiruments,
or Euidences ; and the bearing of falfe witnelfe; and
the coyming of falfe money; and the wilfisll vfing of falfe
weights,or meafures.
Faux àConnils. À Clapper; or imperfett warren of
Fa da hewaft,or Middl
À corps. Thewaft,or Middle.
Leur Bi Éarnoïs, The part thereof thats next on.
tothe Tafles ; called fo, becanfe it is the weakeft, or
made the fleighteft..
Peinede faux. 12s, in anncient Rome, confi{cation
of goods; if the offendo were a freeman; and death,
if aferuant, or flaue, by the Law Cornelia: But the
Lawes of France, making no fuch difference, inflict
Death,owall that forge Contraëts, or beare falfe wit-
neffe (in a Court of Iuftice;) or falfifie the Kings Chaun-
cerie Letters,and Seales;and upon all Exchequer men,
that haue falfified Accompts, Rolls, Acquittances, or
Difibarges rc.
S’ infcrite en faux. is, to undertake, that an Eui-
dence, coc, ts falfe ; or, to undertake, in a Court of
Fuflice, to proue it falfe, or falfified; alfo, to ac-
cnfé of; or charge with, falfebood, or falfeneffe, any:
thing.
Mainténir de faux. To challenge, or except againft, a
Deed ; t offer to proue it falfè, or forged ; (Celuy
qui veut Maintenir de faux fomme Ia partie que
produit la piece, de declarer s’il s’en veut ai-
der ; & apres fa declaration de s’en aider, fe fait
I inferiptionen faux contre la minute originale,
laquelle I’ accufé doit faire reprefenter, & mettre
au greffe.) . :
Faux: f as Faulx; asythe.
Faux: m. faufle : f. Falfé 5 Looke Fauls.

Faux. à faux. (Aduerbially)amiffesnot rightly; to xo pur-
pofe,vainely; andhence; a
Ce coup tombaa faux. This blow was loft ; orbit not
the intended place, but was defended, auoided,or put


by. :
Rebel À uber trick,a faite part, a trecherous
pranke; a deceitfill,or coufeni 10M»
Elle a fait yn fauix-botidh. She hath played falfe, or
trod her fhooe one xo!
Paux-bourdon. The drone of a Bagpipe.
aux- 2m. The fuburbes of a Towne; whence;
Tardin aux faux-bourgs vaut cent folz au rebours:
Prov. 4 Garden inthe fuburbes is worth a hundred
pound backwards ; (which diners of our fond citixens
baue to their coft found true.)
Faux-feu. 4 fayling yniffing,or not taking of effeét;a de-
ceiuing,or difappointing ; alfo,a fhrewd tuyne,or ill of-
fice, done vnder hand. ;


Fauxmarcher. To fe, or ge. ‘awry ; to. et the


foot ill in going ; alfo, to flp, or fumble, by fucb
ir mardhute: f. A wrigch, or firayneinabone,
or int of the faote, cc, got by a flip, or wry
: 00 Faire


FEB


FEC


ee va ss bird which hath” cf “Ge sp a


H :
(Entveat “A fidftor bollow pe Se ound that fnkes
be: the feet in going; alfa, a ips mi à in footing;


Fayeric: f. as Féerie; or, a fancie imagination; jllufion,
or vifion of Fairies.

Fayfort: m. 4 warranting of the goodaneffe and fuffici-
encie of fale-ware; or as Le fait

Faymidroiét. Bafe,or low iuriflition; “called fo bythe

! Cuflomes of Solle.

Fays. as Fais. @Langued.

Fayfle: f. 4 fwatb-band for a child. &Langued.

Faziols: m. Fafels,long Peafon, Kidney Beanes, French
Beanes Romane Beanes.

Fé: f. as Foy; fuith(an old word:) par lafé Dieu; (now
turned by the countrey people into, Par la fefte Dieu)
by the faith 1 owe to God.

Fé Dieu (an Intevicétion of admiring;) G velle chofe
advintonc; Ob God man, or, Gods me, {uch a thing
was neuer.

Feable. as Feal. Honeff,truftie,faith full; alfoyworthie of

" accountf reputation.

On&ion feable. The pruining,or annointing which a


Hawke giues ber feathers,by the moifture fhe fucks from |


ber Crupper.

Feablement.# Fealement. Honeftly loyally.

Feage: oa Fee fimple ; or, aninberitance, or boufe held
in fee fimple.

Feal: m. ie £, Faithfull, Me De

Fealement. Faithfüly,trufuly,loyally,bone

ge :f. Fealtie; fidelitie, aloes ie Arf
tineffe

Feauté. The fame.

Febe: m. 4 double fecret, orfecret lorie; a thing bid-
den; (Originally,this isthe word y 01,45 a
queltion demaunded, inthe Cake. dene of King and
Queene at the later end of Chrifimas, by bim that
would bane a peece of the Cake.)

Feble.as Foible, Feeble,weake.

pps Sicke of


ebrifique: com. bodies fill of the feauer ; .
gel apt for feauers.


m. ile: fi Feauerie; MAR ~ 00a


ging to an ague.
Febve: f. eur a #
ebve tiaque. The: Beane of E a-vwaler
plant Ph beara Roft-colowr pep di sat ‘averie
pers leafe ; (the fruit, or Beane, and the root thereof
(tearmed by fame,Colocafia) are 1 andno
ill meat;) alfosthe fruit of the Lote tree. .
À cfpeffe. Orpine, Liblong, or Linelong ; (an
e:)
Febves fritees. The Note, or Charaëer ff im the ci-


Foo aaa 8 i en
4 2 ANNE A ind of berd, rudd andpritien


“d'y French Beanes, or Beanes of Rome; 4
Fe RaiveFeinenre Febv

e asFebve tiaque.
Fe re deporc. The weed Henbane ; fo called in for-
Febvesd Rome: Kidney
le \Beanes; S] Beane:
French Beans PHONE Peale ginal “¢


Go gle |


Febve fauvage. Tee with nine jenn


be of a bright Crimfon colowr,and whofe tke tt :


is moft unfauorie,


Bailleur de febves àmy-croift. A confener, cheater, |


impofter,deceiner,conycatcher.

Comme vhe febve en la Le d'un Lion. we fay,
like a Beane in a Monkes bood.

Trouver lafebye au gafleau. To find what one looks
for,to meer with a thing for bis purpofe.

Quand les febves font flories les fors commericent.


leurs folies: Prov. when Beanes doe flower youth en- ||


ters into follie.

Febveux: m. cule: f. Beanie, full of Beanes, yeelding
Beanes,

are :m, A Black-fmith,

En forgeant on devient febyre: Prov. Continwall

prattife begets cunning.

Febrier: m. as Fevrier. :

Fecal: m. ale: f. Durtie,dreggie;unfeiled;unfined.
La matiere fecale, Dung,or excrements.

Fece: f. Lees,dregs;grounds ; any thicke fubflance fetled
in the bottome of liquor,

Fecond: m. de: & Abundant, ranke,full, fertile, fruit-
fiill,plentifull.

Recondement. all fr fui) sbandenty

Feconder. To make fertile, fruitfüll ; ranke,abundam.

Fecondité: f Fraitfidnelfeferuiitie flore,fulneffe,plen-
tie,abundance of fruits.

Fecot: m. The seen, Jar of any other fuch
beaft) newly come out of her bellie.
ecture. as Fa@ure the finifbing,or making vp of.

Feculent: m. te: f. Thicke,muddie,dreggie.

Fée: f. A Fairie.


Feé: m.eéc: f. Fatall,appointed, deflined ; alfo, taken,


bewitched, or fore{poken ; alfo,charmed, inchaunted.
Féeric. Parfteric. Fatally, by deftinie, by appointment
of the Faivies.
Fein: m. Hay, See Fi
Feinét:


m. Serf. Paid forged, Papa, Oe 5 as
| Feingte: A finallor zene She the rie Pilebard.


e. To cog, foift,counterfeit,
pretend tbe pester: De ae refemblances, or


Hike sto imagine, fuppofe


: os à marcher. En an arfe, dragd be- |
ina formar |


07 ON,

Sefeindre. To make fhew of or one thing, and doe anon |
ther ; to fuffer of purpofe his aduerfarie to prenaile a- |
gainft him; to difable bim{elfe more then be needs; to’
proceed coldly in a matters to come flowly id to |
drag bebind any way to forbeare, or doe’ leffe then be |


can doe.


Se feindre autrainde derriere. Abeafto fauorbis ||


binder parts: or,to batt bebind


Sans fe feindie: Diligently, ferionfly; M
den er pondre pe € :
Feine: f. Deer 4 alfo, a kind of pr the cyder


mbereof iso is of long continuance.
phy A era , or Phantafine; ae,
‘reprefents,or adts it ”, aifoya Shar,
in par tg


Feintement. 4s Faintement; frintly; fainingly.
Feintife:f, Difebling, fainine cozging,ere,See Faintife.


Feletin: m.. Flannen; or, ee


hangings are (fimetimes) made,


Belles coin, Häppie;luckie, ercts;
ra Span nsf cena
cre.


Feli- d


-_. + YY oo Shen! in an tha sae
Te eR  eenen A > ee {
rere -


163€


+ things in them. e:
mme de bien vaut yn grand bien: Prov. Az ho-
neft woman is worth much.

‘Femme bonne qui a mauvais mari a bien fouvent
le cœur marri: Prov. The good wife of a wilful man
bath many a wofull day; The lkeis; :

emmie qui a mari mauvais a peu fouvent le cœur
‘en paix. f Ü 107 bn TUD!h!
Femme bonne vaut vne couronne: Prov: A vertu-
ous dame'is worth a Diademie.
me fiere'en toute faifôn veut eftre maiftre de
fa maifon:Pro.The proud flroe fcornes to be a fibicfl.
Femme lechereffe ne fera ia porée efpaifle : Prov.
Looke Porée. #


Felicité: € Felicitie happineffe, bliffe, profperitie, great
luckeexceeding good + sea # à ;

Feliciter. To make profpe/ous,bappie,luckje.
py 8 avec vn de. To reioyce,or congratulate with
one . BEL 5

Felin: m. A certaine weight; (among Goldfiniths, feuen
graines, tmonz Lapidaries,two carrats) alfo;the fluffe,
or thin waollen cloth,called Wadnall. a!

Felle, À ind of fifh-net, forbidden to be ufed, ea |

Felle: com. Fed; pight(ul, difdainefull, cruell, fierce,
rhs pe pene eke are Ÿ

Fellé: m.ée : £ Cruxéd cracked flawed,à little rinen,or
broken. :

Felleure: f..asFellure,


elleux: m. eufe: f, Full of bitterneffes fate mativaife qui .n’ empire encore n° eft elle
Rellinsae Feline ane olisug oh t pas la pire Prov. An ill wife that growes not morfe is
Fellon. as Felon, not of wines the wort. ; ee
Fellonie. Looke Felonnie, emuneé trop piteufe fai fatnillle téigneufe: Pro.


The ouer gentle hufwife mürres ber houfebold,
Femmefe plaind femmiefe deulr, femine eft ma-
lade quand elle veut: Pro; Women lament,mweepe,fic-
henswben they Lip. 2"
Femune prudente, & fage eft l'ornement dé fon
_ mefnage: Prov. Looke Prudent. eS
Femme qui envis file porte chemife vile: Prd Beg-
 gerie,and naftinelfe are the fruits of dl bufwiuerie and
lazineffe. É
> Femme quifes levres mofd;&qui fon allure tord,
 femefle du meftier ord , ou fait 3 foy méfie tort :
» Pro. The wife that bites her tips and treads askue, is to
her busband,or ber [elfe,vntrue. is
mme qui perd fa honte eftans eflime,& Conte:
* Pro. os that hath loft ber flame pach loft refpeët,
efleeme, good name. ee,
~ Femme rit quand elle peur, & pleure quahd elle
veut: Pro. 4 woman laughes when Tre can,and weepes
when fhe will, ,
Femme fafte, & yvrongnefle, de fon corps n’ eft
as maiftrefle ; Pro. Look. Yvrongnefle, :
emime fage,& de façon de peu remplit fa maifon:
Pro. The wife,and well-bebaued woman fi ber boufe
© with little ; or, a woman wife,and prouident by tbnft
doth flocke ber tenement, x
Femine forte fe cognoift la cotte: Prov, The foo-
Lifh woman's by ber weeds difterned; the womans var-
ment show find fhe is. $e
* Defmme volage, & friande, En tout temps bon
heur nous defende : Pro, From women light, aud lic-
| horous,good fortune [Hill deligerus, " "7"
De toute femme qui fe farde,donne toy foigheufe-
ment garde: Prov.Let 20 womans painting breed thy
fomac s fainting. oe “Shel ¥ eres
Qui ferme a noife a: Prov, Looke Noife.
Cement croit,& Afne meine fon corps ne fera
ia ine: Prov. (Belike becaufe the one is (fome- :
time)falfe, as the other is ener foobifp.)
Toutes les fernmes fe refemblént: Pro. All pom
peer pi Ey eC
“A peine cognoift on la femme, & le Melon: Prov,
(The meaning is, untill they be sth or cut vp ; and,
the out fide is often the beft part of t Lie aan a
‘A qui Dieu veut aider fa femme luy meurt : Prov.
The wife of bim whom God willhelpe foone dyes.”
Aux Receveurs les honneurs,& aux fermines leurs


: 909
Fellure: f. 4 fail craze, cracke, or flaw (in a Jewell,
Glaffe,Pot,crc) no bigger then ahaires 0 2
Felon: m, 4 fichneffe of the flomackestearmed,the chol-

* lericke paffion ; or,a flux (accompanied with vomiting)
that proceeds of choller. ( is"
Felon: m. ne:f. Fell; fellonious; fürious, defpightfull,
cruel cust, pitileffe,bar fo, rough, froward, untraëta<
ble, ontrasjous. in
Regard felon. 4 grimme, flerne; terrible, frowning,
lowring, foure, mifcbieuous looke, >
Amour vainc tout fors que le cœur felon: Prov.
Loue conquers any thing but a felonious heart: 17% à
Eefonene: f Selandine the greater, Swallowes bearb,
Swallow-wort,Tettar-wort. os
NA be 4 | r dpi
nnement. Felly ; 3 firrioufly, defpight-
- fitlly cruelly curfily jar fly, fiowardly ; grimly, piernely,
À mu outragioufly. TES ‘#
Felonnie:£ Felneffe, eurfineffe, defpightfulnelfe, ire,
anger ; untractablene(fe crueltic ummeresfilne(feout-
ragioufie(fe; alfo,difobedience ; trecherie, treafon; a-
ay fach bainous fal[ebood, or offence, committed by a
valfill agaiaft bis Lord, or by a fubiett againft bis So.
weraigne, whereby be loofes, or is worthie to loofe us
e


eltate.
Felouque: fai Falouque. ’
Felure: £ 4 flaw,craze,or finall cracke,
sis et ine: £. Womanifh,effeminate; weake,ten
ate.


der de
Femelle: £, The fémale,or fhe of man, or heal.
Femelles. ‘The rings which béare up the Rudder of a
Ship; wecall them;Gudgeons. SEC Ve
Femelle. Female; of the female fex,or kind,
Femellette: f. Alutle creatures) (0) <4
Femier: m. A Baylife, or ouerfeer of the Husbandrie, in
a Gentlemans boufe. Lit
Feminin: m. ine: f, Feminine; or,as Femelin; ao
nate. ~ rs
Femme: £. A woman; awift; a female, na
_ Femme dechambre. 4 chamber-maid. f
Femine de corps. AVillene/fe,or woman of aftruile
| condition, !
Pomme de belle femme . The name of a certaine
beautiful delicate,and inicie,apple, nod
Follettes femmes. The hearbe Orage,or Orathe 1
_ Sagefemme. 4 Midwife, :


En femme. £ffeminately. womanifhly, woma die douleurs: Prov. Receiners get preferment, foobfh w0-

y Matra Ds andl Eur of | menpainezor (a8 truly for à ot WAY momens paine
|. Femme,argent,& vin,ont Jeur bi ,& leur venin : brings them bonour , Receiners honour breedes their

Prov. A woman, coyne, and wine bane good, and bad |  paine. : ve MES

| 00 y Beauté


aha LENS A PT ETS Te 1 ST a.


REM
Beauté de femme fafcheux refville-main: Prov.


RER folie « ate prendre aux Fécanes, 6 aux be-
4 Fi! Prov. bee sme that quart ele (with women,or


en'eftrien, © Tu ja qui fe noye: Prov.


ER though a woman drowne ber felfe.
cun pbs avoir la y femme: Pro. E-
Merie Ape thinkes ber puppie the faire.


eux pots au feu fignifient fefte, & deux femmes
| fonc la tempefte: Prov, Two well fildiare fignes


” of a fealt; two women.
2 he ie su Fm oe femme à à faire:Pro.
(For by building 15 any a man undone and with a
widow (if {hoe lift) amy man fhall haue ynough to doe.)
Tan fe faut fier nid femme,ni au giron:Pro. Looke
iron,
_Iln'eftf bon que femme n 'afloue: Prov, Fhe beft
man may V afotted ona woman.
Les hommes donnent aux femmes cequ'ils n’ont
as,8ne peuvent avoir: Pro, viz.ddilkes.
ar trop trotter la poule, & la ferame.fe perdent
HOT Prov.Agadding bene sand houfwife are


one loft.
Qui perd. {a femitne, & cing fols cet grand dom-
mage de l'argent: Pro, He that loofes bus wifeand, fix
pence bath fome lojfe by the money.
Soleil qui luifarneaumatin, femme qui, parle La-
tin, & Enfant nourfy de Vin, ne viennent point à
po fin ; Prov. 4 learned woman fe prowes a


eee ce que Clerc laboure folle femme devore:
Proy. a that the Clarke toyles for his Punkede-
houres,
Vn hommede païlle vaut vne femme d'or : Prov.
A man of ffraw is wortb a womanof gold (for rude,or
violent purpofes will fome fay.)
Femmelette : f..A pretie little mife,or mroman.
Femmette. 4 little wiftylow woman, :;


Femois ; m. A certaine (forbidden) fircatching Net; or
Fan £ Hay tim, Hay-baruef the Lean wherein


Hay & gotten. Fr
Fenat e pean ieee a Vesti
enault; m. 4 Hay-loft, ENT
Fendant: m. 4 flafhg ~~ Cut, or dovme-
right blow ; alfo,acuiter, ee lé


buckler.
“A inéie;& à fendant, Both thrufting, and kin
inal extremities by al cee ue frites
Fendane t. Cleaning, flitting,cha; ping choppingrining a


fi
Gel fendant. To freeze e: reamely.
rendait f. 4 cheri FA io


ding,rining,or cutting afunder. 7e
PL m, À cleauer, (litter; a riuer; a diuider.


n into, final rifts,or chinks.


M NON ,
Lu hie.
bis countrey 5 or,to rum away.
a a0


Go gle


Fendu: m, The flityor clouen ioe ying


Fené: m.ée: f. Withered; alfo,weatbered ; made as,or.
| intosHay.


to get.
| Fener. To make Hay,or make into Hay.


| Éencrateur:m. Aa Vfürer.
Feneration: f. Vfurie,or the prattife thereof.


Feneftrage: om eager s or,the fafbion,feat,caft,pla-
Feneftre: £. A window. He


endement: m. 4 cleauing, chopping, chapping, dini-


POELE A nafeaux, A cutter, fivaggerer, Swafh-
Py AR Clouen;riuen, chapped opened in, or

Fendi 7 To peje he ; chap shoane,open,er breake,
Fence To cleane, ft 5 rue dinide, or cut, afun-


F EN’


Fendre à noyau. To take the effap ofa Deere,
Fendre les pieds à. To ruane away frem. 11 luy-fau-
droit fendre les pieds,& l’envoyer mae comme
vne pecore; (Applyable to prope on lie logarbead)
be fhould be turned to the pese -trongh; or, fe Sent a gra-
xing; be is fitter to feed with beafts then with men.
‘Fendre le vent. a Fendre}’


Fendu: m.uë:f Cleft, flit, riven, clouen,dinided, cut
afinder ; opened or open ; gaping, chappie, full of cra- ;
nies, full of choanes. ;
Levre fenduë. 4 Hares mouth; See Levre.

Oignon fendu, 4 Scallion.'

Radis fendu.The cleft Raddfh,doubleRadd'fh,mary-
vooted Raddifh.

Bien fendu de gueule. wide-mouthed,fparrow-mou-
thed mouthed vp to the eares.


Ila Fauché sfené. He bath confumed, or loft all ; or,”
bet atc bight bi beft; be hath got all be is like


Se fener. To fade wither,wax deadifh; to decay.


toire: com.
_cing or contrinement ther


A Feneftre baftarde. A falfe window ; or fufbion of flo-
pee window (as in fome flops) yeelding a falfe light,
eneftre dormante; ou À voirre dormant. 4 Dorre
-2window,or _ window ofglafe,érc.
* Feneftre Flamende 4 fiue-cornered window of tim-
ber-worke, bearing out, in the upper parts, from the
roofe of a houfe, exc; and “era im the bottome, vpon
mee! beight of the bonfe wall,
“hs À feneftre. Houfébold bread,wheaten bread;
» Le made of vaboulted corne.
Entrer par la feneftre.Tocomevnto by indireét cour-
«fes, to enter the wrong way; (whence belike we [ay that
a baftard came in at the window.)
S'ils ne veulent paffer par là qu’ ilspaffent parla
feneftre. mas not thd that courf, let them doe


mene
mer EWiadow ed. , bauing us open,


ga if A little window.
eneftrier : m. ere: f. Belonging to a window; alfo,pla-
ced in,or looking out at,awindow; whence;
Fille feneftriere, & trotiere rarement bonne miel-
nagere: Prov.Seldome proues gaxer,or gadder a good
boufivife.
Feneur: m. A bay-maker.
Feneux: m. eufe: f. Haji filo by
Fenicte. A little =
Bene bay bes Recke,
‘enil: m. A move, e ; aReeke
“4 st of an the Racke wherein bay is


rar Withered, faded.
Fenoil:m.as Fenouil, Fernell. 10
Fenons: m. Rowles made sr À finger thick,
Sirf wrapped in bay, or flraw, then within a peece of
and unto broken thigbes, or. tests about
the pa agi ok et fettle them, and eee cm in


Feno-


(a R


+ ae dull (pirit, which by much vrging enters int®

holler, ‘ t

Fere: Ê. 4 wild beaft.

Fercules: m. The things whereon Images, or Pageants
are carried; al(o,Beeres for dead men,

Fereluche. as Freluche ; a moat,erc.

Feri: mie: £. Hit, flrucken; wounded,hurt.
criage. as Feage. | ts

Ferial: m. ale: £ Ofer belonging toa bolyday ; idle;re[-
. ting,vacant,vnoccupied ; alfo,ocond merriespleafant;
alfo,ridiculous.
Vn ferialbeuveur. 4 (quare drinker,e faithfull drun-
kard ; one that will take bis liquor foundly.

Feriat: m. A vacation time ; an idle,or play day.

Feries: £ Holydaies, feaffiuall daies, wine daies,id}
times, Wakes, Vacations, or vacant feafons ; proper-
ly fachbolydaies as Monday and Tuefday in Eafier


weche, rc.
Ferin: m.ine : € wild, fanage,beafllie,cruell.
Ferir. Tobit, flrike ; wound,burt.
Mal ioué qui fiert la iouë : Prov. He makes but ill
[port whofe play tends to burt,
Fermage: m. Farmage ; the profit made of, reuenue
à comming in by,a farme.
Fermail : m. The clafpe of a boake,ec.
Fermaille: £. 4 finall buckle,or cla(pe.
Feneftrea fermaille. .4 window that fhuts with a
hafpe; or (in head of, à fer maille) as in Fer.
ermaillé: m.ée: £ Buckled; bafped ; clafped ; alfo,
garnifhed,or fet thicke with fall buckles.
Fermailler: m.A Buckle-maker,or Cla{pe-maker.-
Fermailler. To buckleshafpe, clafpe ; alfo,to fet, or gar-
nifh with fmall buckles.
ermaillet: m. 4 Carkanet,or border of. gel ere, fuch


Fenouil: m. The bearbe Fennell ; alo, the. feed there-


of.
ouil de Barbarie, Fennell giant, great Fennell,
Barbarie Fennell. ; )
Fenouildoux, Sweet Fennell (in all refpects bigger
then the ordinarie one, and therfore diftinguifhed from
it.) (4 \ “
Fenouil marin, Rocke Sampire,Creffinarin.
Fenouil de porceau.Sow-fénnell, Hogs-fénnell, Hore-
range ,Horeltrong,Sulpberwort,Brimftonewort.
Fa Romain. The hearbe Annife,or Anniféed.
Fenouil fauvage. wild Fennell, borfe Fennell, great
Fennell.
Fave £. A cleft, rift, flifier, chinke, flit, cranie, chap,
choaine. * .
Fepteen pr A cleft in a bone, as finall ae any
aire. ts
Fenugrec: m. The hearbe,or feed,Fenigreeke.
Feodal: m. ale: £ Feodall ; ofor leek to, a Fief;
< alfo,beld (by bomage and fealtie) as a Fief; alfo, poffe/-
«fing diners fiefs; Looke Feudal,
Seigneur feodal. A Lord Paramont, or cbiefe Lord;
one of wltofé fief diners other fiefs are held, by homage
and fealtie.
Cela nous appartient par forfaiture du Seigneur
_ feodal. we haue no pofivilitie of right unto that.
Peodalité: f. The effate of a Feodall,or chiefe Lord; the
polleffionofor Seigniorie oner, diners fiefs ; fexdalitie,
or feodalitie; alfo, a tenure iy-fef; or, by bomage and


fealtie,
Feodé: m. ée: £ Infeoffed ; given unto in fief; alfo
beld in fiefor in fee. - . 5} À ie
Sergent feodé. Looke Sergent. de
Fer: m. Iron; alfo, the bead of a Pike, Launce, Arrow, | F


ec; alfo,the tag of a Point. | as Gentlewomen weare about their heads,or boods; al-

Fers. Shackles, fêtters, boults, irons ; alfo, borfe- fo,an inchaunted image ,collar,or chayne, worne about
0005. : ; the necke,as a preferuatine again{t poyfon, witchcraft,
er d’archail, Fron wire. € wounds crc; alfo,a finall buckle,or clafpe.

Fer blanc. white Lattin. ÿ Fermance: m. Acertaine officer within the iurifdiftion |’


Fer de cheval. Vn fer de cheval. A borfe-fhooe; Le
fer de peu A kind of Axfècd,or fall Pulfe, called
Horfè fhooe.

Fer de guerre, The fleelie,and [harpe bead of a Pike,
Launce,or horfemans flaffe. ,

Fer maillé. Feneftre à fer maillé. 4x Jron-grated
window, whofe barres are not(or ought not to be)aboue |
fur ynches afunder.

er de Moulin. 4 MilLring, or Mill-rind ; called by

Heralds,an Inkmolyne.

Fer dravaler. A Tanner, or Leather-dreffers fhauing
knsfésbeame knife yer working knife.

Fer de richard. as Fil d’ archal ; or, great Iroz
wire. { nc:

Fer de rochet. A Burre ; or, the blunt, or dulled bead
of a tilting flaffe, Fe
Vieux fers. Old Iron; old, or broken things of Irom,
alfo,old rags ; any ouer-worne trafh.

‘A fer efinoulu. Extreamely; or,in good earneft; Looke |
Efmoulu.
Entre deux fers. In equ2ll ballance ; of a like,or iuft
4 the fame fubftance, qualitie, proportion,
goodne (fe. |
Elle n'a eu fer à Pied. She is vntainted, püre;undef-
nee ast yet beene manned ; [he bath not yet
eene |


of La Solle.

Fermant:m. Abuckle,bafpe,or clafpe; alfo, a fhutter;
any thing that (furely) binds, faftens, clofes. À

Fermant. Shutting, flopping vp;clofiug, fealing, locking,
faflening making vp. :

Fermative: f. An affirmation, affeneration, or provefia-
tion of right unto a thing ix contronerfiemade before a
ludge,by him that pretends it.

Ferme: f. 4 Farme, or Leaft; a thing farmed; a Tell,
Rent, Mannor, or Demefhe in farme; alfo, the far- |
ming thereof, or an eftate therein by farme,or leafe;al-
fo, a ferme; or ferme-boufè in the countrey ; alfo, as

-\ Fermative. | ames ’
Les fermes du Roy. Thyfè parts of bis Reuenue, or |.
-… Demefne, which may be let out. teas

Ferme: com. Firme, fiable, fure, faft; fleadie, fetled,
Vtt Pi ro pt alfü,decreed;rati-

‘fied confirmed,e ev sis aes
Faire ferme. To fland fill; to make a flop, oy
fiand; 5 Mee flop, canfé to flop, make to fland (ire -


Fermé: m. ée: f. Cloféd, fat, faflened, locked,fealed
up; inclofed,kept in; made vp. }

erme,Adverb.(as Fermement;).and hence; Ferme | -
à ferme (is Horfemanfbip) anie Aire done ina: little


PEN, LS
’


vp. Set: roome,and a iuft time. A ue
Ar A gr
: On tant a ils : Pro. | — extreamely,exce/fiuely,excee 3 fercely,violently,
Cold Iron by much rubbing wal grow bot ; Applyable vehemently ; afuredly, confidently, =
| 0


Oo iÿ Fer-


: Go gle: ,


CNE" 1


i
F
a


| waited


FER


Fenneille: LÉ eFémaile.
Ferineillet: m. as Fermaillet,


M Sama lockin,
clofing, lusting, faflening, locking,


meena


Fermentation i lig ar alfo,a
fermentation ; mae? of pafte with leauen.a lea-
“mening ; alfoya wor 6 of ale orbeere; alfe, an in-

oye infiifing ; a fetting,or letting fland, dimers fim-

cyl in the Sunne, ouer a fürnace, or among
Parle , untill they be we incorporated, or their
Sisbftances throughly mi

Fermenté: m.ée: f. Setled, feflemed,a vs SA
raifed,as beere,or bread; alfo,infufed,fleeped.


Fermenter. To (éttle,faflen,afjire,make firme; alfo, to


worke,as ale or beere; alfo,toinficfe ; or ly fieeping ; as |.


in Fermentation,


Fermenter la pafte. To leauen it ; 07,t0 make it rife,


E as leauen doth. fi ke
criner, To fhut, flop, clofe, locke, feale or ma

“Ps alfo, (a à demaundant,and “Mondo i sfendant) to Pai À
ihe before a Fudge, bolding thew bands with

that they baue good. right vnto the thing they


Es D
erme tabilitie
pe un i nelle, ad rar 3


tis ti i lacking
0 € Ups
ch Ue D TE


orn; alfo, cba end of a pla

=: endeth;) alfo,the clafpes fai Le

Fermeur: m. A fhutter,clofér, tener locker, flopper,

Fermes: fas Fermement.

Fermier:m. A Farmer; a Leffee ; alfo, achiefe Hind,
or Dre Bayliftor rt ofanother mans
Hasbandrie
ore du Revendage du Roy. Looke Reven-

Reenice m. cre: £ Farming; taking to,or eniaying by,


Pre eerie A certaine Officer pwbe had all pub-


= fines and amerciaments, and was (before Charles . .
rid time) mr" of all caufès and controuerfies | è


fermier. Th ime i pt (which |


A


pats not
a mam ge of a booke 5 or , as Fre-


Seetiel: : mA certaine beame in the prow of a fbi


Feroce: com, Cruell, fierce, car enr _
sad bare f. Ruf of Iron.


, fterne, rigorous,aujtere, :


© gor. ite,


hearted
| Ferocité: €. ie free crucltie, ena
stn The ong of sam mor


ing ‘in,Ivon. :
= Prod ferrage. Looke Droi@.
Femail: £ Cop ins Iron


Old Irom.


28 ai tne he saint
a!


RME,


‘ted


FER
Marefchal ferrant. A farrier.

Ferraffe : f The finootb, and lene-Silae Skate called,
the Forke-fifh ; alfo,tbe courfeft of Hempe, Swinglefoot
ber ds, courfe Towe.

Ferrat. Shod( as a borfe with Iron.)

Barbe rafe pied ferrat: Pro. Looke Barbe.
Pent: m. ée: £ Shod (as a borfe with Iron;) alfo, coue-
sn ee gt Lor bound about with 1rorisafo,bard,
orne, obflinate.
Ferréa ig Frofied,or {hed with frofi-nayles; hence
alfo die footed: fare of foot, feldome flipping meer
or fallin
Gofier feu lace. A paued mouth; See Gofier.
Eau ferrée. wherein a peece of hot Iron, Steele bath
beene quenched.
Mangeur de charrettes fearbta.A: serrible bufffiuffe,
Scarre-crow,braggadochio, a

_ n'y a cheval fi bien ferré qui ne glifle: Prov. The
wiféfl erre ; the beft offend ; be that bath furef footing
Sometime falls.

Ferrement : m. Aa Inflrument,or toole of Iron,  *
Ferrements dela Mefle.The ornaments,implements,
or inftruments belonging to the Maffe.

Ferrementiporte. A wandering Priefi that ener car-

« ties about with bim thofe ornaments,or implements;al-
fy a sean of tooles, or beads of fpeares, or blades of


Forest To To fooe a borfe,ére ; alfèsto couer,bead,or bind
abontwitb Iron. -.
Romer vne cein@ure. To fet buckles unto a girdle.
Ferrer les cigales. To/pend the time in wifling,to un-
dertake a fool bufineffe ; to loofe tiene altogether.
Ferrer la mule à. To bring in an extraordinarie, or
; Safe reckoning unto; any way to play the clofe theefe
Fm lesoyes. as Ferrer les cigales.
Il eft fort difficile à ferrer.He is verie fubborne,filfe-
willie,unrulie froward ; bee ant ce be tamedshee
will carrie no ie ae


‘Ferret: m. Thèrag


Ferreur: m. 4 encor Si abclatided: i
, Of Iron,as bard aa Iron,

bind of big Dutch Leatherne bottle; al-
fia place to heepe Ironin ; alfo,a powch to put borfe-
wayles ix ; or a great cafesor powch of leather (clofed,as
a Portemantue, with chaine,and locke) wherein tooles
for the fhooing of borfes are kept, and carried; alfo, a
kind of Adamant


nt.
Ferronnerie: f..4n Iron mill,or forge; al(@,an lronmon-
“gers
Ferronnier: m.An Ironmongersone that fel vmwreught
Lronin Barres œc. -


errumination : fA faldering,cimenting, fa ening to-
gether properly,in matters of Iron,
TA « The foooing of borfes ; 07, as Permet

(6,Iren worke..
Fers. Looke Fer. - à
Fertile: com, Fertil, fruitful, hold, fill, "à

batle, flore-bringing much-yeelding..
Fertilement. Fertilly; fraitfidly, abundantly, vankely,


plenteoufly.

Fertilité : f. Fertilitie, fruitfiube ankle fullneffe,
fatneffe; plentie, flore abundance. ies Ho
Fertilizé: m. éc: f. tint es made fertile, or fruit-

ronke aude.
MC Fer-


re i hoje
So,to increafesgrow,


ge re wounded, beaten,
» À malattder in the bought of a borfes knee.


Nathan
nelle ima borfes a fine fprung in bis knee, or other
40)
Ferve. par ferve. According to , afler the rate of::
qBourbonnois,
Fervement. Fernentlyshotly ardently earnefily eagerly,
fiercely, vehemently,
bot, ardent, feanlding,


ent: mente : “3 Fervent,
alma 3chafed ; eager, angrie, fierce; ve-


AY
cnet erveftu. RL qe ovarmed


a Fer beat,b, ardor,an-
gcr,violence; Pair mi ma pon hala ear-
aefinefe,


Ficnulace, » Round ; alfo,of the kind of tl hearbe Ferula,
crule :£,4 Ferulayor Paulmer vfed in Scholes for cer
rection; al{>, the bearbe Ferula,
pere 34lfo,a veed,or cane.
erules. Splents for broken legs,armes, fingers joc.
Ferun: : m.Rankneffé,rammifhneffe ;extreameor Strong


unfauorinelfe,


Ferure :£,4 ia Priking pitting.
Feb tian


efle :f. 4 Pal ahaunch sa breech, o or one pe of
the breech, -


. Latefle ‘on. Bare breech that bath not x vag to
couer bis sn à yom estate Ra:
Commere CS: A Httockes, an
are golfe whinge ke
LS 52 os fefle d’ vn Poftillon. Sécke
e)
N' aller d'vne feller por unwilling.
dpsarwertes so werte Elan ‘
Icerche trop bas la Dect qui fouille prés des
CS : Prov, Tis an ontewerd: charitie thats groped
for neere to the buttocks.


mare :mée Freins utched.i wh)


cau. # Faifcean,
iaite:m.d Prief that quickly whips ouer, or
ps ont te hs pg Fy any ome that fayes omer bis


ree A Pedantical sobipce(
te = + rated teeth lap on the buttocks,


ree on the
estes Bakers eRtrnr
Free out of money, upon intere st ba exchinge: | Le
pain. À great eater of br


Fetle pe
RE np bibber,quaÿer Cole, po.


Fee . Tebreech,beat,wbip, feourge on the butte
Fe et f. The buttockes, vl


Sagapene, Fennell


| Fefle-tondué, A bawdie companion, a notable ship
Lier sora knauifh Epithite for a fa

Fefle; ( for it hath alfo another fence.)

fleur. 4 whipper, Scourger, breecher,


: m. ere: £ Belonging to the breech er buttocks,
~ Mufcles fefliers. Three mufiles in the breechya
ps “0 Lisele one's alwbich. doe ferne 10 ate


Fi, oe rhe,doe, ol witht batches
furan DU ethan we roche hole.


Go gle


In a man; the difeaje offrenie o mad.


the Rents gr bane hake


fine Sacke Lao |


Fefagen à


Feft.as Faifte : 3 whence ;


Giberà felt, 4 gibe tbe bath a topping , or gi

ely duetie paid unto certaine Lords
hi oe qe ridge,or boufe- top within their tine
0”, 07 Seigneurie ; alfo,a feafting, or feafts due by eer
oe henge unto their Chapters.


cht: ere of Slug gi if, drow felazie dill, flow; |


Feftardife, =e Sloth; lucgifinef, drowfinefé; a dut. |


me pnelle ; cowardife,faint- -beartednel]e ; (bred


Felte: m, Therid, ge,ot top of a boufé ; Lcoke Faifte,


Feft


| Lafefte Dieu. Corpus


pa if, “Apap 4 boly-day; a feflinall day ; (Looke


Felted bafton, A pablicke feaft, wherat all the com.
ae incorporate Towne goe in (a kind of) Pro-
Cefjion.
Chrigi day. :

La fefle des feftes. Mme-Sunday.
Lafefte des morts 4/-foules day.
La guerre eft la des morts: Prov, arre is the
dead mans boly-day.

es au galas. Such bely-dayes as are not Hall-

dayes.

Lafette des rameaux, Palmes Sunday.
La fefte des Rois. The Epiphanie , or Twelfth-day in
Chrifimas
La ce: du Sacré. The Coronation day or,the feat of


© the dedication of a Pavifh Cburch,e


La fefte de tous Sain@s. 44- es, Alballom


Ke fe, All-ballow day.
+ aix eft la fefte de tous Sain@s: Prov. Peace is
tae mans boly-day.
teat eftes du village. Wakes; Ales; Plougk-mens
or bo Se


La petite fefte dieu, T#Oétaues of, or, fome eight
“4 - after Corpus Chrifti day

anter devant la felte. 7 To triumph before the vie
pr


© Eftte bien avant de fefe. To live merrily, or instiofe


~ Faire fefte de.To ioy ia at,be glad of; 10 brag,
" ere rare
ig and iollitie, fobrietie,

Apres la fefte on grate latefte : : Prov.(viat Afiér a


Crinons en ete gaftent la fefte + Prov. One baume.


to women a florme, portend.


Fel


Feffide. as mi
Ps HY


litie,


Faire fefte à, To flatter, Smooth, fawne on,make fiyre


weather unto.


boaft,be proud make much, of,
: e&le leu rt tea el +Prov, After


Saft made.)


tous, 07 as Mr gues marres a whole
Deux pors au feu fighificent la fefte , & deux fem-
mes fone la tem Prov. Two poison fre a feaft,


Le folrefte apres la fefte: Pour le doth vof |
DA on a feels ; + por properlyafier a eaft once made


Les x eg Pallet la of! Prov. See Grillons,
I n'eft pas toufiours fefte : Prov. Feafls la not al-
wayes 307, Wwe mit es sae thinke to feaft it; ewe-
i day is A not Sunday ( faywe.)

efté:m. ée: f, Fellas kept bolie ; feafled, +"
Sire To fo efits i AE gr te ge


RTS hn tne ret


a:


St.


Perit ede es ea Ss EEE


; es «fl
3 in de Marti baci He bath bad a
triall in Staffor r hath receiued Jacke Drums
intertainmen :

Fethinetin Fc [lination, peed, bafi , quicke procec-

ing, =

Feftivant. À feafter,or feaft-maker.

Fefton:m. 4 pret ne border'of fruits, an
flowers; efpecially in grauen , or imboffed works;al/o,
a nofegay.

Feftondienne.(as much as) Parla fefte de dieu; Cor-
ruptly;or by one that daves not fiveare out,

Feftoyant : m, 4 feafler,or be that feafis. :

Feftoyant: m.ante : f. Feafing,banquetting ; cherifh-
ing making verie much of, De

Feftoyement. 4 feafting,banquetting ; a cherifhing,or
hind intertaining of.

Feftoyer. To fall, banquet, intertaine with feafts, and
banquets ; to cherifh, ufe kindly, make much of, alfo,
to celebrate an boly-day,

Feftu: m. 4 fskue; a fram, rnfh,little flaulke,or flicke,

vi for a feskue.
oible comme vn feftu. 4s weake as arufh; or (as
we fay) water. ; |
Coigner feftus. To fpend the time verie foolifhly ; or
to loofe it altogetber.
Je n’en donneroye pas vn feftu. 1 value it not of a
rufh; 1 would not gine a (raw for it.
Rompre le feftu avec. 10 fall out, or at oddes with a
iend.
$e fans vertu ne vaut vn feftu : Prov. Difboneft
gaine’s not worth achip; or, nofcoundrell to th’ unbo-
nell rich man. cs

Feftuler. See Fetufer.

Fetardife :f. Sloth; cowardife; as Feftardife,

Feteur:: f, Stinch, filthineffe,jll (mell br fanor.

Fetide : com. Stinking, filthie ill-fineHing.

Fetife. liqueurs fetifies, Made or compounded b-


ingen Fefton; Al/o,the frufor middle of the fole of


abor(és foot, JET =: Ab
Fetufé:m.ée : £ Touched, or wiped ouer with a feskue,
alfo,tickled by fucha touching. —
Fetuser.To touch,or wipe ouer with a feskue ; alfa,to tic-
kle by touching witha feskue. e
Feu : m. Fire; alfo,as Fouage ; (al/o,ahoufe,or familie,
in old French;) alfo,light. xt
Le feu. A kind of light, (neeve a foot long) made of old
clouts fleeped in tallow, & writhen like a torch;wher-
with Fowlers pe PPT penta in
the night ; alfoyafcab,tetter,or (cur fe among cattle,
Feu $, Anthoine.Saint Anthenies firesa fweHing (fill


of beat and rednelje) that beginnes of a blifier ; and |


owes toa {cab,or fore, like a tetter; and im the end
Portifies tbe part (efpecially the bone) it ath feifed


Feu ardent.(as Coulevrée blanche.) bite Brionie,
| wild Nep,Tetter-berrie; The wallons (fayes Gerard)


cbse be fre em)


Feu de \ t RES FA
= des Efpagnols. 4 bot, scorching, or fhining.


Feu Herein S.He Fr pr
teor that often appeares at Paso.


_ FeuS. Marcel ou,feu Martial; aiFeu $: Anthou |
nie, . à
Feus mifsiles. Squibs; or any fireworkes throwne toa


mi[chieuous end.
Feu Perfien. Ar inflomed,and painfull impoflumati-
on,the bloud or matter whereof being very bin, makes
it looke almoft as if it fhined: fome callit,the bolie fire;
the Grecians,Eryfipelas. ,
Feu de riqueraque. le mau fin feu de riqueraque.
Wild-fire ; ov as Feu Perfien.
Lesfeus du Roy .An yearely rexenew of ij, s. Parifis
paid unto the King by inhabitants of divers villages
in the Prouofifhip of Laon, thereby exempted from
certaine Appeales. i ;
Feu Sacré. Looke Sacré ; or as FeuPerfien. ;
Feu fauvage. The fhingles , running-worme , er wild
ré.
eu volage. À ring-worme,or tetter.
Pierre à feu. 4 flint-flone; alfo, the Marcafite, or


e-ftone.
Attifer le feu avec} efpée. To prouoke an angrie, or
angred pere :
Avoir le feualatefte. To be bot, baflie, cholericke ;
fierce, firiows; alfo, to be forward;baxar deus, aduen-


tHTOMS.

Avoir les pieds au feu. 11 femble qu'il ait les pieds

au feu. Said of one that in arefileffe bumor, will not
* fettle,or cannot fit fill, any where.

leéter le feu par la gorge.To fpit fire; to be in a great

fürie, fame,chafe ; or,to keepe a terriblefwaggering, a

borrible fiirre.


le n'iroye pas du bancaufeu. 1 would not flep ouer

the doore,] would not moue one foot, for it.

l'en mettray le doigt au feu.1 dare anfiver for,I may
fume on,1 am affured of it.

Verfer de ' huyle fur le feu.To adde ~~ to the fire,

fay we(better acquainted with wood then with oyle)to

‘fia nif a violent paffion,pr bummer with matter towork


on, *
Vivre À por,& à feu avec. See Pot: mH:
Le feu eft bon en rout temps : Prov, (Belike it fhould
be, e bon feu; fir fire fometimes does mifcbieft too


much.) He Al
… Le feu eft demie viédeP homme: Pro.(4nd werth
bis whole life unto bim; for without it citber be cannot
liue,or [hall doe verie little.) iv ;
Le feu plus couvert eft le plus ardant: Prov, The
more that fire’s kept dowone the more it burns ; fuppref-
Sed beat workes vebemently, - :
1 n'eft feu que de gros bois: Pro.Great wood makes
the bef fire.
Amour de putain feu d’ eftoupe : Prov. (Tb'expof-

- tion is) qui luit fort,& dure peu.

En petite cheminée faiton bien feu : Prov.
Men femetimes make great fires in little chimneyes (to
their coft.)

Qui a affaire de feu Je doit cercher: &, Quia be-
foing de feu le cerche avec le doigt: Prov. He that
wants neceflariesmufl take any paines fir them.

* Tortuë bufche fait dreiét feu: Prov, The crooked log
makes a firaight fire. ‘
Verde bufche fait chaud feu: Prov, Looke Bufche,

Feu : m. feuë :f. Deed deceafed departed.
Feu mon pere.«%y late father, 1
Feüaige :m, a: Foiiage.
Feuchier


cu AS ut \
Feuchiere: fF } À us
ï F Feuchiere hie aquatiques een, Ofinund, m Of


FEV tps MT
{| = mad yal, fined the. watermen, S. Ghrifopbers


Feutraiét. 4 man drawmneout of bis countrey,bounds,or
ders; alfowine,corne, or {uch commodities laken


uchiere des chefnes. Oake-fearne, pettie féarne, | _ thence.”
De (ous “: SEE Feutre: m, Feltisaliua fer sapeece of felt, or thicke
 Feuchiere femelle. She fearae, female fearne, com- woollen cloth to diftill,or flraine things through,


era it \


à malle. Male fearne,great fearne.
| Feu :m,ale:$. Ofor ne Manner,
_., Feesor Fee fimple yalfosheld in fick, or in fée ; alfo, bol-
ding diners Fiefs. à
Cour feudale. AiCowrt Leet, or Baron; the Lords
yak et iggy ga and
truice, oI


utré rm, de: f Wrought thicke,as felt. al d
or fiffened 3 with hue Reh Page,
eae d'herbe, Set thicke , or onergrowne, with
graffe. ;

Beyrurages m, A charme,or inchauntment,

CZ. a aix 3 A burden. ‘

Fi-(Ax Interiection; ) et fi fi va ven icy; Fie vponthee,

get thee bence,1 cannot abide thee; Looke Fy.


Honime feudal. (Signifies both) a Lord that bath te- Maiftre fifi. 4 Gold-finder ,Dung-farmer, cl

nants boldiag of bim ; and(the more commonly) a vaf- ities fryer of priuies. on
Era oS ite] ke iribnon of aE F come. 46 Feable ; Traflie ; or credulons, that
si udal. Fh power of redemption whith a |. eafilytiufieth..

pos or by the priuiledge of bis Seigneurie. FiacreiThe name of a Saint.


4 Fig&, HISFiacre. Looke Fic,&,Fil.
Mal §. Fiacte. hind of fiab, or great wart in the
Fi ? os s 4 te en f. bs
iangailles af, 4 publicke betiothing ofa couple e
-: their fill mariage ; (and fometimes) alfo , pani
\ 5 WOCNCE 5
»Fiangailles chevauchenten felle, & repentailles
encroupe: Prov, Repentance fits full clofe (or dwells
2. Mex doore)to mariage.
Fiance: f, Trufi,credit, affiance, affurance, confidence.
‘Ama fiance. pon my word,
Fiancé : m. ée: £ Affianced,betr othed,bandfift, promi-
Sed, fire unto,
Fiancé dlacorde. Condemned, or defined, vnto the
gallowes ; for whom the gallomes grone.
Fiancer. To affiance betroth,promifé, make ff, affure,


Sclesiout feudal... 4 Lord Paramount, on chiefe
Lor


Fiefde condition feudale. 4Fee (imple ;0r amabfo-
oon benediuarie ef va fee BE don


"De Spats)
— 2. as Feodalité ; Ejpecially. in the laft

.. fence. \

Feudataire: com, Owing fealtie,bolding by fealtie ; al-

Tf wfasbeld by fealtie,orbeld of another.

Feve.asFebue; 4 beane, *

Feverondes : £. The eanes,or eafings of abou/e.

FE ce. Fearne. |

‘euyiere de chefnes. The bearbe Oake-féarne,pet.


tie ye oa
ille; &, Feuillée. See Fueille; &, Fucillée.
€.


e. Seeke Fuci


| Feultre : m. Fet;a felt, a peece of felt; Looke Feutre. unto,
> > > 3 ‘
Feultré : m.ée:f, os felt; covered with, or, as | Fianfailles:£, A publicke betrotbing of man and wo-
with, felt.’ her, : : man before full mariage ; Looke Fiancailles,
Feultrer. Te make of couer with, felt, se Fiant. Trafting beleening,boping on,or va ; intrufling
| Feulu, as Fueillin vntoscommitting tothe tuft of.
| Feur:m. Thecoftand charge abusbandman is atinthe | Fiat: m. Trufiaffurance,afhance.
5 tilling ,c> veaping of bis ground; alfo,as Foire;a Faire; | Fibres: £.Tbe {mall flrines,or haire-like threads of roots;
5 * alfo,a rate,or price fet on a thing; and bence; al/o,the fibers,threads,or firings of mufcles, & veines;
“Afeur de. According to, after the rateor proportion in Lincolne-fhire they are tearmed Cheyres.
re of, Fibreux: m.eufe: f. Fibrous; fullof baire-like threads,
Au feur l'emplage, The fame. ee firings. 9
Si boute tel feur telle vente. Looke Bouter. Fic :m, A certaine fcabsor hard, round, andred fore, in
“| Fevre:m.A Blackefmith; Look: Febvre, the ent, called alfo,Fic S.Fiacre.
Fevrier: m. (rhe Moneth) Februarie. Ficelle :f. Packthread.
: La farine de Fevrier. Snow, Fiche:f. 4Gardeners dible,or. fetting yron,
Fevrier le court pire de tous: Pro,Becau/é it iscom- | Parma fiche. by my fey. mise
monly the foulefts and thereupon wee call it, Fill. | _ Planter À lafiche. Sec Planter,
dike. any Fiché: m.ée:f.Fixed, fafiend, ferled; thruft.planted,
‘Aujourd’huy Fevrier demain Chandelier: Proy, | \ fet favre in, firme, leadie, the, flicking fain; alfo,
Looke Chandelier, , decreed eftabiifhed,refalued CRD
Pluye de Fevrier vaut efgout de fumier: Proy,we | _ Croix fichée. A croffe Fitchet(in Herauldrie.)
ay, 4prill fhowres bring in May flowers. | Fichemént:m. 4 fixing, faflening, fetting, fetling,’
Toute Charte a fon Fevrier : Prov, Ewerie dogbath | Fichément. Fixedly; pas .
bis day(fay we) or (more properly) euerie weman bath | Fiche-pain. The vermine called an Eare-wig ; fome al-
ber wanton fit. ee fo call fo the Wood-lonfe. ESN
Feurinariage. as Formaria : Bourgognois. | Ficher: To fix, faftensfeitle; to drive, icke, fet, thruft,
Feurolles. Night-fires; Looke Furole, plant faft,or farre in. ;
Feurre. 2s Foarre; Straw. LiF Fichet.arbre defichet.A tree that is come of a twig,or
Vi Seigneur de feurre combat bien vn vaffald’a- tender fcion planted. wnt
cier 5 Looke SP ; + ' Ficheut : m. 4 fixer, faffener, (euler, or fetter in,
a The Plural. unto Feur ; onely in the two fifi pba ue er Le + drining, flicking, plan-
nces. mock ton 5 V: mr {1 ing im, à À
‘| Feuftre, as Feulere ; Or the thicke,bairen,and filé: like Fiche: in. ué: f..as Saugrenus Or abfürd. ©
_ fluffe, ofed by Sadlers for flufiing,or infiiffenings, | Ficotte. par ma ficotte. A diminutine of, mafoy, or
_ 78: r ma |
La


FID


2 t E


; fi
Fidte. 4 lets gites


Fictil: m. ile : f Earthen,ormade of earth, -
Fiction: £ 4 fichion,inuention,lie, fibscogs a thing ima-
gined, fained,or foifted in.
Dire fans fiction. To {peake fincerely, confelfe plain-
: by profelfe from the heart.
Fidei-coimmis: m. A Feoffementin truft
Fideiufseur :m. A furetie, pledge, caution.
Fidele: com. Faithfull, truflie, loyall ,true,fure of bis |
word,or to bis fide; alforeliguus,
Fidelement. Fathi loyally raptlyyenfinedly true
Ly, [urely ; religionfly
Fidelité : f. Fi a  faithflnefe loyaltie, truflineffe;
truth, ssh rae. > :
Serment de fidelité. Th’oath of fdelitie made by :
all Prelates unto the King , at then inueflure, im ace |
knowledgement of bis Soueraignetie, and of th’ obedi=
ence and fidelitie which they owe hits This, although |
they bold no fiefsin right of their Prelacies ; 3 for if they |
doe, they al/o doe bath homage, and fealtie for them, ‘|
Fidclium. The lafi Prayer thats faid for the dead. = |
I! pañle plufeurs chofes parvn ium. He bud-
dles,or fbuffles up many things under one; be fleightly
difpatches,runnes, or goes ouer the matters committed
vato him.


Fidicule: : f. The Harpe of beauens a cempanie of Patres
which refemble a Harpe.


Fiduciale-Part of an Ajivolabe turning round about she
a edge ther fs ; th’ Index,or band of an Afiro-


Fié : m.ée: f. Trufled, beleeued,hoped on or in ; alfa, in-
trafted trujled with committed unto the truf of.
Ficbvre:f. 4 féauer ; Looke Fievre,
Fiebvrette : f, 4 fleight ague.
Fiebvreux: m. eufe: f Full or ficke of, [ubie&t unto, a
feaner ; alfa, feauer-brecding,aque-bringing.
Fied. as Fief: qBourgognois,
Fief: m. se a(Knights) fee; a Mannor , or inberi-
ye held by bomage, and fealtie ; and ginen at the
rfi, in trufl,and upon promi(é of affiftance, or a
warres: (A learned Frenchman defines it, L’
ihe tenu { foy & pepe baillé à: aucun |
pour la fiance qu’on a euë en luy: Another; La
terre concedée à caufe de confiance,ou fo: Sam soi
fe par lepreneurd’ icelle, d’ afsifter fon
en guerre : which both t gether make good my UE.
nition :) Alfo,atenure,or eflate in Gefor in fee. This
word was firfl heard of after the conqueft of Gallia by
the Francs(or auncient French men) when their So-
ueraigne Princes referuing fome land for their owne
: Demaines, diftributed the refi (by whole countries,or
‘oon on pe their Captaines,and principal
15 on condition, that they fhould bold ofthem,
Es themin their warres ; 12 which 7 mr
vefpetl was alfù had ofsand prow made ie
bya French fout ue Le more , 07 few
Captaineshad under eater, or le
mere their portions) vbereupon the cm ines, i
De pr their Princes) referued fomervbat +-
ticular demaines, they diuided the fe
“pt van thém;tobe held of themfelues by the
for and on # ame condition, that they beld


bipaend re th Arricre
= Talker pet the foared
tants of t countrey,on much


. il 1


+
-


5


es
=
S
>
3
Q


in ery — Inthofe fines al Fiefs were
| Gris “the feoffees, and renocable


Digittz


HO: gles |


= beredivarie et (for fome fiefs


"wants Iurifdi


at the will of the féoffor: But not long after hep boheme
(as the moft them. are non) pan imeniall, or beçedi
larie, 1,
Fief: abregé.d fief abridged, refirained,or not noble;
a fief that wants,and isnot capable of, iuri 54,
tenure in Cenhue ; or in Socages
Fief ample, A fiulor whole fet fr |
which the Tackeehesiehe wig js mi eft
hor{t (or iftbe bad none omen and at 6 xd ar-
mor, for a Heriot, à
Ficf de Bafoche, Looke Bafoche. |
Fief bourfal. The fief,or portion of a fief, that. tel
toa en ér brother. |
3&,fief chevel. A Noble fief; an inher
tance “held in Capite,and ei tur ifdittion, +
Fief de condition feudale. Ana tyne fee fimple,
fcend not; fa be


Fie de danger. Sucha fief as is forfeited unto the
Lord of wham tis beld,if it be entred into by the tenant
(under any title other then of ceo cand bo-
mage and fealtie done or at the leaf,offered. .
Fie de dignité. 4 Noble fief, fach a one as bathfome
title of dignitie(as a Countie, Vicountie, Baronnie, or
or Chaftellenie) annexed vnto it ; a fief that th
(a gentleman ; for a Roturier,amleffe be bats 4 lie
wae difcent from bis grandfather, or be withall enno-
rie by the King,receines no mariner of digmitie by it;)
Ficfdominant. 4 fief, or Mannor belonging 10 a Lo.
Paramount ; a fief beld in  chiefèsand where ri: à 0-
bold,


thers
Fiefd’ Hauber, oud’ Haiibere, Any fief, or inberi-
tance whole owner is bound to fèrue in the Kings wars
with an Haubergeon , or.coat of maile; (whereto one
addes,a borfè,a {word,a fhield,and an helmet. 1
iefliege,ou lige, ou tenn en plein lige ; a Fief
ample; Held diretily , and without mefne, of os
Crowne, P
Ficfmort. An inheritance that rer the Lord nomia-
ner of profit other then a barerent; and therefore may
bee tearmed,a Ficffee, 3 ¥
Fief noble, À Noble fiefor Manor ; the marks wher-
of be, Antiquitie, Furifdittion, Cenfiue, a dependan-
cie of diuers infertour fiefs; and (onely in nfome ri)
a faire boufe with ditches,or amoteround aboutit;but
the mofl.certaine marke of it (for the King may at.
time eveét a Noblefief; and the Iurifdittion, a thi
neral,may be dinided. from it) is,that it be beld either
te rote Crowne,or of fame other fief thats beld immedi-
ately thereof.
Fiefouvert.1s when no vaffall,or tenant prefents bim-
felfe to do the feruices,and pay the rights which be due
vntotheLord thereof, or when by the change of the
tenant (by death, or otherwife) the Lord Daas oe
rgb, and ests 931 sive
trimonial, See ‘Patrimionial.
pet ca Kegs, = Noble fief, held immediately, and
‘King ; or sas Fief de Dignite. roe


Be aaa teftrainG: as Fiefabregé. . cat
de Dev A fee ;arent charge, or annuitie in


out of la
icf stad by the Cuftomes of Nevers) 4a fief that
“à a moted boufe, and all other fuch
markes oh Nobilitie and antiguitie,

Fief fervant. A mefne, or inferionr fief; a fief that
bolds of a fief Dominant.


: us de: that yeelds the
Lord no more profit


then-abarevent.


Francs


iginal from


PHE-OHIO STATE'UNIVERSITY


Franc, Bay LME
Menu fief. An inferior fief,of fall value and altoge-
ther without iurifditti Là ag ees achat
Plein fief. A fill,or whole fief; an intire Knights fee ;
of invifdiction,and'good worth, I
Clercdes fiefs. Looke Clerc, . *
Entrer de fief fervi. The bomage,e>c, due by avaffall
at's fir entrie, dine'well-ynough by another ; as by
theldest brother for theyonger, bya busband for bis
wife,crc; and thereby the Lords entrieprenented.
Homunes de fief. Freebolders ; of Lords of (inferior)
fiefs, bound to aff the Bailli of the Furi(dittion in the
Courts he keepes, and hg or finable , forall
wrong fill iudgements ginen therein, }
ben à ef. Looke Sergent. |
De fon domaine fairefon fief A vaffal to alien
part of bis fiefand therof create anew tenuyesor caufé
4 to be beld of bin by amefie tenure. j
De fon fief faire fori domaine: To reunité onto bis
demaine afief that beld of im. *
Exploidter leficf a pure perte. Tomake a fiill, or ab-
Solute feifure of the inheritance forfeited unto bim.
Relever vn fief. seeke Relever. :

_ Tenirfief. To enioy an inberitance feodall; to be fei
Sed of land inhis demcfne as of fee. ay
Tenir en fief. To be feifed of a vight, or priuiledge, in
fet,or in the qualitie of a fief. |

; Re fief nie fief perd. He that denies bis tenure, for.
its his € te, . $ "
Ficffal : sera : f. Feoffall ; of a fief; in fee, beld'in fee;
lurifdiétion, -


Fieffe: f. as Fief: Normi: ES

Fieffé: m. éc: f.Inféofed; giuen,or grantedin fee ; beld

a afief, or in fée. ù R
Domaine fieffé (ou non fieffé.) 4 Nobleinberirance
beld by homage\and feattie, (or an vnnoble: one for
which no homage is due’: ) Norm, ‘ew

. Goutteux fieffez. 4 fr Epithite ; for the gowt, mo
commonly de{cends which way foeuer the land goes,
Heritiers


belonging to them, 4
Sergent ficffé: Hooke Sergent
Fiefler. To infeoffe to grant, paffe,atien,afiefor an in-


Fie


me: A fee farme.

; Rieke as Fieffé. NS
ment: m. Aj an infeoffings
Fiel: 1. Gall; or the Gall, at te .

Ficl de terre, The bearb Earthgall,Penerwort, fall

Ceatorie,common Centorie, Centorie thelefe,
la sr ee ee Pierre. 5)

ieller. To make bitter. ik EE EN
ge m.eUfe: f.45 bitter as gall; fllofbitrernege,

oF of gall; x
Fiens :m. Dung.ordure’ muckemanure, — =

“Fienside his En d ent ferorit'tout vn'au!

iour de lugementt Prov. All will Le one'at' thé 1x.
Flente:# Ding urd lb, exremet of i

: f. Dung, tur. lure, excrements 0; n,
orbeap); ea of vcr mines ab Foxes , Badgers,
Ee - 4 : 5
Fienté:m.ée: f. Duniged; fed or filled, conered or com-
| palfed, manured or wtb’ a, it,


or befhit. is


Fienter. To ite, feumbers a


Francsfiefs. Free, or affrancbifing fiefs; or as in


ieftez. whom the Lord puts in poffefion ; |
or towhom be makes liuery and feifinof Whites !


ET F > + VERT TT CPE ct tete Te


Fienteux: m. eufe:£ Fall of! dung,turds ordure,
Fientifié : m: ée:: F, Befbittenberayed,beturded,
Fier: mere: f, (of one fillable) Proud, arrogant, info-
leat, fcorncfull, difdainfall, bigh-minded 3 aif, fierce,
"eager; blondie cruelt, fauage, unmercifiill, inbumane ;
alfo,bold.flout, confident couragions audacious,
Il en eft fier comme vn afne d’ yn baft neuf. Heis

+ 48 proitd of it as an Affe of à new packefadale (which if

© be werenot an Affe he would not be praud of.

. Femme fiete en route faifonsveut eftre maiftre de
fa maifor: Prov. Looke Femme. ;

se Fier. (of two fillables) To truftyor intruft unto; to be-
leene or baue affiatice, to put his hope or confidence,
ies
De qui ieme fie dieu me garde: Pro: God pre true
me ‘fom hin whom 1 truft, : Fa
Fierement: Proudly, infolently; bautily, arrogantly ;
feercely, crnelly, fauagely, inbumanely | vamer cifiilly ;
vldly, floutly, audacioufly. ‘
Fieret:mette:f Somembiztloftie; a little fierce.
Fiereté:f Pride infolencie, flatelineffe arrogancie, fur-
dineffésdifdaine, fcornefilne fe; crueltie, te Li
wal phi jalfi,boldnelfe,audacitie , floutneffe, met-

. wall; pivit,

Fierettement. Somewhat bautily,infolently arrogantly,
a little flercely, fauagely, cruelly.

Fier-humble. stou Y-bumble ; a fiout heart bumbled.

Ficrt.A Verb Imperfonall; Cecy fiert à. This is like un.
to,or,agrees well with.

Fierté, as Fiereté.

Fierte: f. A fhrine,or coffin wherein the bones of Saints
areinclofed, —

Fieul. as Filz; A fonne : Pic.

Fievre:f. An ague,a feauer.
Fievreardente. 4 burning feaner.

\ Fievresblanches. The agues wherwith maidens thar |
baue the\greene fickneffe are troubled ; and hence ;
Hailes fievres blanches, Either be ss in loue, or jicke
of Wantonneffe.

ievré continué. See Continu,

Fievre deDol. The French pockes,

Hs intermittente. Any ague that comes and goes
| ts.
| Fievre de veau. (qui tremble quand il eft foul.)
| \ Trembling after meat ;: Jicknele vpon fier ferting.
| Defievre en chaud mal, From il to worfe,out ofthe
| fying: pam into the fire, ;
Tesfortes fievres. A pefiilenee take thee, ai plague
chuake thee.
| Fifre:m, A Fife ; a Flate,or little pipe accorded with à
| = Drumme,or Taber.
| Figé: m,ée: f. Fixed, fetled, faflened ; compattediclo-
| | sed together, : >
| Laid figé. Milketbickened, or curded, às with’ the

ruanet,
| Sang figé. Bloud clotted, or cluttered together, as
p when it's ae ing, en lofings (and ben

igement: m. 4 fixing, faflening; clofings (and hence
| the ing,curding,or ving Shi ?
| Figer. To ff len, fetle, cloft,or compatt togelber:
| Sch ger. Tothicken,curd, clatter, curdle, céngulate.
| Figon: m.A loner or ordinavie eater, of figs.
| Fo A fig ; alfo,the difeafe in a borfes hoofe,called,

;


he fig. 5
Figue de Carefme. 4 drie fig,a Lenten fig:
Figue folle. ‘The fruit of tr on land, Mie indie 507
Mulbervie fic trees itrefémbles the wild fig, butis,
~ witlall,the fweeter of che two, and withour feeds: 14


à vie


oe


4


ripens not(efpecially if the tree be onerladen) vntill it
be feraped with an yron booke : Alfosafig date; or any
fig, that opens of it felfe, and difconers it feeds, as it


owes. ;
fi ues primerouges. The firft figs that come vpon
rs jrs gr figs. fe
Figue royalle. 4 Date.
Ces figues font trop hautes. ‘Thefe dainties are. a-
boue our reach; they cofi too much;they grow too deere.
In’ eft ny figue ny raifin, He is neither fifh nor
flefh ; hot nor cold ; there is notbingin bim. — ~
Moitié figues moitié raifins.Betweene ieafl and ear-
nejt; or palfe th'one balfe th’other,

Figueraye: f. 47 Orchard of fig trees.

Figuerie: f as Figuiéré.

Figuier : m. 4 fgtree.,

Figuiére : £. A fig-yard; an Orchard of fig trees.

Figuratif : m. jue: f, Figuratiue, fpoken by a figure,

Figure :f. 4 figure, fhape, image, forme: ikene[fes
refemblance, representation, counterfeit ; fafhion, ma-
hing of; afo,a figuresor flourifhof Rhetoricke.
Figure accordée, An exaétfuruey of land in contro-
uci fie, dravone by the confent of both parties.

Veué fivure. A defcription,of aplace by the eye; or of
a place which is prefent,and in th'eye. ’

Figuré: m.ée:f. Figured, fifbioned,delineated, pain-
Piel Mobis ip alfo, figuratine, in figures,
by a figure. R
Veldurs figuré. Looke Velours.

Figurement : m. 4 figuring, (hapings forming,delinea-
Ging, reprefenting,pourtraying. .

Figurer. To figure,paint pitture draw, delineate, pour
tray, represent ; to forme, fhape, fafbion ; imagine,con-
ceiue,

Figurine: £. A prettie litle image, pitlure, counterfeit,


ures
Fil ip. Tineall alfo,a thread, line,or firing; alfo,a freak,
Small dafh,oï firoke;al/o,a file rank,order courfè,row,
ray ;alfo,an infeétion,or imperfection in trees, where-
by their barkes come to be gnawen, and eaten into,
Fil d’archal. (Great)yelow wire, made of copper, or
latten oa
Eu de caret. Packthread. gt ee
- Fil d'eau. à fil d’eau. with the flreame,
Fil d’ entendement, Sharpaef[e of wit, nimbleneffe
a ‘ebenfion gquickne [fe of conceit.
ild’vn'efpée. The edge of a fword rae Paffer,


Fil d'Efpinay. A kind of looffe-twifted, and (fome-
sehat)coue thread ; made at Éfpinay,a towne in Ar-


tois, -

Fil.S. Fiacre. A great wart, bard fwelling, or excre/-
_ cence of fie[b. wines

Fil de Florence.A fine, dr bard-twifted thread ymade
_ in Florence. as
| Bild or tai. The finalleft gold wire.
| Files ante Perl

: Til en aiguille. From point 10 point, fromene end
“@ qtetbeather allebolly our. ….; ea
| 7 De droi&tfil. Direétly on, fraight firward , with the
Tea secs dar EAN


Pt AE eg i =’ y=


BIL:


ries,readie for all effayes. dettes

*A toile ourdie dieu mande lefil: Prov. The marke |
thats well begunne God belpes tu end; or, beginné thy
worke,and God will helpe 10 end it. (Scme cxpoundit Y
more projhanely.)

ilace : £ Fine flaxe, dreffed flaxe, faxe made readie
ir the diflaffe; Looke Fillafie.

Filacier : m: ere: f. Fir,readie, or cafe 10 be pune.

Filanens : m. Filaments; little firings threads,or bairs,
in veines,plants, roots,e>c ; tke beard of aycot.

ilamenteux: m. cufe:f. Full of thofe firings.& c.

Filandier. 4 maz that fpinnes.

Filandiere:f, A Spinfler; a Flaxe-woman; alfoya kind
of {mall boat,

Filandré: m. ée: £ Streaked with, or full of , finall
threads, fibers; felanders,

Filandrerie :f. Spinfirie, pinning.

Filandres: f. The felanders; {mall wormes that breed
in bruifed, fur feited,or fiule-fed, bawkes; alfo,nets to
catch wild beafis with,

Filant. Twifling or (pinning. (
ilant les mouftaches. Twirling, twining, or ofien

4 frokings bis muflachoes. |

i


Filat :m. Congar; fotearmed about Martcilles.

Filé : m. A net to catch wild beafis,or fifhes with; a toile,
hay, dragenet,erc; alfo,a fnare, fuarle, ginne.

File: £. Aernke inch and eutn vow of.
“Ala file. One after another one by one, in due courfe,


allonarow.

Filé : m. éc:f. Twifled, fpunne, drawne out; made in-

to thread,

Filée :£, The Eagle tearmed, a Bone-breaker.

File-habits. clothes- (pinning.

Filer. To twifl, fpin,draw out threads ; alfo,to lingerde-
lay ; prolong,extend in length; alfo (among Mariners)
to looffen,undoe,and make vp.

Filer doux. ‘6 footh, finooth, flatter, or gine frire

words; alo, to heare much and fay little.

Filer gros. Jlsfilent bien gros, They werke rudely,

cea gre paced fs |
iler prim, To rwrne thimnesor by little andlitile. :

Filer de lafoye. To take a purfe; 10 10b by the high.


way ide. ; :
Faire filer quelque chofe. To draw a thing ont in
length,to make it goe a great way. .
Au temps paflé Berthe filoit: Prov. 1# old time the |
ce were the greateft bufivines; Looke
es
Dame qui trop fe mire peu file :Prov.Seeke Dame. |
Femme qui enuis file porte chemife vile : Pro, Beg-
gerieand fluttiflneffe ave the fiuits of il bufwifere, |
and of laxineffe. :
Fileret. as Filleret,
Filerie :f. À Pinning ; or, fpinftrie ; alfo,a friendly mee- |
ting betweene the young men, and maids of a countiey
towne;where they play at many forts of (cchiuc)games,
while thefe both fpinne and looke on. vii sl E
Filet: m, A little thread, firing,or twill; alfo,as Filésal-
_ fosthe fillet of a beaft ; alfo, a borfes watering bit.
Filet carré.A fall fquare part,or member ofa piller;
Bien Dre PAR
ilet d’ A final drop,or threading of oyle.
Les Filessa vn peer
Avoir le filet: To be tongue-tied. — +
Freraillé de filets. Looke Fretaillé.
Filette: f rarne.


Fileul:m. A Godfonne.. IW
Fleur fread une sore inning bref +


k


From


UNIVERSITY


Oridhita


OFIO-SFATT


- | Fillan


i


13
|


BIN


| Eil-gros. Shoomakers thread. |
| Fil à m. y fmt law, flep-fonne, fonne by.a for-


mer marriage,


Filiation: f. The being afinne ; the oftate of a fonne.
Filiére: f. 4 cryance; or along thread tyed to the lunes


of an Hagard or young Hawke, when {he 1 taught to
come unto the fifi,or lure; alfoya net ; alfo,a ranke, file,
rowsalfo,a Lyon-peece ox Ridge-peece,of timber ; a fide-


waner.
Filipende. as Filipendule,


Filipendule: f. Filipendula,Dropwort,red Saxifrage.
Fillains: m. The tackling of abip ; final tackle.
rerie. See Filandreric.
c:f. as Filace.
La fillaffe de noftre Dame. The fall, and flender
firimes of a Cobweb.
Fillaftre: m. 4 fonne in lam, or ftep-fonne, |
Fille: £ A daughter ; alfo,a maid ; givleymodder,laffe,
wench.
Fille de France. 4 daughter of France, the French
Kings daughter.
Fille deioye. 4 whore, punke, harlot, queane, firm
Se ree hackney, pleafant finner.
illes penitentes, as Filles Repentics.
Fille les A defperate filth, graceleffe flurt ; or,as
Fille de ioye,
Filles repenties. Aa Order of Nunnes, which baue
_ beene ft whores; Conuertifis. ,
Belle fille. A ffep-daugbter ; daughter by a former
miarriage,daughtcr in law.
Lesfept filles dela Preuofté de Paris. Sewen Bayli-
wikes, or Towne-fhips, which belong, and are fubiect,
vato the Chaflelet of Paris; viz. Poifly, S. Germain
en Laye, Tornan & Torcy en Brie, eil, Mon-
Iehery,& Gonnefle en France. ;
Dune fille deux gendres, À feuerall commoditie, or
hire, drawne from feuerall parts , or parties, for the
ufe of one thing. : : ;
Se fier en vne fille? Allez vous y frotter. Looke
Frotter, ‘
Fille aimant filence eft douée de grand fience:
Pro. The loue of filence in a maia’s great ftience.
ille brunette eft de nature gaye, & nette: Prov.
_ The nut-browne laffe for mirth and neatneffe doth fur-
affe.


ille feneftriere, & trotiere rarement bonne mef-


nagere: Pro. À gazing, and gadding maid feld proues |
Fille bonnet, pean pcp affez riche, & bi
en |


dotée : Pro. 42 boneft maid of mannerlie bebauiour,
-_ bath wealth for any man to Pine ni ry
Fille oifeuferarement vertuëufe:Prov, An idle maid
is rarelie vertuous; ora maid that does nought learnes
to doe naught. Has
Fille oifive à mal penfive: Pro. The floathfull maid
es of finne;, a maiden fit-fill thinks onill,
ille qui donne s'abandonne:Pro.A maid that gies
à eafily gotten,
Fille qui prend elle ferend: Pro. A maid that takes
(much) is as good as taken:
Fille trop veué, Robbe trop veftuë, n’eft pas chere
tenué : Prov. 4 maid oft fèene, gowne teo oft worne,
are diféfleem’d, and beld in feorns.. ww
Mauvaife fille fe mocque de fa mere: Prov, So docs
iebird beray berneap.
à marier
- à garder : Prov. wenches,


oy rte
es fond of mariage are trouble.
Somme cattell to keepes » SREY SAA Th eagle


F'IIN


cauque : Prov. See Cauqu ‘
Autant fe prife beau varlet que belle fille: Prov. 4
faire lad thinkes bim{elfe good ynough for any la fe, or
thinkes as well of bimfelfe as any lafje ; a Fack’s at all
times wortbie of a Gill,
Entre promettre,& donner fe doit Ia fille marier :
Pro.See Promettre.
La Goutte en la hanche la fille enJa pance: Prov.
The Goxt in the banch,a girle a the panch ; viz: Ifa
woman feele often paine in ber backe, flanke, hips,legs,
ch kauckles,tis a figne that fhe is withchild of a girle,
Mere piteufe fait fa fille roigneufe : Prov. 4 gentle
mother breeds a fiuruie daughter,
Fille-fernme. A crackt pecce, one that bath got a clap;
one that goes for a maid,(but is none.)
Filleretam.ette:f..Aaid enlie,wohite-linered, effeminate.
Fillerie, as Filerie.
Fillet. 4 watering bit for a borfès oras Filet,
Fillette: £. A girle, yong maid, little wench ; alfo,a fir-
hin,barriquet, [inall wine velfell.
Fillette deBourgongne. The bale ofa Muid; holds
nine Suicrs,and the Stier eight(French) pintes, :
Filleul : m, 4 god-fonne.
Filleule: f. 4 god-daughter.
Filliaftre. as Fillaftre. ,
Filliere.as Filiere,
Filloche:f. 4 little thread,
Fillol : m.as Filleul; A god-fonne.
Fillole: £ A buddie knob in a vine,like a wart.
Fillot:m. Agod-fonne, . %
Filoire sf. pinfler.
Filon. A veine of mettall in amine. »
Filofelle: £ Ferret. filke, or flurt-filke,and the fluffe F3.
loxella being all,or the better balfe,of fertet-filke,
Fils:,m. Afonne ; a boy; a man-child,
Fils de putain. À whoore-fonne; a baftard ; Looke
Putain.
Beau fils 4 flep fonne ; or fonne by a former mariage,
‘A pere amaffeur fils gafpilleur : Prov.See Pere.
Filtration :f. 4 frraining,diftilling,or paffing of fimples,
ec ,throueh a felt,
Filtré: m.€e:£ Strained diftiled, or paffed,through a
felt,
Filtrer. To ftraine,difiil, or palfe,through a felt,
Fimport : m. À forme of,or,courfe in,Lav, binding a
plaintife to fetch in, make ioyne in fuit with bi all
fhch as can pretend any rightinteref},or portion in the
thing which be meanes to recouer : (By the cuftomes of
\. Britaine.) DE 2 1 VS
Fimporter. 4 plaintife to fetch inyand make iayne in
Suit with him, all füch; as pretend any vight, intereftor
portion in the thing be meanesto [ue for, rat CR
Fin: m, le fin de l’eflay demonnoye. The remainder,


ouerplus or frp thereof... &
Fin:£. A fine,end,iffice conclafion, fucce[fe; alfosa finifh-
ing,ceafiag,ending; alfoya feame,or veine, in aquarrey
of flone; allo, a barre, exclufion,refifall or exception,
urged,or pleaded in iffise; & fometimes th'iffue it felfe.
Finsde non proceder. Are ao better then dilatorie
pleas ; as an exception, againfi the iurifdidtion of the
Court, or sara the qualitie of the perfon unfit to
be impleaded therein, oe. 3
Fins de nonrecevoir. Looke Recevoir.
Findeterre. A Promontorie in Britaine, fo tearmed,
- becaufe it is one ofth'ends of France. - :
Roseaineiiectennedin. To thrine, cheene, in-
_ ereafe, or profper we , Me ee ©
: ns Pp Faucon.


Quand la fille pefe vn M luy peut mettre la


MEIIIN


FIN


Faucon de bonne fin. A wellliking, of wel-prouing
bawke. |


‘A toutesfins. Of Gree, of neceffitie, howfoener wee
come byit, by booke,or crooke,by any meanes what/oe-


uer,
La fin fait tour: Prov, The end does all in all.
_Alafin fçaura on qui a mangé le lard : Prov. The
‘theefe will be at length difcouered (bowfoeuer he con-
ceale,or,how cunningly foeuer be carrie,bimfelfe.)
Telle vie telle fin :Prov. Such as bis life fuch was bis


end,

Fin: m. fine: wittie, craftie, fubtile, cunning, wilie,
fraudulent,cantelous, beguiling; alfo, fine, mall, pret-
tie curious; perfect exatt,pure, exceeding good, of the
verie belt; alfomoftvery utmoft.
ee fine, The female Eele ; called (à in Langue-

ac


Fin à dorer. À notable impofler,cheater,coufener,co-
niecatcher.
Fin comme vne mouche. As craftie asa fox; and;
Vne fine mouche. A fubtile fox,or peece of flefh.
Le mau fin feu de riqueraque; Looke Feu.
Du fin fond, Out of th’'utmoft depth,or bottome, from
the verie middeft of,
Par le fin faitte, Strictly, firaitly, exaëtly, by line and
leuell,to a baire,or to th'utmoft in all extremitie.
Pour le fin moins. At the leaff.
Chargé de la plus fine. Thats paied foundly,powde~
red throughly, that bath bis load of the moft delicate
pockes ; alfo, as in Chargé, +
Faire le fin. To he fqueamifh,make it daintie, feeme
Jirange,refife an offer(cunningly,and with ia’ bope to be
the more inuited.) :
Mais à fin contre fin.But craft met with cuaning,or,
two craftie knaues were therein verie well met,

in contre fin n’eft bon a faire de doubleure: Pro,
Craft in both parties binders all attonement.

Fin. Adverb. and hence, WS ;:
Fin à tel jour.Ptill fuch a day; and; fin que; untill
that, whileft that,

Fin de conte. Fiaally,to conclude,to be briefe;to make
gr make baft, nied BARNS Bae
Fin de propos, il difoit,que. The laft hé faid was, or
in the end he fan the or (as in Fin de Conte) to
make an end ; be faid,thate ~ ET ES
Pouf le fin moins, At the leaf. et
Tout fin. Ewen now, firaight ; hard by; alfe,wholly,
Tout fin à Nocl, Verie neere to Chrifimas, when it
was almoft cbrifimas.
Tout fin mere nu. 4H difcouered,fiarke-bellie naked ;
as naked as mynaile, +." wk

Bins a eres: ins | ing

nage : m, All the [mall ¢ ein a fhip tackling.

Finages: m. Th’vtmoft He liberties, the furtheft
bounds or borders ofa countrey or citie.

inaifon. Quand argent faut nulle.No bar.
gaine,or (atisfaction, without money,

Final:m, ale: € Fiaall, fimifbing, laft,concluding vtmoft,

. alfo, ficbiett unto a conclufion,or end ; and hence;


Creature finale. 4 mortall creature; a creature that.


mu end one time or other(his dayes,) — :

È Flr etd «4 pevepariccolif
Finaletnens:ieatiy.atiengibyat she Lf sia faanetin
conclufionjin the end, À EF TGÉ
Finance: or; Finances: £ wealth, fubflance, riches
| à i eafure.(The French


Diaitigecby Go. ‘gle


5 er à Theor Papifes Cnof property) tbe Kings de-


maine which confifts of ordinarie reuenewes ; but Fi-

nance (more general!) comprehends both the demaine,

and all extraordinarie leuies ; as th’ Aides, taxes, im-

pofitions cre.)

Perte de finance. Loffe of publicke treafure by a rob-

berie,erc; the ruine,or decay of a private eflate by ex-

ceffiue,or needle(fe vfurie.

Prendre à perte de finance. Looke Prendre.

Faire finance. To gine money for an Office ; alfo, to

make,or gather,a flocke of money. i
Financé:m. ée: £. That bath yeelded fome treafure,

or areuenew(to the king ; )or(more generally)disbur-


fed.

Financer. To yeeld a reuenew,or treafure to the king,
oc; | sl) generally}to disburfeste gine or pay mo-
ney for.

Financier : m. 4 financer,or Exchequer-man ; a Recei-
ner ,under-Treafurer,or TeHer,in th Exchequer.

Fine de poules :f, Henmes dung,or ordure. _

Finé: m. ée: f. Ended, finifbed,determined,concluded,
accomplifhed; come to an iffue. :
Finemént : m. 4n end,iffue,conclufion,expir ation ; or,

.anending,determining, fin fing of.

Finément.. Subiilly , craftily, flily, wilily, cunningly ;
bence,alfo,indufirioufly; prouidently, diftr etl, wari-
y;cauteloufly,c> guilefully deceit fully, fraudulently,or,
with a fraudulent intent. :

Finer. as Finir ; To end; alfo, to obtaine, get ,recouer ;
ouerrule,commaund preuaile with; alfo,to fürnifh, or
affoord ; alfo,as Affiner ; to trie,cleanfe, fine.

Je neme puis finer d'argent. I cannot come by any


monty.
Homme de qui on fine aiféement. A gentle,or trac-
table fellow ; one thats eafily won, or foone preuailed


with.
Finerot chemin fin.A way that is abont 18 foot broad:


«B


ourgong.
Finefle : £ Craft, fubtiltie guile deceit, policie cunning,


aud. fleight, flinepe, wilineffe. à
Fincifee de ds je 08 SO Sach as are eafily
-_ lookt into ; or feene thorow. :
Finet:m.finette: f, Apettie craftie flaue;a lie rogue,a
 wilie mate, a fubtile companion. é
Finfreluches :f Shales,or féales, or fcalié excrements ;
as dandriffe dc ; or,as Fanfreluches, aa
Fingard: m.de :f Lazie,lither ide, flothfull, flugeifh,
- dalireteblafie,car clog negligent, AUS
Fini:m. finie : Finifbed,ended,conclnded determined,
raccomplifhed ; alfo,prefcribed limited fiinied; compaf-
- -fèdicomprehended.
Finir. Toend,conclude, finifh, determine ,accomplifh; al-
-{0,to define;prefcribe, limit, flint;comprehend compafe.
iniflant. Ending ,determining,defining miting.

Le cercle finissant. The Horizon ; Looke Cercle,
Finiteur :m.Thecircumfêrence of a piller, from the top |
F to the fae or ui afed g

inoinét.A kind of peare; good raw,orvoafied.
Fins : m. The ee ta Srentiersotmoft ends,or

“limits of a countrey. ;
Fiole : f. A violl of glaffe,crc.
Fiquatelle : f. 4 womans piinities,

ue. par ma «By my Fe ts

Fiquer. as Ficher ; To faflen: Pic,”
Firmament: m. Theskie,welkin, firmament.
Firme: cornes fe le;See Ferme.
Firmeté: f, Strength, frmeneffes Looke Fermeté.
Pilealm.alesrife U;belonging,or comming torbe pub-
lick purfe, treafure ; Tveafurie,or Exchequer. à


ro. |


Original.from
RHELOHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


EF I'S


Procureur fifcal. À Lord bigh Fuflicers ordinarie At-
tucney, who pleads, and profecutes within bis circuit,
all caufes wherein either the publicke,or bis Lords in-
heritance,or both, be intere(fed.
Fiscalins: m.children,or freed men maintained or nou-
rifbed i the Kings boufe,or vpon bis land.
Fiscelle : f. Packtbread.
Fitcellette : f. Small packtbread. À
Fielle : m.ée : £. Fuxellies orsbendie counterbendie; a
tearme of Blazon.
Fifq: m. as Fifque. +
Fifque : m, The publicke purfes the publicke renenew,or
Treafure; a Treafurie, or Exchequer.
Fiflaigne. A certaine tumbling tricke.
Fiflau. A Fitch,or Fulmart.
Fiflaye :f A quicke, and violent daunce much vfed by
the French,
Fifselle. 2s Fifcelle; Packthread.
Fiflure :f. A clefi,rift,chinke,chop.
Fiffuré: m ée: fi Cleft,rinen,chinked.
Fift. ilfift. He did; Sec Faire. ;
À Fifticin: m. ine:f Of Piftachoes,or fifticke nuts,
Fiftique. The Piftachoe,or fiflicke nut.
Fifton : m, A Little fonne,or boy,
fonae,or boy. .
Fiftule: € 4 pipe,or flute; a tap,or fancet ; alfo,therun-
‘ning fore called an Iffue,or Fiflula.
iftuleux: m. eufe: À Full of Fiflulaes ; or of boles like
a [punge. :
pvc m.A vafall,copieholder;or cuflomarie tenant,
properly,the va]all,or tenant of a Lord Cavier. * :
Fivele : € A buckle :&Langued.
Fixe:com. Fixed, fetled, faftened, fure, fleadie, vn-
mouable. 4 en
Fizain : m. Spindle. tree, pricke-timber, 3501
Fizellé. as Fifellé, ater’ ta bal
Flabellation. A fningsairing, or gining of wind un-


to.

Flabellé: m. ée :  Fanned, aired, blovne onstbat bath
wind ginen to it. : ys

Flac: m.A flat, flap,flampe,or clap giuen by à thing that
is violenily thrown againft a wal or vato the grounds
and the report,or found made by bands,érc, firutke,or
bit,one againft the other. 1
Mettre à la flac. Toemptie « purfe (of the found an
emptie purfe makes) alfo,as Flacquer ; or, fuddainely
Sn a burric) to ruine cafi dovnc,oucrthrove!

e grand vilain grand flac: Prov. He that lines vil.
Lanoufly falls violently; or, the fall of a great rogue
makes a great report,

Flaccide : com. #eake, flaggie limber, flagging bang-
ing looffe ; faded, withered, pi taut
Flaccon. as Flafcon. = Seah
Flacconner.To plie the pot ; to quaffe, or tipple bard,
Flache: com. weake, limber, flaggse ; lolling,dv
banging downe the head; withered, faded ; faint, effe-
minate.  * x SJ
Flacon. as Flafcon ; A(great)leatherne bottle.
Flacquer.To make a thing 10 flap, flamp or clap,by caf-
ting it violently againfta wall or to the ground.
Mla vous flacca li. He (quafht, lat, or fqwat her
downe there; be gaue her an arfepoffe; be made her
rin the fall he gaue ber ; there be clapt


Flafla. aF


Hageoleur : m.A piper a whifllersal/oya coufener,chea-


Fiftonneau. (The diminutive of Fifton) averie litle .


Flagorneu ; Ablab, — 5
Res À whipping, four tiét lafbings ier= |
4 ing. : ‘ 3 1236 ”


: L . i


FLA


Flagellé: m. ée : £hipped,lafhed,ierked, fcourged
lageller. To whip, courge,lafh, de A

Flageol. as Flageolet.

Flageoler. To pipe,or play on a wbifile.
Flageoler en P orcille. To flatter ; to whifper,
lageolet:m. A pipe, whifile , flutes alfo , as Fla-
gcollet,


rsconiecatcher, notable decciner.

Flageollet :m, Iris, flagser Flowerdeluce,

Flagorner. To blab,tattle, tell tales, report idle newes:
alfo,prinately to appeach,difgrace, detract from otbers,
thereby to pleafe the bearers,

Flagorneur : m. 4blab,tell-tale , tatler, tale-carrier;
alfo,a pickthanke, priuate detraétor, fecret accufor ;
one that by fuch bafe Offices bepes to win fanour.

Flagrance d’vn deliét. Plaine apparencie, or palpable-
nelfe, of an offence; the crying of a finne.

Flagrant: m. ante :f, Flagrant, ardent, burning, fla-
ming; carnef}, feruent.

Prendre au fai& flagrant. To takeatit, or inthe
manner ; to apprehend vpon the deed doing , or pre-.
Sently after.

Flaine : fe Aticke for a bed,

Pres m, Sent, finell.
airé :m.éc : f. Sented, fmelled, ven inded -
aie , fmelled, vented, winded ; alfo,

Flairement: m. 4 fenting, finelling, fauoring, venting,

Fer NTI

iter. To fent, fmellvent, wind ; alfo,to per
afinell,yeeld a fauor, breath out oe yes
Onflaire cela. There is great doubt, or fufpition bad
er À jor, men begin to difcouer it, went it, find it,
out,


Flaireur: m, 4 fenter, fmeller, venter.

Flaironné : m.ée:£. Sented, fmelt, vented,

Flaironner. To fént, finell, vent ; fucke vp bis breath at
bis nofethrills often together.

Flaiftri: m. ie: f. Marked , branded, burnt, as a
vogue , infome apparent member , with an hot yron;
“i, publickly defamed, openly difgraced, knowne for
a knaue. -

Flaïftrir. To burnein the band, or eare, to brand in
the forebead, to marke for a rogue, with an bot yron;
alfo, to defame publickly , difèrace openly, blemifh
thereputation of, lay a foule imputation on; alfa, as


Flaiftriffüre :£.4 difgracefill brand,or marke; an open
blemifh ; al{o,a fading, or withering.

Ela as Hee . is
aman: m.A certaine reddi[h,long-bild,and long-lecd,
Sea-fovle; of the bigneffe ofa pr preston sp ro
ger,and indifferent good meat.

Fla t.asFlaman.

à = Flaming, fhining,gliflering yeeldiag a bright
lufter. CRE

Flambart. as Furole ; S. Hermes fire ; alfa, the bearbe
Water-torcb,or Cats taile. ;

Flambe:f. 4 flame,a great blaxe of fire ; alfa,the blew.
Flowerdeluce (called otherwifé) Garden flags; alfo,


as Spale, ;
Flambe baftarde. Sedge, Gladen, Glader, Sword-


affe, Water-flag,yellow-Flag,Lauers,Leuers.
Hanbe blanche, The white Flowerdeluce; alfo,the


Flowerdeluce of Florence, of whefe Aromaticall root


Orice powder is made,
Flambe de riviere. Water-flag,water Flowerdeluce;
or,as Flambe baftarde, Soke US
Pp ÿ- Flambé. -


Original fois
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


* ~ A


UE, ght tales d
-


i


FLA
Flambé. Flamed, blexed,piered alfo,bafled with fla-


FL sor bot. feauld ing lead.


au:m, Is (generally) a light ; or any thing that
— a flame, and is carried, inthe darke, for light;
and (particularly, ) alinke, or torch of wax, bauing
neither any rofen init, nor woodden handle unto it ;
and,the great wax candle thats ufed, for flate, in the
boufes erest men.
Il porta le flambeau en cesfecrets. He divulged, or
sett be led men tothe knowledge of, 1 eft | [e-


Flambelot: m..A /mall torch,linke,or light.
Flamber. To flame, to blaxe; to fine, glifier , yeeld a


laming,or bot {caulding lard.

Flanberge: f, A fivord : @Barrag.
Flambillon. 4 finall flame,light,or linke.

poe A kind of long, flender, e flame- “coleupl fia

Langu

Flamboyant F Flaming, blaxi ., fining radiant,

Couleur flamboyante: À flame-colour,
Flamboyantement. Flamiigly, fhiningly, radiantly,

molt brightly.

Flamboyer. To flame, fhine,blaxé,giue much light.


8 eee


Flamend : m.de :£. Of. Fawaders,Flemifp belrging te |


a Fleming.
Feneftre Flamende. Looke Feneftre.

Flamiche: f, (12 Pars,and thereaboutsthey call fo) a
kind of better bread then ordinarie, referued for the
Maifters,and Miflreffes own mouthes; asalfo, a cake
made of butter, cheefe, flower , and yolkes of egges ;
after baking glaxed ouer with fugar,and rofewater.

Flamman. as Flaman,

Flamme: f. 4 flame,or great blaze.

Des flammes. The greater kind of thofe round muf
cles,or cockles which the Latines tearme Chamæ, and


which, being eaten, inflame the mouth tke peppers the |


leffec> lefJe-in flaming ones we tearmed ammertes,
Flammeche. as Flammefc


Flarmnerolles : f, Firé-Drakes june MN 187,


, fometimes in the skie; 0754s Furoles.
A pie et perk ae or el 4


Flammette : £ 4 litile flame; alfo,the bearbe Croft |
. alfo, akind of Launcet , pointed like a broad arrow |
head, wherewith Chirurgians vfe to open a pi "73 |

es |


Des flammettes. Look des flammes,

Flanmie: f ThOffice, or dignitie of a Pagan) Ach
prieft; a Flaminfbip.

Flamme-vome: com. ee

Flammuche. a Flamiche.

Flamunule : £ The bearbe called
upright Virgines-bower; alfo,the:
wort,or Speare-(10mfoot.

Flanc :m. The flaake,or fide; als anker (in ae
- tation; ) alfo, a coping, planchet, or plate of metta
readie to be  Ramped on,or coyned,

+ Malde flancs. 4 contoual Puch inthe fide; or, a


ee DS à sal
0
Havel
Donner le flanc


P wel


ni al or
called ,Spear-


D pepe 7e Tayeld omer be
anc. ett fen a bi one


| Pad anne ce a
4


reat lufter gine much light ; alfo, to baft (meat) with


Flu AA 3 A little flaske,


.Flaté: m. ée: f. Flatered; Sinisa Aroaked,


rt res ee à md ds ot: “ii mis GE


FL; A


Flancars : m, Side cas Armour for the flankes, or

fit of a barbed bo Jante,

Flanchere :f. 4 farker, fide peece,or flanking peece of
timber,in building,

Flannet: m..4 doucet,or little cuftard.

Flanquers : m. as Flançais; al/o,as Flancars.

Flanqué : m. ée :f. Flanked, frengthened with flanks;
fenced,definded ; accoafled.

Flanquer. To flanke, firengthen with flankes ; accoafl,
runne along by the fide of; to defend, fupport, or fence;
to be at ones elbow for a belpe at need.

Flans: m, Flawnes,Cupards Egge-pies;al/a,round plan-
chets,or plates of mettall ; See Flanc.
aons : m. Round planchets,or platesof. mettall,yeadie
Fi be flamped,or coyned.

ue : com. ments feeble, faint, flaggie;See Flache,
Fa nee as Flache,
lafcon: m. A (great) leathern bottle.
Terre long de foy n’apporte que flafcons, & bou-
teilles: Prov. Ground shat lies farre off yeelds nougl.t
but pots,and bottles,

Flafconner. as Flacconner.

Flafque. as Flafcon; Alfo,a flaske, or box fix powder ;
ee the ib of a peece of ordnance; the fiame


: fThe couering of a bed;alfo,the daintiefi kind
of Ray,or finooth Thornebacke,
laftereau: m. A kind of flat Naveau.
Flaftrer. To marke burne,or brand with an bot yron.
:mie: f Marked buïnt er branded with an nest


Flaftrir. as Flaftrer ; or,as Flaiftrir.

Flatant,Flattering fawning on,colloguing with,clawing,
moothing, flroaking.

Flatard: m. de: f, The fume.


ned on glued with.
Flatelet: m..4 Halibut ( fib (fh)
Flatement :m. A flatiering baling ening fe-
Ig ons RU toe gloxing with,
evaux. À flroaking of them with
i 3 affo, the popping, or Snacking wfed by ri-


Plate. flatter; foath, finooth, fawne om, glexe or col-
withzufe faire words,pine (oucr)good tearms vn-
to; alfo,toclaw, Siroke, clap gently. À
Sansflaterle dé. Plainely, Sincerely, roundly, with-
ont making the matter better thenit 1.
Quiflate il grate : Prov, He that flatters,thrines,
Flatereau:m. Half a flatterer, one that fomewbat


fitters

Flacerelie : € A flattering,or cogging wench.

Flaterie : f. Flatterie, fawning, gloxing adulation affin-
tation, foorbing, finouthing;cogging, foifling.

Flateur sa 2m. 4 flaiterer eloxer, fawner, fooiber:füifler,


her; a claw-backe, Sycophant, ks
ds en ot ie J
ale al
re a Pape sang sated mith bot jron;See
Hank as Haut,


Flatriffement : m, À bee FE Basho abur-


nin tug the care sen ia marke of d'Igraces a
| ju if Flatted, one made
Flatcir.


‘


re


t Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


ae VE SE _ « |


|
Î
|
| 3


!


F
L:


Heads if A wwound,or fric


‘


F LE


Flattir. To flats tobeat,or make flat,

Hlacueux: m.eufe:f Flatulent, windie, full of indie
hamors.

Flat ner « Flarueux. aia PE
“latuofité: f.Flatulenciezindine[e, fulneffe oj

Flavelle: f, Trifling, (v.m.) PE

Fiayau : m, A{laile tothrefh with,

Fieau: m.as Flayau; Alfa,the beame of a great Balance;
alfo,the tendrell,or tender flute of a vine, whereby it
cateheth hold on what isnext unto it; 1 is alfo much


yb by metaphor, for a four ge,plague,or iudgement of


Le Bias des poiflons. The finnes of fifhes.
Les Fleaux des rameaux des arbres. The final tops,
or twigs of branches, ;

Fleble : as Foible,

Fleche: f. 4 fh:fi,an arrow; alfo,a petceof wood in the
beakchead of a fhip; the prit fayle whereof it ferues to
bold in.

Fleche d’vn arbre. The trunke,or bodie of a tree,
Fleche de lard. À flich of bacon. à
Faire de rout bois fleches.. Looke Bois,

I ne feait plus de quel bois faire fleches. He knows
no longer what wood to make arrowes of, viz: what
‘fluffe to make ufe of what helps to relie on, what friends
to recourfe to,

Flecheurs. Benders, pliers,bowers ; and (more particu-
rif the mufcles that fèrue to bow the ioynts of the

ingers.

Flechi: m.ic:f Beat, bowed, plied; moued, turned ;
gone, averie,or on shone fide,

Flechir, To bend, bow, plie; to moue ;turne,gocawrie,or
on th'one fide.

Faciled flechir. Gentle, pliant, flexible, traëtable,
oat tender ; inconftaa monable; foone es


eafily bowed.
Flechiffant. Yeeldin phinghending, Lis vale.
Flechiffement : m: BR me splying. - f
Flechiflure :£.4 bought,or crvokednelfealfos bending,

crooking, bowing,

Fieétion. as Flechiffement.

egart. À common place,or way: Pic.
Fle atique :com, Flegmatickes full of fleames bree-
Vu fleame ; ;fubiebt unto fleame,

:m, por ted fire à
er on: m, A hetyand red fwellin mation 0

res by Plane Fignen | à


Fan arrow, |


AVR:


{che. as Fleche ; Ao,
Flefchier : m..47 Archer.
F'efchiflant. as Flechiflant. . ~
Fleftri.as Flatre; Alfa, (adedgwiaheredyquailed decaied
Fleftrir. as Flatrer ;.Alfi,to fade wither; flag dv oope

decay,or drie up; toquaile, faile,or ea’
Laifler fleftrir


am} ::
rene To let run to fred; See


.Graine.. «4
Fleftrilenre:t withering eding quail decaying
a failing, drooping, Pegginele, falling away; ao a
ÆFhaiftriflure, stem ow : |
Fletan. as Flettan. fe on
t. 4 Ha holyabut ro
HE cede sae ae
Fiette. Acer ; a finall barke; alfoya Flounder. » a
7 : com. as Foible. Save: 4 a
cone ste : com, F legmatick, fabiect unto.


Bicone as


| Fleur: 4 flower iaome ofonesa cath blening,
+ y


FLE


Fleurs. A womans monetblié flux,er flowers; - 2-1
Fleur d' aage. The prime, or moft flourifbiing time sf


ones age.
Fleur d'amour, Flower-gentle,Flower-amour, |
Fleurs blanches, The whites; (a difeafe well knowone
among women.)
Fleur des Chardons. Thiflle-downe.

leurs cordiales. les trois fleurs cordidles. ‘rhe
three cordial flowers; Rofes, Buglofe, and Bourrage
flowers.
La fleur du cuir, The g'aine.or upper part of leather,
Fleur d’eau. The water Lillie,water Rofe, yellow, or
white Nenuphar.
Fleur d'erain. Little red and! fining graines that fall
from the fimoake arifing of cleere rater caft vgon mel-


ted, ead a and * hot braffes (of great vf in I Phyfick
urgerie.)
Fleur de ar Flower,or the fineft ras tal.


ill-du
FE eur 5 ae as Mere goutte.:
Fleur S.laques. Ragwort, Stag germort, Stauervoart,
S.lames-wort.
Fleur À jaulnir. Dyers weed, greening weedy wood-
waxen;balé broome.
La Fleur de mouton. The bef of the rack, & thevibs
of the breaft which be not under the fhoulder,
Fleur dela pierre AGienne. The /alt ifh mold, or
boare,that growes on that fione; az excellent prefer-
uer of the things which avefeafoned withall.
Fleur de fel. asin Sel,
Fleur du vin. The mother of wine;the white,or moul.
die (pots that float on the top of old wine.
Chouxfleurs. Collie-florie, Cypres Colemorts.
Couleur de fleur de Pefcher. A Peach colaur,.
_ Lanoblefleur. Flower- -gentle,Veluet flomer, lé
er amour, Flower valure,
“A fleur. Blanchir dela toile à fleur. 7o bleach,or
. whitenkianen. —
‘A fleur d'eau. Clofe by the matersbetveene wind and
water,
‘A fleur de terre. Clofi: valo, euen with, bard at, the
ground;
_ Lafleurn’ eft quecendre, The beffiis but trafh the
 faireft no ur: then a dead flourifh,
Fleurage : m. Floarineffes a beape or abamadence of
lower Ss.
Fleurant le plan de la terre.igsd Ficus detre
eurant ie calemard d' ape 2000


1 À: din gor cafling Ul of an Axe
1 tn gran py et witb the


Fa 4, ‘ Flpmerdelace bete ep fa ulders, cee. à
curcelile a or, po a a beanie
with golden Flowerdelucess © 1

lifer.Tofeta Flower deuce betwee a foul
ders with a hot pron (the. a rogue; Yalfi, to
‘haies, fickes. fet thi , with Fimwerde


Flemée: fithe fat emer pf lois fume


eee filke Prey «®


To ds pan
together.»


dprunni ners,
touchin aaa affing by; alfo, venting,or winding
mes. Re TA lightly to miss sean


b aphorically fr
ae sa inp aie ene


Mefler la foye avec le fleuret,


Va 1
Le


Pp ii


PL | F:L O >


lers farbufh their blades ; or as Efmeril.

Flion: 4 kind oftender, and daintie Shell-ffo, net much
unlike a Cockle but that the fol thereof is fomewhbat
whiter, and much finootber.

Flique de lard. as Fliche: Pic.

Flis :m. 4 flight-fbaft.

Flifquant: m. ante: f. whisking jerting pmanging,

Flo :m. The high-water marke,at fea; Looke Flot.

‘A flo. Floating,or fwimming-vpon tbe fea.
Chofes du flo. Flotfens, or Lt mdrr goods that lie
ing ,or foimming on the top of the water.

Floc de laine. A locke, or flocke of wooll.

locde Moine. as Frec.

Floccard : m, 4 fafhion of bead-attire put on bythe be-
trotbed maidens of Lyons,and left off when they bane
beene mavied a twelue-month.

Floche, Looke Flofche.

Flocon. as Floc,

Flocquars : m. Taffels, puffes, or tufis, as of Sarcenet
thats drawne out of, or cut under another finffe.

Flocquer. To puffe out, as Sarcenet in abreech cut after
the Swiffe 320 bang forth looffe, to fit bagging,
flaggingsor beftumpled, as an ouer-wide garment,

Flocquoir :m. 4 /guirt.

Floflotant. Flowing, floating, furging ; founding like
waues,or billowes,


ae A floating,or furging; a bubling,or tem-


Flo oter. To float,furge,or waue vp cone 3 alfo,to
make a furging,bubling,or tempefinous noife,
Flon.as Felon; Alfo; a white-meat made of milke,egs ,
butter, and meale ; 3 or as
Flondefai&t: m. A tertaine balades that fomewhat
refembles our flawne.
Floquer See Flocquer
Floquet. gentil floquet.4, [weet youth, fpruce compa-
Es 3 minion,milk-sop : Rab.
ets de poil, Flockes,or lock:s of baire.
piques The bear Cheefe-runnell,or Cheefe-renning,
in Ladies Bedflraw,pettie Mugwet,Maides-beire.
Floraux.leux Floraux. A certaine wittie, & pleafant
contention san gai inthe ery E-
“glantine being the rewar 207 BIR; 1 oer,
anda Marigold fr the fecond,
Florée: £. The blew feumme of woad boyling in the Dy-
» ers lead; which fleeted off, and dried unto powder,
| fs Painters, and. Silke-Dyers for diners fes.
ore:


Freeman Fine tearmes tofinall purpofe; an
Fleurette: £ A little flower, {mall bloome , or blofjeme.
Fleuretté.


patte tearme ofBlaxon;). alfovented,
‘or winded.
Fleuretter.To vent or wind; alfo,to fneake,or eaue-drop


it ; alfo,as Fleureter.
:m. cule: f. Flowerie; flored with choice of
flowers; al, fragrant,odoriferous, (weet-fmelling.

Fleuri:m.ie :£ Flourifhine, fowred bloffomed.

fleuris. Cokie-florie ; Cypres cole.
Visite euries. Palme-Sunday.
Vicilleffe fleurie. white,or gray-beaded.
Fleurin : mi, 46 Florin; Or,a Low-Countrey coyne worth
about ij.s,fterl.

Fleurir.To blofome bloome, flower bring or beare, flow-
ers ; alfo,to propper, excell, flourifb,be renowmed,come
into credit, baue much reputation im the world.

Fleuriffant. Blooming, bloffoming, flourifbing, bearing
many flowers ; alfa, profperous,yenowmed bad in efi-
mation.

Fleuron :m. 4 Fleuron,or Fleuret; afiall flewer, lit-
tle blofjome,young blowme.

Fleuronné : m.ée: £ ne decked,or fet thicke,
with yong flowers, bloffomes, bloomes,

Croix fleuronnée. A croffe botonie ; (in Blazon.)
bie a To bloome , toblow; to begin 10 blof-


Fauré ttis :m. À flourifh,or
Fleurtis des ioe the arbi of little birds.
eury. # Fleuri,
Fleute: f. À flute ; a pipe,
ke fleute d’ vn Alambic, The beake,or nofe of a Lim-


becke.
Fleute d' Aleman. 4 ey; called foin fome pla-
ces ech of the little which fhe bath in th'vp-
per part of ber bodies: :
11 y a de l'ordure dans leurs fleutes. AU goes not wel
with them ; fomewhat is amiffe among them,
Ils ont accordé leurs fleutes, They are agreed ‘pon
_ the matier.
Ce qui eft venu par lafleute s'en retourne avec le
Tabourin : Prov Wbat the pipe bath gathered tbe Ta-
ber fcattereth ; goods ill gotten are commonly ill (pent,
— fe a 7 Prov.
(2


Fleuter. TR on the flutes.) 12 ony 41
Fleuteur et: Fa 68
Fleuteufe: f, 4 Flutereffe sa woman that pre on a


Fleutrer. SeeFlatrer,: tr


Fi im. À floud, fireame,yin
ean Eats Sain@ ge Prov. The den


once, vowes are ill
Ses  foone bent,


Floret : m. A fôile; or fvord with the edge rebated,

Flori :m.ie :f Bloomed, blofèmed, flourifhing , in the
flower ; whence;
Quand les febues fontflories ; Jesfors cômencent
~ leurs folies: Prov. Looke Febue.

Floride : com, Livelie; frefh,luflie, flourifhing

Florin Den € concerne “in


< med eafily. Sonor caged godt be dealt | = France,worth ijisfterl:not currant at this day; ‘a
“with, fit to be wrought on, Languedoc, and the countries adioyning retai
“Leon ge 3 turneswind about. name fill, ina peece thats worth 18.d.fierl,) ite,
eux :m.eufe : Da roue ee fl 2 Florin de Metz. Ys worth iij.s.fterle
ete bath many turnings ~ pur au trait, Wants James «= A se os
BEN IONUL 143275 80 en £


ur.)
Hori Fa Vic. Goes ne is Tondiné à!


Qui a Flori mil

mg DS rae

RENE A
KT11' tha


| ze Sleawe fiers! bem
f ot:


croix florencée.d croffe flurt; (in Blaxon,) |


+


tite 2


FLO:


Flot:m. 4 was, furge, floud ; orjthe veauing, floating,
or flowing of any waters alfo, a tyde, or the tydes or as
Flo; the high-water marke at (ea.
Le flot de Mars. The great Spring-tydes which come
in about the Equinottial,or thirteenth,of Marz,


bout the Autumne Equinoétiall,


loft on the waues.
Tout ce que vient d’ Ebe s’ en retournera de flot:
Prov. what's got by one hand will be loft by ano-


ther.
ren m. A floating, firging, fwimming on the
topof, . ‘


Pp ‘
Le premier otage d'un Navire. The launching of a
new fbip. ¥
Flotelant. as Floflorant.
oter. as Flotter.
Floton: m. 4 tuft,locke,or puffe of.
Flottage. as Flotage.
Flottant, Floating, flowing, furging, waning as water;
alfo, fayling,or fivimming on the water.
Flotte: f. A Brewers Cooler ; alfoya fleet of [bips.
Flotte de gens. 4 crue, rout, atroupe, locke, a'com-
; Parente, ffreame,of people,
Flotte de marrein. A pe enr of timber ioy-
ned together,and [ent dovwne a riuer.
lotté: m. ée: £ Floating ; fer aflote; alfo, fhaken,
= tofjed, moued ; cartied vp and downe by, or on, the
wanes.

Bois flotté. LoogeBois. :
ttement: m. A floating, fwimning, waning. *
Flotter. To flote; bouer; fivimme aloft on the water ; to
boyle, flow, furge, rift in waues,or billowes,
Floüet: m. ette: f.veake,wafhie tender delicate ice,


| @Norm à
ne main foüette, À /oftjor daintie band. |
Floüin: m. 4 Barke of fame fortie,or fiftie tunne; high-
er decked then a Galley, and lower them an ordinarie
Barke; and going bath with fayles, and oares (witout
bankes) and fitted both for fight, and burthen; we
call it a Ry-boat,or a Ry-man (for the fafhion of it came
from Ry, fayes Niéor.) : -
Flour. as Fleur ; a bloffome,or flower. -
Flouré: m.ée : f Flowrie (in Blafon.)
Flourir. see Fleurir.


26 Ae ix, flowi to Ott
Huétuation: forge fine ingsa doubting,
Fluctuer. To float, (urge, wane vp and downe, as the

ter ; tobe tolled, th 3 alfo,to wa-
papi pyre wee


Fs pa
water. ci Era, Lin, ; 5 RTS


Fluëurs de femme, 4 womans moniblié flowers, |

| Huïde: com, Flowiig, running, w es
mater; thinne, feeble, weake, ai wate ; al, glib,
> 7 « hs À an" Ra cee


27 :


¢ Se ee VPN = « CORRE T


Le flotde Septembre, The like tydes, comming in a- | Flu
‘A flotgriffe graffe: Floating, furging, fivimming a


PON ORE (Phe bebe rage |


£00 i]


ve Fleute ; 4 ; a certaine peece of (niall Ar-
tillerie, y
Fluter,& Fluteur. see Fleute: & Fleureur.
Fluviatile : com. Of a river, flreame,or water ; belong-
“ing t0,07 bred'in,a riner,ftreamesér water.
X:m. A flowing running, flreaming, or rufhing out ;
& chrrent(or tide) ef water -alfo, à flux, flix, laske,
PA 4 (thinne, or liquid) ifue ; alfo, a ‘flufh, at
ardes. °° on
Cela eft encores en flix. That is as yet in adtion, or
‘upon th'increa/é.
Pafle fans flux. Paffé,1 am not flr
Matter, or not a pinae matter,
Fluxible: com. Fiuxible, fuide,or flitting.
Fluxil:maile:£ Flnsie, flacit, flowing, fitting, run


5 al/o,let-coe, no


ning,

Fhixiôn: £A fluxion; à running, flowing or floating of
waters ; alfo,a flux, flix.or iffue,

Foatre : m, Straw ; alfo,litter,or fidder.

nhs :m.eufe : f. Full of, well firaifed with,

ra. |

Focile :m. The arme from the elbow to the writ; the
leg,or fhanke from the knee to the aukleseach confiftin 2
of two bones,
Focile grand. Ti’ upper of thofe two bones, being the
longer,and greater.
Focile mineur ;ou,petit focile. The undermoff,and
lee of them.

Fodine:f, 4 quarrey,or mine ; a place or pit whereout
any thing is digged.

Foetide. as Fetide. Stinking.

Foeu. SeckeFeu ; A fire.

Fogat. 4 kind of engine to catch fifh with.

Fogner. Ta grumble ; prvt,lowre. à

Be Hs @ yne navire. as Fougon, at

Foiblage de poids. wzat of weight, (cant weight,

i :com. Feeble, weake, firengthleffe, faint, force-

elfen ne, :


Foible comme vn feftu. we fay aé weake as water.
Le fort portant lefoible. One with ancther , good
and bad together, fome better to make amends for tbe À
wore. | 7
Qu a lé refsort foible. That wants ereflion. *
Foiblement, ie nds À it État firength,
7 ed fed ps biere ue ee
oiblefic: f, Feeblene[ft.wealneffe, want of firength;
anne finite frinting,or failing int a qu ;


~ . alfo.ant of due weight,or, {cant weight, in cone.
‘ Foibleffe de coeur.Daffardié faint-beartedies,cow-
RL A mr LR sats ans Ramat
Oic. 2 ny dE De is
Foignafle te atedicke fader, Spam rfi Snail
Foigme LE 4 ti fale ha ba a aie ed are
À affe that bath at throne end a fai
sd item ee
Foigner. To powt,lowre grumble,murmnre,or be offene
ded,at; al/d.4 Feindre; ad bences ai cect À
Is nefefoighoyent de guetes. They difembled, or
forbore, but a little, Saha
Foin: m. Hay; aifo, a great white Moath, or night-flie,
that fomewbarrefembles a Bittle, ae hr
Foin d artiere’ ifn, Fog, late Math , lsteward


Hay. ; a
Foi Bou gongne. Spañifh Trifelie, Medick fod-
Foft'dur. Hard Hay, $. Peters wort, quate or great |


- —_ ——— —--~-


,


'


us


=
S
=


POP ES LR , el
‘ ‘ M


PS DEN pens RP TE TS


FCO 1


Sain foin, oufain& foin. Spanifh'Trifilie, Medicke
fodder, Snayle Clauer.
Bailleur de foin à la mule., A Cheater, Coufener, Co-
ape Jo):

hapitreur de foin. A skarre-crow; one that feemes
better then be is,or affumes more then be fhould.
Bailler foin en corne, To deceine, gull, coufen, fella
bargainc,giue a gudgeon. OT
Bailler del’ avoine pour du foin . To loofé by an ex-
change,to gine cake for bread. i
Botté de foin.Ruflicke,rufticall clownifh,Boore-like,
rude; alfo,ignorant, fimple, fillie.
Il y a du foin, il n’y a que les beftes qui s'y amu-
fent. Your hopes are verie meane, or vaine; the thing
you gape for's “- vmwortbie of you.
Se remplir de foin, ou de paille, To flop bis guts
with, to glut bimfelfe on, any thing ; (from a horfèsthat
wanting Hay falls to bis Litter.)
oe du foin aux chiens. To (pue,call vomit (after a
furfet)
Tourner les truyes au foin. To anfwer from the mat-
ter, to fbeake from the purpofe.
Foin en corne: Proy. 4 good warning,or marke, for
the auoiding of a dangerous perfon ; a thing worne to
gine notice that the wearer us not to be [afely accoafted;
(from the auncient Romanes, who ufed ta ty a wifpe of
Hay about the one horne of a Jhrewd,or curft Beafl;)
and hence ;
li a du foin aux cornes. He is a dangerous beafi;a
fierce, proud, flurdie, furlic,unfociable, fellow.
De mauvais pres foin, ou paille: Proy, For 4
desperate debt take any fatisfaition, of an ill paymai=
fer any thing. i ge

Foine. as Fouinne. A Foyne,or Polecat.

Foine. 4 Pigeon-boufe, that bath one entrie.on the top,
without other hole,or window for light,or ayre ; alfi,as
Faine; Beech-Maft, ; F ;

Foinil: m. 4 Hay-ftacke, Hay-reeke, Hay-mow; Hay-
loft, Hay-boufe. , j

Foirard: m.  fhitten fellow; alfo,a kind of white Vine,
or tr cof no great worth; fo tearmed, of the proper-
‘tle


‘bath to loofen the bellie, fé
‘A cul de foirard toufiours ak merde : Prov.
A filthie tale feld wanteth filtbie Auditors, ==


| Poire: f. 4 Faire; a Mart; a generall


| Market.
11 s’eft bien trouvé dela foire. He bath made a good
_matchor market; be bath fped very well ; (Applyable
vito one that bath gotten a good wife.) .
On ne s’en va pas des foires comme du marché;

De mg a a gi Mecaea
oire: f. Squirt, thinne dung; alaske. oa
Faire barbe de foire à. To difgrace, violate, wrong

*extreamely,abnfe egregioufy. 8 = \

_ “Afain&e Foire chandelle de merde: Prov. 4 gift

"agreeable to her natwre,or humor ; fit (and filthie) Let-
tuce for her ([linking)ips.

Fo rden Mercurie,


: f. French Mercurie -
in a laske ; alfo,te be-


Ma. 4s Foret. :.
UX: m.Qufe: £ Alto befhitten, or
Res aU,hanins the fyxirts trond


bat


hier | ESS rene afte: Prov. Lt ey |


times; & Autre fois(an Aduerbe,and moff ufed as one
word;) heretofore, in times pafl ; while-eave; fome-
times, at another time.

Quelque fois. Sometimes,one time or another.
Toutes fois. Newertheleffe norwithflanding.

-» Toutes fois &quantes. Euerietime and tide; as of-

ten as,

-» \Wne fois; once: deux fois ; twice: trois fois; thrice:
quatre fois; fiure times ; (and Jo forward, reckoning

- 2 by fo many times)

De fois à autre: Efifoones,new and then, ener and a-
non; one time afier another.
Par fois. Sometimes,or by times,now and then.

Foifon : f. Store, plentie, abundance, great fullneffe, e-
nough,

‘A Poin: Copioufly, plentifiully abundantly.

Foifonnant. Abounding with,bauing plentie of.

oifonner. To abound ; be füll,baue plentie of.

Foifonneux: m.cufe: £ Plentifill, abundant, full of,
well flored with.

Foite-cul: m..4 Pedant ; a whip-arfe.

Foiter. as Fouétter.

Fol: m. 4 foole ; affe, goofe, calf, dotterell, woodcocke; |
noddte,cokes,goofecapscoxcombe,dixard,peagoofe,nin-
nienaturall ideot,wifakers ; alfo, a Bifhop, at (heffe ;
alfo,a kind of great (anarie bird, fo called,becanfe {he
neuer linnes wagging ber head.

Il en eft plusaflotté qu’ unfol de fa marotte. He
dotes more on it then a foole on’s bable (which, we fay,
bee le not giue for the Tower of London.)
Fol eft qui fe coupe de fon. propre coufteau : Pro,
He is an affe that burts bimfely with bis own helps ; or,
, és bis ovene good parts to bis owne deftruction.
eft qui s'enyvre de fa propre bouteille : Prov.

» Of the fame fence; or,he is an affe thats befotted on his
one good parts.

Fol eft qui eft efperonné,& à cheval dir hai : Prov.
os isan ae that baning fufficient,doth vfe infufficient


Dale. 3140 De
. Fol eft qui eft à table,& n’ofe manger: Prov. He is
« an affe that b en” alth enough dares not vfèit; or
4 fé where tis to be bad, dares not put for it.
oleft qui ictte à fes pieds ce qu'il tient en fes
mains: Prov. Heys anaffe that throwes at bis beeles
what bee boldsin bis 3 viz. that negleéts bis own


ac nib nr à

I eft qui perd la chair pour les os: Prov. He is an

aff that loofès flefh for bones; viz. that leaues impor-

© tant, to follows paulirie,matlors. - sur

. Fol eft qui de fon poing fair coing: Prov. Hé isan

_ Affe that'prefimes too much on bis owme firength; or
owes not the right ufe of bisowne things:
ol & avoir nefe peuvent enw’ avoir : Pro, A foole


ve


and wealth camnet poffeffeeach other. vat
_. Fol qui beaucoup defire choifit, & prend le pire:
Prov. The greedie foole that all would parle by baie
fol lights onthevorfe.… ar TL
» Fol fe doit nommer en face qui bien affis fe defpla~
sce: Prov. He fh ld be cad a soole to bis face; that
| ke he age staat COS AREAS
.: Fol quiert iufques au crever ce quinefe peut tou+
‘er: Pro Mesa especialy of the Albi)


:


| ores ges quand ils fe taifent : Prov. Fooles
( fete paie nt. -: 2) bill
Le eft for 8 quantymais tout for n'eft
pas fol: Pro oles be its, but el ats be wot


n


SES Se — — 4 he meer — meme


Original fran


THE OHIO:STATE.-UNIVERSITY


Vn fol cerche fon. chang : Prov, A foole doth feeke
bis owne mifhap ; the curious fearcher finds bimfelfe
unfortunate,

Vn fol vn enragé: Prov. Once a foole, ener a mad
man, orbe that hath played the foole once, will, ere be
leaue, playthe madman, :

Va fol fait coufiours D eme: : Pro. The
fre begins,but neuer ends,a bu,

‘A fol avantureux n'eft meftier d a fens: Prov.
An énterprixing foole needs little wit.

‘A fol ne faut point de fonnette : Prov. (So quickly
his words,and geflure tell you what be is.)

Au fol lamarotte: Prov. We fay alfo, Gine the foole

bis bable ; or, whats a foole without a bable?

Il eft bien fol qui cuide toufiours vivre : Prov. He is

a verie alfe that thinkes be fhall line ener.

Ileftbien fol quid fol fens demande: Prov, Hee's

a true affe that lookes for wit in an affe.

Il ef bien fol qui s’oublie: Prov. He és a right foole

that forgets himfèlfe.

De ce que fol penfefouvent en demeuter Prov, 4
» foule oft finds bunfelfe fhort of his reckoniags. —
Mertez fol à par foy il penfera : Prov. Leaue a foole
el and be will bethinke bimfelfé (what be bath to


On si fol envoye fol attend: Pro. Seeke Envoyer.
Qui fol va à Rome folen retourne: Prov. Let no
- foole hope to become wife bytrauelling (at teaft,we vfe
to fay of fome of our giddie Traucllers) he 15 come bome
as soem a foole as be went.
por gee fol tarde, iour ne tarde : Prov. while
Pa oe paufe the day — time fus: the
: fooles leifure.
Si le fol n’alloit au ji. +3 vendroit pas la
mauvaife denrée : Prov. If foules went aot to Mar-
ket ill wares would be
Si le fol ne folie il perd fa faifon: Prov, A foole that
would feeme wife is moft seveatinahe; or, the ev bs
moft fisftie when be is leaft foolifh.
Si tous les fols portoient marotte, on ne fair pa
de opel bois on fe chaufferoit: Prov.
les bore,wood would be verie decre. :
‘A barbe de fol on apprend à raire: Proy. By fha-
Ming a foole one learnes to fhaue.
‘Abarbede follhardi rafoir: Prov. The rarer May


*A bar ee ETc aoe of à mol : Prov. A foole


wr 2
“A confeil de Fol clo logear-
beads confult logs ferue for b T rafashbno
ce ee “Tbeteares
a faole are not to 13858 GE
Belle promeffe fol Jie : Prov. Serke Promalls: tof!
_ Bonne iournée fait qui de fol fe delivre : Prov. He
dôes.a good dayes wor Dates of of afoole,
Douces promeffes o! esfols: Pra.fuëre
mifes oblige tei =
En defaut de fage monte vafolen chaire : Prov.
: Booke éSape,: 1 shan MD Not bras Ho !
Grand befoin af qui de foy: relie fait :
Pro Bee fo 100 eee ee re ‘play
Lev "1
On croit @ un fl benfouvene Pit foie Chere,
» pour fes vi er ferré mo
TE eobeariet


7K


= 0-


aus


Digitizéd:by Go. gle


| Fo


1f all fooles -


Folie: £ Lay ampli foie, fe te
alfo, a
biookes any difgrace ; ren sé


Qui commet affaire à vn fol s’apprefte à le fi uyvre: =
Prov, (Leafthee wifh beebad gone about it bimjelfe;
alfo)be that rmployes a foole may follow bim for compa-
nies for wife men vfe to imploy wife men.

Tout eft perdu ce qu'on donne à fol: Pro. Al that
s giuen toa foole is caft away; (whereupon fome Cri-
tick will perbaps conclude, that all the labour befiowed
on this word bath been misbeftowed,)


Fol: m. folle : £. Foolifh, fond, fi frmple, witlelf, foi,


idlevaine. |
Farine foile. Meale-du!,or Mill-df. |
Paiftri de folle farine. A fleight,vaime,or idle fellow.
Figue folle. À Fig-date; alfo,a Sicamore figsthe fruit
of the outlandifh Sicamore,or Mulberrie Figtree.
Paillefollede bled. The vpmoll tbiane vind, or out-


fideof ffrav. =
De folluge breve fentence: Pro, 4 foole foone giues
Dre


Vuides chambres font les Dames folles: Pro. Looke
Chambre. 5
é: com. Wanton, la[cinions, toying, fond, effemi-

nate,

Folaftremént : m. #antonnefe, ribaldrie, laftinious
Loving effeminacie, foolifh daliance.

Folaftrément. wantonly , fondly, lafcinioufly, effemi-
nately,

BN To play the wanton, leacher it,ufe la[cinious


tricks.

Folaftrerie: €. A fafhion of taking woodcockes ; alfo, as
Folaftremént.

Folatre, Folatrément. as Folaftre,Folaftrément.

Folatrer. as Folaftrer

Folatreries: f Fond trickes,la(cixious prankes, wanton

4 te actions.

. Wantonnef[e, fopperie, foolerie.

Foleme nt pent lr, ee witlefly, foolifhly,
vnadui

— m. Fe Iprettie foole,a little fop,a yong coxe, none of
the wifeft.

Folet: m, ete: f. Somewhat fond,prettie and foppifb,a
little foolifh,or young and foolifh.
Efprit folet. 4n Hobgoblin,Robin-goodPllow..
Poil folet. A young moffie beard ; all the firft downe

young re


nifedne|fe, foppifhnelfe,indi{cretion,


Pate Spice Hs
eaux garcons, Lecherie; and hence;
Faire folie. A woman to bla fe, enter a man more
then fhe Anes tread. her fers
“Folie faire,& folic recogn Ot deisx de
ae Prov. Hee’s doubly wy find t that ities bis fond-


Cok foie ‘de fe prendre aux femmes, & aux beftes: |
: ad à is the man that brables with women, and


Courtes folies font les meilleures: Prov. Short fol-
lies are the beft, or, the belt of a fund att is the fhort-
i et or, allies eae while they laft thé more
LES

fens: Pro. In lowe shire is both
aan? pee


en qui coe pa on : Prov. |
nifell
ne En


y


, <a
Original fromg : “va
EE a”


+


THE OHIOSSTATE.UNIVE


Seen
—<——2° 5) yo SA


pie see ng


ee ee yee his? POI.


; oe ee ns LS
Vn fol advife bien va rh Prov. A foole may fome- Promettre fans donnereft fol reconforter: Prov.
times gine a wife man co Pruitleffe promifes appease none but fooles.


FON


7


F ON


Qui le bien void,& le mal prend, fait folie en bon
efcient: Prov. He that fees what's good, and takes
what's bad,is cuiltie of wilfull ideotifme.

Folier. To play the foole,doe like an affe,bebawe bimfelfe
like an ideot.
Il n'eft fi fage qui ne folie aucunes fois: Prov. The
wifeft man is foolifh now and then.
Si le fol ne folie il perd {a faifon: Prov. 4 foole is
mofl abfird when be playes not the foole.

Follaffes: f. The hearbe Beets,

Follaftrerie: f. 2s Folaftrerie,

Follet; or,Efprit follet. 4m Hobgoblin, Robin-good-fel-
low, Bugbeare.

Follettes. Orage, Atriplex,golden hearbe.

Follicule: m. 4 little bag ,powch,or facke; alfosa buske,
hull,peele or skin inclofmg feed.

Follier. as Folier.

Folliner. To play the wanton, to vfe lafcinious tricks.

Fomentation: f. .4 fomentation,or fomenting ; a com-
forting, cberifbing, eafing, affuaging ; a thing applyed
in a bladder, fpunge, &c, (if it be moift) or within a
bag, or quilt (if it be dry) eitber to cherifh, comfort,
or cafe the part it is layed on, or to make way, by
opening the pores, for ointments, or plaifters to be layed
on it.

Fomenté: m.ée:f. Fomented; cherifhed, comforted,
refrefhed,eafed.

Fomenter. To foment ; cheri{h, comfort, refrefh, eafe,or

' affisage the paine of ; as in Fomentation: '

Foncé:m.ée: pete seca grounded, whofe ground
is flrewed, or fioved with ; alfo, beaded, that (asa
peece of caske, rc) bath a bead, or bottome fet into


it.
Fonceau: m. A little bottome, bole, hollow, or deepe


lace.
Pons d'un Canon. The big, or broad end of a Ca-
non bitt. L
Foncer. To head a peece of Caske ; to fet a bottome, or
bead into any fuch vef[ell. =
Foncier: m. ere: £ Fundamentall ; or,of the foyle,for
the foyle,belonging to the foyle. RE
Cour fonciere. A Const Baron; or,Court of bafe Ju:
rifdiction. ; :
luftice fonciere. Low prt ea ig kind thereof,
exércifèd by the Lords of Fiefs,


i the recouerie of
their ge from thew vaffalls ; and often too f
firained, and therefore difallowed, and forbidde
the Cuftomes of diners Prouinces. # AP
_Rente fonciere. A Rent-feruice,Rent-charge,or Fee-


farme-vent ; an acceffion unto bey ps æ
“charge impofed on land vpon the fecor t
alt, becaufe the foyle is ener after L
toit, . à TU
Seigneur foncier. The (direél) Lord of a Fief; the
Lord of the Soyle. Hi
Serfs fonciers. Such as hauing beene conquered by
the auncient French, recciued lands of them, on the.
Condition of doing them any ferai
means — to change the


al Digitized by Go. gle


euerie Arpent) called. {

Vn bon fond de deniers. A good round fianme of mo-
ney, gathered before band for the bearing out of or go-
ing through with,an attion; and hence ;

Il n’a point defond, He is not within, ornot in the
leather, or bath it not in the leather ; be wants where-
withall ; be bath made no prouifion,or but final prowia
fon of monty.

‘A Fonds de cuve. Throughly, fully, largely bome.
po) fait à fonds de cuve. Broad, and flat-bot-
tomde.
De fond en comble. See Comble; or,F.ons.

‘A fin fond de. From the verie middeft 5 ont of the
depth, or bottome of.
‘A plein fond. Large, deepe, fide, full enough.
Donner fond. To caft anker ; or, to let ill an An-


ker.
Labourer en fond. To plow verie deepe.
Mettre à fonds. To finke (a fbip)érc.


Au matin les monts, au foir les fonds: Pro. Looke |


Mont.


Il eft plus aifé fe tirer de la rive i dufond : Pro. |


It 1 more eafie to leaue a bufineffe in the beginning,
then in the middefl of it; 07, a man may better dejift
ae be hath but entered, then when be ws farre en-
gaged,

Fond de cire: f The melting of wax.

Fondalité: f. Fundalitie ; right of, or intereft in, the
foyle; the title or eftate of the Lord of a fayle.

Fondamental: m.ale: f Fundamental ; belonging
10 a foundation,or ground-worke.


. Pierre fondamentale. The principal flone,the chiefe }


firength of a foundation.

Fondamment.as Fondéement.

Fondant. Founding, or grounding ; alfo, melting, refol-
ning; confuming wafling away ; alfo, inking. falling,or
comming downe on a fuddaine.

Fondateur. 4 founder maker,creator, builder, firft in-
uentor, chiefe deuifèr, principall author of.

Fondation. A foundation, or ground-worke ; the firft
building,or evectionof. —

Fonde: € fling,to caf ones with.

Fondé: m.ée : f. Founded,grounded ; built ; erefled,
eflablifhed ; refting in,confilting of.

_ Fondé par defloubs. Wnderfèr, vaderlayed, or layed

… Tefuis fondé en equité. The right is om my fide ; 1

1 re on iuft,and honefttearmes ; my caufè I am fure is


good. .
Nous y fommes aufli bien fondez l’un que l'autre:
Our caufès are much of one goodneffe, or much after
one ; we haue both reafon alike - aa
Fondéement. Pleurer fondéement. To weepe ex-
treamely,to refolue,or melt, into teares, |
Fondegue: f. 4 Marchants ware-boufe,or flore-bonft.
Fondelfe. 4 kind of Engine for batterie; vfed in old


Fondement: m. 4 foundation, ground ground-werke ;
aprincipall flay,chiefe meanes; good beginning,or way;
alfo.a melting yefoluing ; wafling,confuming away; al-

+ fosthe-findament,  :- >) Aile
Il faifoit grand fondement de. Heweled, or built
veriemuchvpon, -:

Rien ne peut eftre grand qui n'a bon fondanent:

Prov. Nothing that wants a good ground can be great.

«To found, ground , lay the fondation of,
make a-beginning to; to build, fettle, veft, or flay
upon, CRE > EE


~ Fon-


Original from


HAOHIO/STATE-UNIVERSITY


PARU TT OP ENNNIREES ——


| Fonderic:f. Bell-founding, the trade of ‘melting, or of
cafbng things in inettalls BIO ONG
Fondeur: m. 4 melter,or trier of mettals ; a founder.
Eftonnez comme fondeurs de cloches (quand la
fonte n'a pas bien pris) extreamly amazed appalled,
abafbed, out of countenance. ;
Fondier:m. flinger;one that throws flones out ofa fling.
F ree : £ Chops,rifts,choanes,in a womans ouer-
fill breafts.
Fondrailies: € The groundsylees,or dregs of liquor.
Fondre.fo melt, or cafl,as mettals, ec s to refolue , as
Siow before a bot Sunne ; alfo, to powre, or {head a-
broad; alfa, to finke ; fall,or goe downe; and bence ;
Fondre d’enhaut. To loope ; to fall downe plump, to
come downe amaync, as an eager and bigh- dying bawk
do’s upon ber prey, :
Fondre à terre. The fame; or to ftoopeas a bawke; to
drop asa artridge. | :
Se Fondre.to melt, wafl,refolue,confiame away;to fink
done on a faddaine.
Fondréau. as Fondrillon.
cake Fondrilles.
ondriere: f 4 bog,or qu ire; alfo,a great bottome
or large, and deep valleys os; as; e Ë
Fondrilles :. The grounds, dregs, lees,or thick-growne
ie of liquor that bath food any time ; the fettlings
0 “wor,
Fondrillon : m. A bottom to wind filke,thread,or Jarne
08; alfo, a knottangledin thread
Fondroyer, To bangdowne to the ground; to hang low,
or towards the ground; to hang fo low that it touches
the ground. :
Fonds : Looke Fond; al, a fone; looke Fons.
Fondu: m, ué: £.melted,refolued ; cat as mettall,
ded,as a thing of mettail ; confumed,worne wafied un-
to nothing. +
_ Baftiment fondu. Sunke,or fallen,downe. -
Poix fondué. Tarre. ie
Fondure: £ A founding melting, or cafting of mettals ;
Ca
Fonge : m. 4 ene: or toadsfloole,
Fongeux: m.eufe: f. Spungie ; light,or ‘full of boles,as
: a Page. 3
Fongnement: m. A frowning, powting, louting, lou-
ring; alfo, a difcontented grombline.
Fongner.To frowne, powt, lowt,loure, glow, fell force,
|, to. gromble.
Fons. Looke Fond.
De fons en comble, From the very foundation ; or,
from the topto the bottome ; wholly, throug fally.
Fons: m. 4 font to baptife children." "7
Lever vn enfant des fons. To be a childs witneffe,or
Godfather,at the font. ; DES UE
Tenir vn enfant fur le fous. ‘To (hrifen a ebilds ro


aame the childe ; as, Lever.

Font. as Fontaine; and hence; srrptres*
Au matin vers les monts, au foir vers Jes fonts:
Prov. Looke Mont. i

Fontaigner: m. ere:£, Off or belonging to, fountaine;

F or, as ears et ñ : à ‘a )

Ontaine: f. 4 fouataine; (bring, fource ; well; alfa
Cocke, or (bout a reeds 3 and the quill,or faucet
of a wine-veffell. arya
La de mefchanceté, The bead, root,origi-
nall fource,principall caufe,ofwickedneffe, v0
Fontaine deta tefte. The mould of the head. +


Endurer la foi es d'une fontaine, o fiarue in
à Cookes Jhop, we fay. i tattle? KO HIER S 21 |
EL +


>! / th S FRS) 6
se Rorboire Te ROP oa Sans eg a


FON oh


à petite fontaine boit on à fon aife: Pro, Looke, |

ire,

Qui n'a laine boive à la fontaine:Pro.Let bimthat
hath no wooll (viz.no wealth) drink water.

Fontaincux. Full of springs, or fountaines,

Fontaïnier. as Fontaigner.

Fontanel: m. elle :f. veine fontanelle. The principal
veine in the thigh of a borfe,cc.

Fontanelle f. 4 running joe 307, an iffue made for a
griefe or fore; as Cabrol

Fonte: f 4 melting, founding,or cafting of mettalls.
Torche de fonte. 4 kind of great linke, all of wax ;
Looke Torche,

Fontenelle. Aittle (pring, a finall fountaine ; alfa, as
Fontanelle; 47 fit. ;
Fontenelle dela tefte. Thevpper part of the head
forward. '

Fontenette. as Fontenelle; a little fountaine.

Fontenier: m, 4 fountaine-maker ; a digger of wells, a
Searcher. for fprings ; a conduit-maker , a conueyer of
water from [brings to conduits.

Fontenil : m. A finall fountaine.

Fontenille: £, The fame.

For: m, A Court, or common place for pleading ; as, Le
For!’ Evefque. The bifhops Court : ¢Parifien.

Fot.(in Compofition) fignifies, out or without ; as in For-
clos,rce, and fometimes alfo, badly or ill 345 in For-
confeiller,&c. :

Foradjour. as Adiour.

Forage. droi& de fo. Foure pots of wine upon euery
peece thats fould by retayle,due vnta the lord of the Iu-
vifdittion wherein tis fold ; In fome places it is alfa, two

pe Meg euery peece thats fonld in groffe; Looke
roi

ne meinc:f, Forreine, flrange, alien, outlan-


Chemin forain (de Boullenois) 7s to be fiftene foot
Yoat.


“Domaine forain. Aa aricient impofition of iiy dTour.
in the pound, vpn marchandice, ét ; or, as Refué,
Impofition foraine. An impofition of xy d.Tour. in
the pound vpon marchandice, and commodities mpor-
ted, or brought into the Realme (onely within Paris
there is but vi d.taken.)

Prevoftforain. Seeke Prevoft, é

* Traïte foraine. 1s as Impofition foraine; but leuyed
ison Repay ete tranfported, or carryed out of the
Realme, ey

Foraines: f The Cuflomes, or Tolls that aré leuyedin
füres,and markets. ER Le PQ
rafS, À certaine receptacle for Sea-water (whereof

Salt is made ) conneyed into it out of others by a trunk,

Bie ok Meas RER" FN sal xcs
an: @s,Ban3 or awexclufion, 9
Forbanni: m. ie: £ Expelled ,bannifbed,caft forth,dri-


uen out, ;
Forbannir- To banifh, reiett, expell, caft forth, drine


out, , LE
Forbaññiflement: m. 4 bannifhment, expulfion, ex-
clufion, out-cafting, forth-driing. | >.
orbatu: m.ué: f.Cansafed, or beaten throughly; finin-
£ ere Se TRE : %
orbe : f. as Fourbe. 4 cunning, and coofening tricke.
taken pr


Forbeu: m.ené:£ Mellow, fine, cup-


Len, whofe fidling or barley Capis om, see
: Cheval cu. Aboifé that bath drunke beinptoo
foundered, Fi


DER ee


FOR


a}:


FOR


ouerfèene , or too blame ; to take a dram too much ; 10°
drinke until be flare againe 5 ate founder as a borfe,
by drinking when be is verie bot.

Forbours.as Faulxbourgs. Suburbes.

Forçable.Forceable,compellable,

ru at: m. 4 Lot er a, agame at draughts,

wherein one muft take bis aduerfarie when be may, or
elfe behimfelfe is taken.
ce: f.Force, might, firength, power, abilitie, vigour,

vebemencie ; vertue,effect,operation,energie,efficacie,
power fall working ; violence,conftraint,compulfion,ra-
uifhment ; (alfo , tore, purs ce, many of;
whence Force cfcus; orce arbres.)
Force forcée. Of force,of neceffitie , will be nill be,in
fight of bis teeth.
‘A force. with great might, with much indeauor ;
whence,Couru 24 Hardly eagarly,ov extreamly,


r{ued.

es luyeneft demeurée. He bath got the vidto-
rie; the upper hand, the better end of the flaffe, in the
matter.

Ce que luy fera force. which be Shall be faine, or for-
ced,to doe.

oe force. To indeauor, labour, flriue,inferce,bim-

elfe.

Te ne fais point force de cela. I care not for, 1 force

_ not of, 1 am not mooued Ly,that thing.

Mieux vaut engin que force : Pro. Better be wife
then flrong,

Forcé: m.ée:£ Forced, compelled, confirayned ; al-
Sosrauifbed,as a womansalfopurP open,broke Hows?
he layed 100 ;-brougbt vato a narrow firait,ha

paffe.
Fores forcée. Of neceffitie ; Looke Sepa

Forceinent: m..4 forcing ;4 c
ning ; alfo, a burfting open, or b rl ur

Forcenant. Chien forcenant. 4 Eu, eagar in
chace, bot after bis game, and will and long.

Forcené : m. ée:f. Mad,vood,frantick;raging firions,
out of his wits.


ja My, Madnelfe,raging fie,woadneffe,
Forcener. To be enc ne


Forcenerie. as a
Forcer.To force compellurge,confir re; violate,
force,or ranifh DS ps» iso tre Le aha
dove; )alfo, to lay hard unto,or
dogs doe a deere after along chace va sino we
AEE rg through ee force
un


Een dt, laine. To pick, ae van,


Fa f. A paire of fheeres.


Faire les forces. A horfe to bald bis mouth open, and
turne bis chaps often from one fide to the other.
Forcette: £ A cizar,a fmall paire of fheeres.
Forceur:m. A forcer coimpellerorge?, confirainer ; a
_ violent fubduer, conquerer,ouercommer.


À Forchaffer, come va arc. ns, TR ond awrie, as 4
bow,that of another.


6 debarring. from. LEA


Forcommand: m. A putting out of pafefiion, ia


voiding of poffeliion , by order, ov com
Court.

Forcommandeé: m, ée:f. Voided,outed, pos
polfefion,

Forconfeilé m. ée: f. enr NE
Forconfeiller. To give il counfell.

Forconte: m. A mifreckoning, or mifcounting.

Forconté: m.ée: f. Mifreckoned,counted amiffe.

Forconter. To mit eckon pr count amiffe.

Fore: f. as For; a Court.

Fous m. éc : f. Bored, pierced ; ee boles are
made.

Forer. To bere, pierce make boles in. ° -

Fores. De fores. without,forth of. wut

Foreft: m. Looke Foret. are

Foreft: £ A Foreft ; a great, (and priuiledged) wood, or
wooddie wildernefe; Some ( Frenchmen) bane genc-
rally interpreted it (. ‘from the Latine words foris, &
fta) a Place whereto the acceffe, and entrie is forbid-
den, by the ed hinge re j and bence, it feemes,
that priniledged large waters (wherein
none but the rash yee ld fh) were alfo tear-
med,Forefts.

Foreftain: m. ine: f.Wooddie wild, forreft-like.

en m. A forrefler,or fofier ; a Keeper of,or in,a


forrefl; a Kaunger, Woodman, or  Haod-vear: den; an |


pu that lookes to the Kings woods, or forrefiss (In
ethe Gouernours of Flanders (for the French)
were tearmed Foreftiers;) alfo, a forrainer, alien,


| Saee :m.ere: f.woodie, forrefl-like;of.or belonging
to,a forref} ; wild, fanage ; alfo, forraine.”
Sergent foreltier. Locke Sergent.
Foret: m. A Gimblet, or Piercer.
Forfaiét: m. 4 crime, fiane, fault gnifdeed,offence,tref-
palfe, tranfereffion.
Forfai&t: m. Ge: £ Offended, finned, mifdene, trefpaf:
fea; à alfesefending, fn finning mifdoing.
Forfai@ure. as Forfai@; a tranfereffion; alfo, a forfei-
ture,or confifeation.
Cela nous appartient par forfaicture du feigneur
feodal, Thereto we kane no poffibilitie of right.
Forfaire. To finne, SRA a ee mifdoe, tranf-
effestre init ; alfosto forfeit
Eur g hele fia om pourceaux le fouffrent : Pro.
fre the worfe for barmes done by the Sow.
pele as ForfaiGure.
orfait. as Forfaiét.
pom: m. A knaue,rogue, rafcall, rakebell;varletgsit:
laine, vagabond, bafé fellow, filthie flaue, mongeie
packe,leud companion,
Forfanter. To play the regie; to marre all be meddtes
with.
Forfanterie : f. Roguerie feranerie,villanies aliacme
of rakebelie Seowmdrels.
agé: m.ée: f. Redeemed,bad from pawne.… _.,
F er. To redeeme,or fetch out,a pawne dés:
For a ls A fèfure, or fale of Goods, vpon . execution.


: iis nee forgas. certaine dayes afterthe open fale
of goods in execut. en unto ibe executee to preue
- the execution wren and vecouer them with ceflss
si to ee baer bis ee on sink to bane bis cooc's againe for
ne 5s which timeif be

hn men are, fips veal:
Forge à A5 nef Forge. . Ree SS G
ens


£ 7 cde à
VAN 2 + ed A


FOR
A : Gens de bonneforge. People of good credit, much
(|: worth,great bonefliesor of. len difpofitions. :
{ “Forge : m. ce: f. Forged,made, framed ; formed, fafhio-
l'E pede eet OFT]
Forgeant. Forging,framing ; working at the Anuyle.
En nie eer febvre:Pro. Looke Febyre.
Forgement: m. 4 forging, making, framing; alfo, a
horfes ouer-reaching. )
Forger. To forgemake, frame, compofe ; hammer denife,
coyne inuent; alfo,a borfe to ouer-reach,or cut bis fore-
feet with bis binder. FAR
“orgeron: m..A Forger,or Forge-man; a Smith.
-Forgetture: £ Tooke ForjeGuire.
Forgeur: m. A forger,maker, framer compofer coyner,


innentor,deuifèr.


./ 0fbuntfinenatthe death of their chace. D9

Forhuer. To whoope,fhout hoot,bollow;crie whoo-whup.

Foriboles, as Fariboles. Rab. ;

Forjeét: m. 4 iutting,or leaning out,or oner ; a rellifh,

or out-footing. si

Forjeëture: f The coping, or water table of a wall; a
_ rellifh,or footing out of a rall,or from a foundation.
Forjet. as Forjeét.

| Forjetter.To int,rellifh,cope,leane out,hang ouer;alfo,as


\ er.
Forjetture.as ForjeGure.


_ reafon.

Foriffr: m. ué: €. Sprung,or iffued out of.

| Forjugé: m.ée: nn D adgeds alfidipofefed,

PE tt a rom ind vninft
Forjugement: m, 4 iudging or vniuft con-

| dening of alla dsinbersing depeiine dipofefore

|. of; alfo, an ontingvpona Judgement. .

| Forjuger.To iudge,or condemne, wrongfully; alfo,to dif:

hote, depriue,difpoffeffe of; alfo, to out ludge-

at 7


ment.
Forjuger l'abfent. #,Forjurer l'abfent.
Forjur: m. 4 quitting, releafe, diféhargeof ; or,as For-
_ jurement. \ ;
| Forjurement: m. 4 quitting, forfaking, abandoning,
1 er matt 34lf0,a felling, or aliening ;alfo, a
Pl cea Se .
Forjurer. To quit, forfake, abandon, renounce,abiure,
gine ouer ; te releafe unto; alfo, to fell, alien, paffe


| Forjurer Pabfent. To barre,and amerce,by decree,an
| abfentyandwilfüll defendant, or,a defendant that will
- appeare.


Forjurer les facteurs. To quit, excufe, difebarge,or
leaue profecuting of, the committers, attors, er act
fattors, isi
Forlignant. Degenerating growing out of kind.
Forligné. Degenerated, growne out of kind.
Forlignement: m..4 degenerating, |
Forligner. To degenerate,or grow out of kind ; to differ
In conditions from bis auncefiors ; alfo, a villaine, baf:
tard,or flranger,to match with a free,true-bred home
 boine woman ; to marrie out of bis ranke,or condition;
alfo,land to defcend collaterally, or goe out of one line
|: imite another. Me (div dA) 2307
Na: as ao she: =
} Forlonge. Verie farre tea Hunting.)
nr = ER ising The dogs are farre
ind the Deere,Hare,@c. Ayres
| © Les chiens refentent de forlonge. rhe dogs find of
LS à cr Deere, hoagie bs es à de pu


Go gle


Forhu. 4 whoo-wbup ; or, the call, hooting,or whooping -


'}. Foriffir deraifon. To tranfereffe, or exceed the limits of |


FOR


Forlongé: m.ée: f. Gone farre before,left farre behind,

Bobocger. To goe farre before,leaue dpt

ormage. See Fourmage. ;

Formagerie. as Fourmageric.

Fonmaillet: m. An inchaunted image,or reprefentati-
on of ome creature,worne about the necke,to preferue
the wearer from danger ; See Fermaillet,

Formalité:f. F ormalitie, quaintneffe, precifèneffe in
outward matters ; alfa, the firict forme of proceeding,
or pleading in law.

"Perdre {on procez paryneformalité, To loofe bis
fuit, by an error committed , or claufe miflaken, in bis
declaration grc. C
seFormalizer. T take in dudseon ; to be diftontented
withsor oppose himfelfé againfi.
Se formalizer pour aucun.To undertake ones quar-
rell openly; toimbarke bimfelf into a quarrell for a.
nother,

Formarcher.as Faux-marcher.

Formariage:m. Marriage againfi Law, or Cuflome ;
alfoymariage out of ranke,or condition, j
Amende, on droiét de formariage. Is the balfe, or
third, or (as the cuftome is) other part of whatfoencr a
villaine is worth, forfeited to bis Landlord, or Lord of
the lurifdiétion wherein be lines, by marrying a woman
thats free,or of a forraine lurifa:Clionsthis although he
have got leaue to.doe it ; whereas if he doe it without
leaue be loofés 60s more;In former times baflards and

Strangers, who married other then baftards, or firan-
gers, were fubieét to this penaltie ; Now thofe in moft
places,and thefe in fème,are wholly exempted from it.
ormarié. Married out of his ranke,degree,or conditi-
on; or to a woman of a forraine lurifdittion,

Forinarier. To marrie out of bis ranke,degree, or condi
tion; or toa woman of a forraine lurifdittion, +

Formation. A forming framing, fufhioning.

Forme: m. A kind of Faulcon, or long-wingd Hawke;

Forine: f. A forme, fafhion ; manner method; a mould,
patterne,draught, ame,yepreféntation,tipe,charatier;
Shape,refemblance,fauor figure of; alfo, a checfèfat, or
chesford'; alfo, a long Bench, or Forme to fit on 3 alfè, a
Shoomakers laft; alfo,a Hares forme.

En forme.Formally bandfomly,orderly,asit fhould be.
En forme de. Refembling,or like unto.
à oe tel foulier : Prov.(Ofa thing fitted,or

tly fuited.) |

Formé: m. ée:f. Formed, fhaped, fafbioned ; drawne,
perenne: figured; framed. 3

es 2 formé. A full, refolute, arrant, beretiche,
Partie


,


rnce- An accufer nor follower of, a crimi-
nall _ (in vefpect of bis particular intereffs) Looke


Form

Formel: m. elle: f. Formall,plainesopen, flat,expreffe,
exaét;abfolute,proper, according to Art; earnefi,vebé-
Fo ab arte Sig i THE
Contradiétion formelle . which appeares, or is ex
preffed,in the caft,and caufe.
Ennemyformel. 4 profe[fed,open,or viter enemie.
Garent forinel, See Garent. :
Partage reel,& formel. 4 partition fully excentedsa


reall,or aétuall partition.

Partie Pavan! A Complainant, or Accufer in a cri:
«. minal aGion;as in Partie formee(This accufer offers
to lyin prifon withbim be accufes, untill he bane made

good bis accufation;but is feldome taken at bis word.)
Formelier: m. 4 Laf-maber,
lizé: m.ée: f.Formed,whéreunto forme is ginen,
izer.To forme ; to PR eit Er


5 Rost


FOR


Fortnellement.Flatly, plainely, dir eftly expre ely open-
ly, wholly tterly, without exception: fliffely, earnefity,
vebemently,refolutely ; exattly precifely; alfo,quickly,

eedily, forthwith immediatly without delay.

Formené: m.ce: f.Difquieted,vexed,afflicted molefied,
harried tormented. 3

Fonmener. To vex, difquiet,afflit?, moleft, barrie, tor-
ment,giue much trouble unto. ;

Forment: m. & formentée:f, Furmentie, Wheat;See

| _ Froument & Froumentée.

Forment. Almoft (as in, forment guery;) aff, excee-
dingly, greatly, mightily, verie much; (forment ma-

ade.


Formmentin: m. ine: f, Of wheat. (

Vne pilure formentine. 4 loafe, or lunchion of
wbite bread.

Foriner. To forme, fafhion, [bape; make, frame, order,
difpofe, inftitute ; figure, draw, pitture, deuife, repre-
fent.

Former le procez à. To draw an Jndiciment a-
ainft.

Garmnerete: m. The finall branches of a vault, in the
ends,or infide thereof,

Formi: m, Aa Aat,a Pifineare ; Looke Fourmi.

Formiant.Poulx for. The pulfe that beats verie faft,but
verieweakely ; (a figne of approching death.) |

Formidable: com. Fearefüll,dreadfüll terrible.

Formie : f. as Formi. .

Formiere: f. An Ants bill,or neafl of Pifineares.

Formiliere. as Formiere ; aljo,a kind of wart in the
findament, fomewhat vefcmbling a Mulberrie.

Formillement: m. The prickling fart of Ringwormes,
or Warts, like the flinging of Anis.

Formilles. 45 Herpes.

Formillon.4 final! blacke Spider like an Ant,and fpot-
ted on the backe with little flarre-like fpecks.

Formion: m. Afiall Ant,or Pifineare.

‘| Fonnoret: m. A kind of flrong Lye whereof Soape is
made.

Formort. a Formorture.

Fonnorture:f. An Eftheat falling tes or fucceffion fal-
ling on,a man, by the death of ls

Fortnofité: , Beautie, comelineffe,well-fauouredneffe,
[weet feature. Le
ormoture. + Formorture. ’

Formulaire : m. The file, fafhion,or manner of procee-
ding in the Law; a Prefident for the drawing of a
‘Deed, Patent, Pleading , &c 3 alfo, a womans


thing. f :
Praëticien qui entend bien fon formulaire. A cun-
ning pleader. 3 i
Formule: £. À flile in writing; acertaine rile, order,
manner, fafbion of proceeding,or pleading, im Law.
Fornage. See parer
Fornaife. as Fournaïle; a furnace,
Fornicateur: m. A fornicator, wencher, fmell-finocke,
mutton-munger, whore-bunter. ,
Fornication: f, Fornication; lecherie committed by an
unmarried couple. ree
Forniquer. To play the fornicator ; to leacherit, vnmar-
vied with an unmarried perfon. ’ +2
: To wander farre out of bis countrey ; al-
> à wild beaft to abandon the Couert ( wherein
he vfeth to lodge) and fe, or take, into the Cham-


pion. 3
F Porpatfer d'un pas-te afepfartber then bemeeds,
or fhould. repens C7


Forpie: f ‘The mouth, or middle of an opened paire of


Fors. “Except, vuleffe, but onely, without st be ; al,


FOR


eres.
Forrage. as Forage.
Fortegardant. Out-looking,or awry-looking.


’


without doores, or abroad; alfo, out, right out, all
out. "

Forfage. Ouer-wcight in money;when a peece is beauier
sew it fhould be. . a 4 |

Forfaire: m. 4 Gally-flane.

Pago as re :

ort: m. À Fort,Hold,Fortreffe; alfo,a flanding,or fet-
led Campe, defended and “A po with es nd
piers,or pallifadoes and little Bafions ; alfo,the bearbe
“orge (fo tearmed of the ftrong fmell which it
ath.)
Le fort d’un affaire. The chiefeft point inbardeft part
of a bufineffe.
Le fore d'une boule, The drawing part, or byas of a
Bowle. ;
Lefort d'un cerf. The bold of a Stag; the thicket, ov
couert wherein be lyes,or whereto he flyes.
| pu forts des forefts. Thickets,or the thickeft parts of
orrefis. s
Le fort d’un lievre. The couert of a Hare.

Fort: m.forte: £ Strong ; tough maffiuesbardie.flurdie,
lnflie, able-bodied ; mightie, forcible, powerfull, effec-
tuall ; able to beare a great fhocke, affault, or brunt.
Forte clameur. A fine of ij s. vjd. Tour. due to the
King within the Chaflellenie of Montereau (upon eue-
rie perfonall aëtion) for the fir{i fummons, or feruing of
thewrit,although the parties agree,and the caufe pro-
ceed no further ; If it doe,and come to a bearing, vij s.
vj d. mul be payed; both,by the partie that fir{t yeelds,
or is foyled, . :

Forte monnoye, folz forts. Good money, money of
the bef fort,or moft value;(for 25 folz forts are worth
40 folz Tour.) 4 word peculiar tothe Sol, and vfed
ae the reckoning and rates of moriey were grounded


con,

Vn boisfort. A thicke wood.

Le faiét fort. See Faié.

‘Terroir fort. A bard,or bungrie foyle.

Fort en bride, Stubborne, ;, im heals firong.
Fort comme vn Dauphin en terre. Mojt weake,
moft faecal no force at all.

Le fort
with


portant le foible.Good and bad togetber,one
ith another.
Tes fortes fievres. 4 plague choake thee, a péflilence
take thee.
Cecy n'eft pas fort à faire. There is no great difficul-
tie in this ; it is not bard to doe,
Je me fais fort de cela. 1 take that matter vponme;1
am affured of it; 1 prefume,rely,or build omit ; I dare
undertake that it will brare me ont.
Faire main forte à. Looke Faire.
Fort eft qui abbat, & plus fort qui fereleve:Prov.
He that recousrs a foyle is flronger then he that gaue
at. ‘
Qui atrend ila fort remps: Prov. viz. Thinkes bis
time verie long. = * à
Fort. (Adverb.) Verie,mofi,verie much,mainely, excee-
ding lyexceffiuely,extreamely,vebemently,
Fort & Ferme. Looke Ferme. ween
= a At moft, at worft, if the werf come to
worst. uh
Fortelet: m. ette: £ A little firong, pretie and forcible,
or pretie and firong to bis age. WEY


~ For.


-


Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


FOR


FXO’ S


 Fortement. Strongly; forcibly, mightily, powerfully, | Foffé:m. 4 long bole,or pit made into the groundsbence,


ably; effectually ; tougbly, bardily ; extreamely;main-
ly, verie much,
Fortereffe : ££ 4 Fortreffe,or Hold.
Fortet. 4s Fortelet. Pretie and firong.
Fortifiable: com. Fortifiable ; which may be fortified.
ae? spn f. Fortification; the Art,or worke,of for-
tifjing.
Forifié: m.éc: f. Fortified ; flrengthened, corrobora-
a os ta enabled, confirmed; bardened, [etled,
ured.
Fortifiement :m. 4 fortifiing, flrengtbening, infor-
cing, enabling.
Fortifier. To fortifie, firengthen, corroborate; enable,
inforce,confirme ; barden, fettle,aljure.
se A Deere to fhun the place wherein dogs are
layed for bimn, ;
Fortraétion: f, 4 lurching, purloyning ; withdrawing.
Fortraire. To lurch,purloyne; withdraw from.
Fortrait: m. aite: f. Lurched, purloyned; withdrawne.
Fortuit: m. ite: f. Cafwall, accidental, at aduenture,
happening by chance.
Cas fortuit. Az offence committed by chance-med-
if


ey.
Fortuitement. (a/ially,by chance,at adnenture, by bap
hazard ; more by bap then any cunning.
ortunable: com. Difaftrous,unfortunate. (v.m.)
- Fortunal. as Fortune; al/o, a great, and fuddaine tem.
pet at fea.
Fortune: f. Fortune ; alfo,bap,chaunce,luck,lot,baxard,
aduenture ; alfo,deftinie, fatal neceffitie.
Courir fortune. To be in great danger; to incurre a
eat baxard (whether of (bipwracke, or any other mif-
cee be neere,or wi dore,to a fhipwra


che.
Suyvre la fortune. To follow, or adhere vnto, the


fronger fide.

ortune aide à celuy quife veut aider : Pro. For-
tune aides bim that lowes to aid bimfelfe ; fortune belps
on the forward,
Fortune n’ efpargne ny ferviteur ny Maiftre, elle
donne & reprend, tel eftfoneftre: Prov, Fortune
{pares no man, keepes no couenants, obfernes no con-
dition, /
Fortune ne vient feule: Prov. 1 lucke comes not a=
lone;or,one ill lucke followes in the-necke of another.
Les biens de fortune pañlent comme la Lune:Pro,
Fortunes bleffings flit like the Moone ; or bardly conti.
nue the age of a Moone. ;
Contre nul ne peut: Prov, Noman can
withfland bis deltinie; or,be againft a chance.
Affez fait qui fortune pañle, & plus encor qui pu-
tain chafle: Prov. He does much that ill fortune mif-
Ses,but be does more tbat quits awhore. es
Aux yeux la Lune bonne fortune: Pro. SeeLune,
Micux vaut vne ônce de fortune qu’ une livre de
fagefle: Prov. Better is an ounce of good fortune then
a pound of good forecaft.

Fortuné: m: ée:f. Fortunate,happie,luckie ; alfo,made
fortunate, blefféd with good bap.

à or Fortunately,bappily luckily, fuccefiue-

, profperou fly. .

Fortuner. To make fortunate, blefe with good bap, gine
good fücceffe unto, .

Forvoyer. To erre,to goe aftray; See Fo


Foflailli: m.ie: f Dirched im, trenched about ; or, that


ages a9 Rs
illir. Toditchin; tomake apitser ditch, .
Foffat:m. a Fol ol Lie 2


ES)


a dike,ditch,or trench about @ towne, fort,cam

or ae Looke Fofle. rs:
Cul de foffé. 4 dungeon,or deepe bole in a prifon for
baynows malefattors. ;
Entre Ja haye & le foffé. Betweene barke and tree :
onnarrow tearmes ; at a flrait piach ; when one bath
but little (bifi to make for bimfelfe;when he muft either
breake through the hedge, and be fevatched ; or,wade
through the ditch,and be wet,

Faire de la terre le foflé. To difpo/e of his ovine at his
owne pleafiere ; or,to make reafonable good fhifi with
that he bath; or by charging to difcharge, by burting to
belpe,bimfelfe.

De terre d’autruy remplirfon foffé. To make up
bis mouth, or fluffe bis purfe full, with another mans


money.

Foffe: £. Any pit,or hole; but mofi commonly that, which
is round ( for Foffé is more property a long one, ) and
made into,and appearing aboue,the ground (for acaue
denne, or hollow, whofé greater part is hidden under
ground,is more fitly tearmed, Caverne, &c;) hence, a À
Graue; a Mote,or Pond for fifh; and fometimes (though
feldome) a ditch,trench,or decpe channel.

‘offe coye. A prisie,iakes boufe of office.
Foffe à poiflons. 4 little fifb pond, or flue for ff.
Heft fur le bord de la fofle. He bath alreadie one
foot in the graue.
Mettre les clefs fur la fofle. 4 widow to rezounce
the adminifiration of her busbands goods.
Vn aveugle meine l'autre en la fofle: Prov. Looke


Av eR
Foffelu: m.ué: £Dimpled; that hath a little pit, or hole

in the midde(} of it.

Foffette: fA little pit; finall bole ; narrow ditch, or
trench; alfoya dimple on the cheehe,or chin ; alfo, the
bollowne(fe that is betweene the {houlder blades,
Foffette de l'oeil. The eye-pit.
Foffette de la tefte. The nape of the necke.

Touër à la foflette. To playat cherrie-pit(with nuts.)
Foffetterie:: £. Pockine{f¢,or the being full of pock-boles,
rom m.Qufe: f, Full of little pits, pockars, or

poc “D0. es.

Foffile. Grand. The bigger of the two bones in the leg.
Petit foffile. The leffe, Looke Focile. ‘

ile: com. Which is,or may besdigged.


 Fofloir : m. as Hoyau.


Entre deux comperes fe perdit le foffoir: Prov.
Betweene two ftooles the tayle goes to the groundsor,as
under Compere. ;
cont ourér. as Fofloyer. sash
oyant. Dig ging, ditc ‘enching.
Fofloye: f, A certaine garment ved old time.
Fofloyé: m. ée: f. Digged; Rey ngs about.
Foffoyement: m. À digging; a ditching, trenching,
pit- * "
Fofloyer.To dig;to ditch,or trench about;to make a pit,
Fofloyeur:m.A digger,or ditcher; alfo,a graue-maker,
Fofloyeure: f 4 digging ; aditching,a pit-making. -
Foterle. Sarafins Birthwort,or Hartwort.
Foternte. as Foterle. '
Fotu: m. A fomentation, or medicine applyed to warme,
or comfort,a difeafed part. ;
Fou: m. A Beech tree,
Fou. (Buvez fou; venez fou ; drinke,or come,out) cor
ruptly ufed for Fors. ; :
Foiiace: f. A thicke cake Bat baked, arabes Ss
“bot imbers layed onit, and burning coales ower thems À
Ft Sn ©


hel oe 1


+


2
; ”
3
J °


FOV
around Bunne ; alfo, a great Kid, Bauer, or faggot of
final flicks ; Looke Fougafle.

Manger fa fotiace fans pain. To eat dry bread for
want of other vittuals,

Foüacier: m. Ove that makes,or fells, Fins.

Fotiage. Anyearelie tax, or dutie,lewied in old time by
Jupreame Lords upon euerie chymney,or boufe- fire kept
within their dominions, In Charles the fifibs time it
vw 4 livres Tourn: fince that time,in moft places, the
Tailles baue beene introduced in lieu thereof.

Foiiaille. The reward which hunters gine their dogs at
the death of awild Swyne.

Foiiailler : m. The findging , or drefing of a wild
Swyne.

Foüant: m. 4 Muske-cat; or,as Fouinne.

Fouarre. as Foarre.

Rouail: f. A Bunne,or Cake baftily baked ; Looke Fou-


Poiciier A Cake-maker ; as Fouacier.

Foucque: f. 4 Coote,or fenne-Ducke.

Foudre. as Fouldre.

Foudroyant. Thunder-friking ; darting thunderbolts ;
violently beating, impetuoufly bearing dovone(as thun-
*der,and lightning) whatfoeuer it lights on.

Foudroyer- as Fouldroyer.

Foüées: f. The finallelt fovtof Bauens,Kids.

Fouere: f la fo. The Squirt.

Foiiet: m. 4 wbip,[courge,rod.

Vn fouet fans corde. A Sergeants Mace wherewith
he arrefletb.

Vie fouet,& au vent. Auant, get you packing,be gone
(a fpeech wherein fouet is ufed as if ome ca ed fora
whip to driue the partie fpoken to away.)

U n'a pas le fouet pour mener cette trompe. He is
not fufficient for fo bouncing a wench,

Foiiettable: com. Worthie to be whipped.

Fouettade : £. 4 lafhing whipping, (courging.

Foiictté: re f, Wbipped, lashed, feourged, ierked,
\ fwindged


Foetemnt: m, A whipping,lafbing, feourging,bree-
Hosetter. 7 0 [cour ge wbipslafuyerkesr ierke,fvindge,


breech.

Foüetteur: m. A wbipper, feawger brecher, Pond
 ger,ierker,lafher,

Je pe meufe: f Fit tobe mbippederked, four


Bee ; whence, ouër au foufoulet. To play the


whore.

Foug males £.4 Mine; ancp-boming fire-workesor wild
fre ¢; alfa,as Fougue.

Fougaffe: f. A (thick) cake baked on a bot bartb, with
hot embers layed on it, and burning sacles ouer them ;
_ Looke re ( pall)
: Je vous rendray ain (ou pour Fougal
Vou de baue weafne one pares or ag


| aoe Seb is sl Fearne


To Pana SOE, ordure.
ougeraye ouaereye, 4 Fearnie plot Adon:
f. Fearne brakes ; Looke Fourhiens. 3


ire, The Cooke-roome of a fhip. -
era f, Soone etm


Fougoux: m.
… readie, prompt unto, fuddaincly falling
| proc - or cé "Sa elena
Ht are ,or wit
Fo e: f. Shin ees Mate ssunto fuddain le anger,
0. 5 af. ré A fi dé effort, or ef.


FO V

| fé&of frie, o of any fucb turbulent,and impetuous

Foui: m. ie: f. Di Diggedor ae iin or mbere-
into holes are ma


Fouier: m. Leaky Sores 4
Fouier. as Fouiller.


FORGE To whyne ; powt, lowre, bang she pier à


Fouillrd: : 10.4 leauie bough,or branch. €Norm,
Fouillé : m.ée: f. Groped, fearched, felt,rifled ; alfo,
rooted,or digged(with the nofe) for.
Fouillement : m, À groping, feeling, fearching, rifling;
alfo,a rooting,or digging (with the nofè) for.
Boule mens Beetle (fly.)
Fouiller. To grope, fearch, ney oa ouer;) to res
te root, or dig (with the nofe) for
C’eft trop bas cercher la charité de fouiller prez
re fefles: Prov. He lookes too low for charitie that
lookes fo low as the buttocks,


Fouilleur : m. 4 groper, fearcher, feeler ; a rifler;avo0- |


ter; a digger (with the nofe) for.

Fouilleur de Taupes. A Hole-catéber.
Fouilloufe: f. 4 bag,ferip,or powch. qBarrag.
Fouine: f. 2s Fouinne ; alfo,akind of infirument in

Jhips like an Eele- carey to firike fifh with; allo, as

Faine; Beech-majt.

Fouinne:f. The Foyne, wood-Martin,or Beech-Martin.

Fouit. To dig,delwe,mine,make holes in the ground.
Fouir aux taupes. To turne vp the becles; goe feed
wormes;make a dy.

Fouiffement: m. hiked oda.

Fouifleur: m. A digger ,deluer ; ditcher ; labourer.

Fouifleure : f. 2s Fouiffement.

Foulage : m. 4s Foulement.

Foulcre. 4 Coote,monre-Henne, fenne-Ducke.

Fouldre: f. 4 thunderbolt.

Fouldroyant. Thundering and lightning;darting thun-

_ derbolts ; Looke Foudroyant. ‘

Fouldroyé: m. ée: f. Thunder-flricken, blafied with

| penesron thunder ; alfo,violently beatcn,or borne


Fouldro royement: m. A thunder. er irikngs a darting of
eet tice 3 4 blafting with lightning,or (inlightned)


juin nus c caf, or dart thunderbolts ; to firike,


burnesor 1b. bal wil ighiningsor (inlightned) thunder=
bolts; Hence alfo, to beat, or beare downe with great
violence all that comes in bis way.


Foule: f. on crowd,pre(fe,or throng of people ; alfo, a a fil


ling
‘A À foule. Thrufling,thronging, budling, or foning
hard,one vpon the necke of another.


Foulé: m. ée:f. Troden, ftamped,or trampled onsbrui- |


Sed,or crufhed by the feet,e>c; alfo,thronged, or thruft
together ; alfa, fuyled, ee js meighed
downe ; griened,vexed.a ffucled,barvied
L'hofte efi toufiours le plus foulé : Proy. The gueft
(or Hof) is alwayes charged moft.

Foulée: f. The Slot of a Sia, the Fufé of a Bucke (the
. view, or footing of either) upon bard gronn graffr,
oe or duft; wee call it ( moft properly) bis fiy-


Re pe A treading, trampling, or flamping


-on ; 4 brui crufbing with the feet, &e; alfo, a
fine epre chay ginger char ing ccm

Four. * To tread, flampe, or tremple on 10 bruife,or
hinge to 3

thru


Original fron


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY


LES


thruft, er weigh downe ; to leane exceeding bard a-
inf}; to preffe,oppre(fe, foyle ouercharge,extreamely;
To difraceor féandalixe ; to
reproach, or ufe epprobrioufly. 4
is cheval fe foule. The


Foulerie: f. as Foulement ; 4/6, 2 Fouloire.
(of grapes, drc;) a (hamper, or


Fouleure: £. 4 fraine,or wrinch,ina ioynt,
ouleures. as Foulées,
Fouliere, as Foulerie..
oulis, 2s Foulement. à
Foullage. pu money payed for the thickening of
deu m. é¢: f, Fulled as cloth'ine Mill; alfo, as


oulé.

Fouller. To full, or thicken cloth in a Mill.

Foulleure. zs Fouleure.

Foullon. as Foulon.

Foullonné: m. ée: £. Thickened,or fulled.

Foullonner. To fill,or thicken cloth ina Mill,
oullouaire. as Fouloir

Fouloire. The round t

efJeoften turning , or the treader

1 the fluffe that is in it, :

or thickener of clothes ; alfa, a fut.

£'tat,and flinking Droane,or dorre-


bor fe is Sirbated,or beated of


eur: m. A treader


on. The Teaxle,or Fullers thifile.
Fillers bearbe, Sopeweed, Sope.


H fenne. Duc .
Foulure:f. 4 reading flampine, à rai 348
of Venifon cut out from betweene
stbat part of the fide


pled, crufbed, trampled


Foulz. Certain peeces


which is next to the necke,
Foupi: m. ie: f crumpled,

on,or crufbed by trampling on.
- Foupier: m. as Fripier,
To rumple , or crumple ; to crufh, or marre the
of; by fitting or treading on.
t. To finger, lay bold on, get into bis fingers,


| Fouquet. Tbe
nofe, runnes tilting at ac
led follow, à fine poche
1 EE


Four: m. 4x Ouen; alfi,a Furnace;
prowe of a Ship, ca
Four balet, A Maukin,
Four à ban,ou bannal,
f the ee or

. wherein it rth
© Béer contre vn fk


name of a man; alfo, a certaine


» fetting a flaffe againft bis
‘ eminate,licorous tay-


F OV


« te to gnaw on ; or, they made bim bane Joineniba®

to doe.

I a monté deflus le four. He is at his full growth,

Il en porta la pafte au four. He bore the burthent of

i in peor the fault was, the punifhrnent fell on-

on him.

Le four appelle le moulin bruflé: Prov. The micher

tearmes the coward couetous ;(and may be applyed to

anie, that checks another for a fault whereof onely bim-

Selfe-w guiltie.)

Ceftau four, & au moulin,ou l'on {gait des nou-

velles: Pro. For while the bread bakes, and ibe corne

grinds, people baue {ome leifire to tell bow the world
oes


En four chaud ne croift herbe: Prov. Hot Oxens
breed no bearbes,

Quand vn four eft bien chaud la gueule s’ en ref
fent: Prov. Out of the abundance of the beart the
mouth fbeaketh, ; |

Prodigue, & grand beuveur de vin > n’a du fien
ne four, nemoulin : Prov. The fiwil/ing prodigall
foone wafts, and fells, both Mill,ana Ouen, and each
good thing elfe.

Fourbe: £ 4 fib,ieaft, fitton, gudgeon,mockerie,gulle-
rie; awyle,guiledeceit,impoflure; a confening, chea-
ting,conycatching tale,or tricke.

Fourbi: m.ie:-f. Furbifhed,polifhedburnifhed,

Fourbir. Te farbifh,polifb,burnifb,make bright.

Fourbi rat er cs 34 Cutler ; or, moft pro-
perly,a fürbifher, fcowrer burnifher, pol fher.

Tefte à tefte comme deux PSF sl (Which
commonly worke with their beads clofe together.)

Fourbiffeure: f. A furbifbing, {cowring ; polifhing,bur-


nifing. :

Fourbouilly. Boyled, or flued meat with broth, or pot-
tage.

FORD: f, The mdr. ofa ue :
Ourc : m.A Forke; or any thing which, forke-like ma
a fharpe angle; alfoya che fe pe cm”
ae fourc d'un arbre, The twit of a tree;(Looke Fours


ure. 4
Le fourc d’un chemin. The angle,or corner of à way
that parts in tra; and the fame partition,or the wayes
that come thereof, {

Le fourc des doigts. The part that lyes betweene the
fisting on of enerte two of the fingers; or the parting
thereof. : | f

Le fourc des ruës,. That part of fireets whereat they

are parted in two, oy
Fourcelle: £ The breaft blade,or heart-blade ; alfa, the
channell bone,or craw-bone; Loske Fourchette...

€,
06


Fourchage: Bs A ere ot tins . le kind
red; any branch,memberor fide of a flock dinided, . |
Fourché: en Rte

double bro. top of a Deeres bead, wa? À
Dh ere anne

Or ke-w. €; ayo. ge Te TORY
Fourche:£ 4 Forke;Pitch foresr Prong aa ge. |
LA bet,or paire of gallowes ; whence;


Fourche patibulaire. (4x appurtenant, or marke of À
high lurifdittion) landing on two pillars,it belongs 9 a
‘Seigneur hauclufticier; on 3,0 4 Lo.chattelainson 4, |
16 a Baron con 6,t0 an Earle:(And yet by the cuftomes |
. of Blois the Moyen lufticier may bane that with2 pil |
© Larsand by the mes of Auxerre,thofe na on
3 or g,belong tobigh luflicers; and elfewhere thofe thar |
on 4,belôg only to Lo,Chattelains;but the/e ropor= À
he + | mer) |
| iy ae


w


en CUS Seelam hae em


FOV


Fourche à'troïs pointes. LA Trout-fpeare, or £ele-
eare,

Coups de Fourche baillez pat qu as femmes a

leurs maris ; Hornes like forke

Panfer vn cheval à la be rs To dre a borfé but

fleightly ; or, to gine him blowes in lead of currying.

Pafler foubs la fourche. To yeeld bis necke to the

yoake; abandon bis freedome ; fibmit bimfelfe vnto

thraldome.

Traiéter à la fourche. To fivaddle, baft, lamme,

fivindge well fauoredly;tovfe bardly intertaine rudely,

deale roughly, with,

Fourché: m. ée: f. as Fourchu.

Fourche-fiere: f. A long Staffe, or Quarter flaffe, ha-
uing at the one end a forke,and at the otber a Pike.
Fourche-fiere à trois pointes. A Trowt-fpeare, or
Eele-(peare.

Fourchelle. A little forke ; or,as Fourchette.

Fourchément. Forkedly; alfo,crookedly.

‘Fourcheon. .4 forket ; the tooth, or graine of a


forke.

Fourcher. To forke; to cleaue, or diuide in two; alfo,
to flay, or make a "and, as a Muskettier does ‘when
be fèts downe his reft; alfo,to be banged.
poe rary fourche, ou fe fourche. This way parts


Tange luy fourche. He finis, or trips with bis


Boarthersti Drageon fourcheran. The (Vine) frig
that fhoots out betweene two branches.

Fourchette: £ 4 forket,or fall forkes alfo, the ne
blade,or beart-blade; (the forked, or triangular
- which cleaues to the bottome of the breaft-bone; a,
the putting of the neck-ioynts out of ioynt ; af, 4 bor-
fès Fete-lock; alfoa Musket-reft.


Fourchette d’ enhaur, ou fuperieure, The craw-, |.


bone,canell-bone neck-bone,throat-bone. °
Fourcheu. 4s Fourchu. “


Fourcheure : f. 4 forkineffe,or forkedneffe; @ fork-like |.


- dinifion, or cleaning ; alfo, that part o tbe bodie from
ans the thighes doe part ; (1 thinke we call tt the


a arbre, The twift ofa trees the top
ask bodie, where à it begins to be du ided by the maine
añches.


Pourchier: m. 4 cord untwifted in nthe middeft, and Ca


ftone being put Benes as a fling.


Fourchier à trois dents. (4 ie ed fork) a |


Trout-fpeare,or Ecle-fpeare.
Fourchon. a Fourcheon. F4


F'OCV"*


Srey for non-payment of Rent. qWallon. “Sfr
Fourgangner. To eg Beh or to ann Le à |
non-payment of pea


Ko on: m.An Ouen-f armen Libre re, |


ruggin) wherewith fuell is both put into an One à


tad flrred when it is (on fire) init. |
‘A celle paclle tel fourgon: Prov.One filshie ane 5
ne: with another.

colt ra fe mocque du fourgon : Prov. ihe
Peele derides the Ouen-forke; one flowen,or neighbor
another.

Fourgonner. To put fuell into an Ouen ; alfo, (and the
more properly) to toffe,or flirre it (being on fire) im the
Onen,with a Fruggin.

Que fourgonnes tu la? what a flirve, what « rum-
bling what a puddering,keepeft thou there ?

Fourgonneur: m. An Ouen-tender, or Ouen-ftirrer;
= ro lookes to an Quen,with a Fruggin, or Mil


Fourmage : m. Cheefe.
Fourmage deBans. A cheefè made De milke,
or as the Angelot.
Fourmage de Betune. 4 kind of cheefè made of
Sheepes milke.
Foret Akind of! rt id 04
at a village of that
SAGE Gustiily eu apeu: Prov, The
* deffe cheese the better ; or, cheefe us when a mife-
yor À ef add it; "according whereunto they fay
ourmage eft bien fain qui vientde
F “en pen & pain d’Argus: Pro, He
o e detaupe,& pain s: Pro, Heauie
_ cheeé,and light pha rt bef.) :
‘Nui ne pele fon fourmage qui n'y ait honte, ou
i fontorofe. Prov. No man pares bis cheefe without
me,or loffe
‘Qui a fourmage pour tous mets, il Je doit cou je
bien efpez: Prov. He muft not foant his chetfe. ii
bath noughtelfè to feed on.
Fourmagere: faced pei er CRE ry,
ourmagere:£ 4 chee -pre|
Fourmagerie: f. cheefé ware, a commoditie of min
alfo,a Eh baies cheefè-dairie ; a roome,or place,
wherein cheefe is vfually made.


Fc r:m, A chee/é-feller, cheefemonger, 1 mar-
pe
np hagas : f. Cheefie, full of chee/?,belon-
in; efe.
ees mA nt ge Her


ee du raifin: The flaulke of a a “fer of pee as iar, Seta


LE saree: em.ué: f Forked; dinidedy Clometein be
“Arbre fourchu. fra


Aflanding on the bands with out: | ~


: Fourman. Vn grand pain eat whea-
“enor white ie as gr Ringe ett mie


bt
| cäfouréhuete pied ouch. tle sof LE


clouen-footed be Neate,
-Lelmpot du pied our chu. Teal lhe i a
È Le or Markets, upon the [eet an ve


au badie, whic bi


, wild, or mounting


a beet sist


à Emme, 3 2.2
Pour dde ét à tae |


RE DR ve ee
ioyeux que


:


€ LE, acer Let kg Ve eae eT! CS RE OL Dr à SH
FE Mes PT TE ER Pe oe Ai


FOV
Fourmiant. frappementfourmiant, Sach a foft,and
gentle flroake as is ginen bythe touch, or feet, of a cree-
ping Ant, |
Fourmier. as Fourmi x
Founmiere: f. An Ants holeyer neaft; a billock,or banke
full of Ants ; alfo, a difeafe of hawkes making the hor-
nie part of their beakes to pill,
Fourmiller. To abound,or fivarme in great troupes, as
Ants in their neafts or canes; alfo,to paine,or pricke, as
the flimzing of Pifmeares.
ourmilliere : €. .4# Ants bole, or neat; abiklocke, or
banke full of Ants, ~ 4
Vne fourinilliere de gens. À great number, a buge
troupe,of people crowding together like Ants.
SoufHler les fourmisdans leurs fourmillieres. To
blow Ants into their boles;to ftriue againft the freame,
or draw on bimfelfe a mifcbiefe by firining to expell it ;
(forthe more one labours, by blowing,to get them in,the
more be prouokes them,and makes them to come out.)
Fourmion: m. 4 little Ant, finall Pifineare.
Fournage : m. The fee taken bya Lord of bis vaffalls,
and tenants, bound to bake in bis common ouen ; or for
4 permiffion to-ufe their owne ; alfi,as Fouages
| Fournaillé: m. ée: £ Baked (in an ouen.)
| Fournailler. 0 bake(in an owen.)


F Ov


Fournoyé: m.ée:£ Baked(inan onen,
Banores. To bake a a ,
Fourquat :m. A kind of plough ufedin Languedoc.
Fourque. #s Fourche; A forke ; a paire of, gallowes,
uier::m. À Brewers flirrer,
Fennec: m. Forrage for borfes ; alfo, fodder for cat-
te


+ Bourrage des corbeaux. A falfe knaue, a filthie lewd
fellow , crowes-meat , one for whom the gallowes
grones. |

Fourragé :méc : f, Foddered; firraged, rauaged, for-
vayed.

peo age A fiddering; forraging , rauaging,


aying.

Fourrager. le four. as Fourragement.
Fourtager, To fodder; alfo,to re >Prey, forray, goe

a foraging ;t0 ranfacke yauage,boot-bale it,
Fourrageur im A fodderer; a forrager, a purueyor of

vitinall for borfes,and cattle; alfo 4 boot-baler,
Fourré: m. A kind of fifh-net firetched out with boopes
Fon er og me whale-bone 2

rte: m. ce: ÉFurred ;alfo,entred,thruft, or pus

in; fheathed,cafed; lodged ri gt": 4


Coups urrez. Interchanged blowes,
Paix fourrée. 4 counter is peace ; a peace made


Fournaife : f. 4 firnace. with a purpofe to be broken,
Fournaifer:m.ere :f. Belonging toa fiwnace. | Pourreau. A {heath ; afeabbard,
Fourneau. A little oven. Lefourreaud’ vne befte. The thicke skin wherein


Fournéede pain ; 4 batch, or oven fill of bread, |.
Prendre vn painfurla fournée. Togeta fnatch at
bis weach before fhe be maryed, AAOIEQET

aot op ery HET es

ourni : m. ie :f, Furnifhed, frau inted, proui-
tna complet fin hal


the yard,or pixxle of a beaft is fheathed.
Lefourreau d’ vine Malar rt pifto-
le; &c. A cafe for a balbeard,barguebufe, pifioll ere.
| ” oe le oon ge mefpriferla lame.
tnot a fatre outfide make th infide telle eReemed 0 a à
Fourrelier :m. 4/cabberd par at à
Foutrer. To put , thruft, or throw into, to lodge in or
bide within, a bole or hollow thing; Hence 3 to Cafe;
» and to fbeath; alfo, to fürre ; alfo,as Fourrager.
© Sefourrer en. To enter boldly,thrufi freely, pierce far
inte alfo,to ingage,or intangle bimfelf in.
Se fourrer es biens d’autruy. To intrude upon the
rompre à other mens goods; to difpofé of them un-
idden, or whether tb'owners will or no.


_ ded of, fupplied with; ina compleate
equipage. ,

+ Lance fournie. Seeke Lance. © 1 |

Fournier: m. 4 baker ;.or one that keepes, or gouernes
a common ouen. , bre

Fourniere :f, A woman: baker,or fhe that keepes acom-

monouen. ° ‘ M :

Fournil: m. 4 bake-boufe.


Fournillé : m. ée : £ Baked (in an onen, or bakes


-


Bois aie L814 S'y fourrer iufques aux oreilles, Toplunge bimfelfe
Fourniller : m. ere :£. Much in abake-boufe; baunting | "up toth'earesin.
Sete hi mme à | CET mete

ourniller. To bake (in an ouen,or ba ) | 5 Pourrerlamain a. To bribe, togreafe the ffl of.
FOUnAimchts Mis wD Frauphe, prouifion ; piers] i?


rreurtm, A\Furrier ; a Skinner ; alfa, aForrager.


perfettion ; that which compleats,or makes Up a thing; | Fourreure:f. See Fourrure. |

- alfoxafurnifhing, or ing mined Fourrie: € ‘Pillage, forrage; rauaging,boot-ba ling yan-
Le fourniment dvne Piftole, A cafe fora Pifloll, | facking, LR tr
Lefourniment dés reins, The muféles of the backe, | Fourier: in! vn Harbinger, : fa}. ç0

~ about the sers: SS 8 ees ME wy 9 Le fourrier dé la Lune amarqué le logis. Appliable

Fournir. To flrnifh, fraught, fupplie, minifier, ind, pro- ~<a woman that bath ber flowers |
wide of accommodate with, 0. ane


*Ournirdvn appointment. To performe, fulfill, or
|Fourniele papa Load Rese 19 à
en a bg ns ra
iat eaters
fiw cies fat ath dole of


ore : f À cawe,or clafe feller, to lay wine, or oyle
poesia ing quoi SD PORTES té
Fourrons. An opprobrions name,or nickname, given
sean nna hie
-: Captaine of thewatch, — OT eho Stem
Fourrure:f, Furre, fürring, skins to frre with)
Foutrler.7» pitene carpes ina pond, 9 11
Fourvoyé :m.éef strayed, erred, Grarued, gone out
of the way ; that hath miffed,or miftakenthe way.
Fourvoyement: m. 4frayingerting, wandring, go-
; Ya er ec oF miflake the so! PNA
: . ? ye sth,
fwatue from roue , wander, firay, or got, out of, the
Cou fa ryax, neve Fourvoyeas |


In
e en ut CPR q


CTS.


HOT


de rien. This will be a great pleafure tous and no bin

derance vnto yousor no whit out of your way.

I ne fe fouryoit point qui à bon hoftel va: Prov.

He goes en out of bis way that goes to a good Inne.
trop fe hafte en cheminant ,.en beau chemin

fe foutyoye fouvent: Prov.He that makes too much

baft oft wanders in 2m way.

Fouffer.zs Fouir; To dig; &-(more particularly)to dig,
or turne up,avineyar star before the vines be-
gin to bud.

Fouffette. as Foffette.

Foufteau.as Fouteau.

Fouteau: m. A Beech tree.

Foutoir : m. A(battering) Ramme; alfo,arammer ; er,a
rammer bead for a peece of Ordnance.

Fouton:m. 4 Snite; fo called, becaufe fhe wags ber
taile verie much.

Foutouër: m. The warlike Engine called a Ramme,
wherewith, in old time, walls were battered ; Looke
Foutoir.

Foutre. Toleacher.

Foutu. vn foutu. À fcondrell; a feRlow of fmall ace
compt.

Foutu : m.ué: f.(The Participle of Foutre,)

Fouyafle. as Fouace : (Bourbon,

Fouyer :m. The barth (ofa chynne)

Lé Fouyer d’une arquebufe,The fire-pan,or touche
n ofan Harguebufe.

Fouyer de Galere, The Cooke-roome in a galley

Ce que l'enfant oit au fouyer eft

iufques au Montftier : Pro. Little pitchers baue wide

pei wee fay; and it feemes by this prouerbe that )

little c lineal haue long tongues,

Fouynne. as Fouinne, ne

Fouzil. a Fufil. 4

Foy: m. Le foy du corps, The middle, or waf.s.

Foy :f. Faith,trufi,confidence,affwrance,beli
dit ginen ; af, loyaltie, faithfulne[fe, truflineffe; alfo,

| em ; alfo, fee fimple; alfo,a ring pda né une
in

_ Demifsion de foy.Looke ke Demiffion,
Homme de rag A veal Jens fbb at owes,
or bolds by, fealtie
Poffeffeur de bane foy.He that pfs asbingup-
on a title which be knowes,and is,goed,
Poflefleur de mauvaife foy.15 besthat either by force
detaines another mans: > arefis ened event
that they belong to another.
En bonne foy ? Is it pofible 2 is sere ay ich mat
- ter ?canit befo ?
qe poane fog. pe Ed ear
nell, La
: y va a bonne
ply, fincerely;te worke
Sar aufsi nee Te quimanges
lachevre. (Suid of a great deceiuer.) .
EE de. To D pr par credit uno,
gene to his ee sr,
40
Ste HT An inberitance 1
‘d rap vato es nee aed
tov. Treacherie,or wit 54
a de f coe ae
ES sf 700


ge 3


bien toft cogneu |


inycre-


FR A


that is but feldome feene ; alfo, a flinkin exeref-

cence refembling a fodden adden liner, and ess
bottome of the fea, unto ae weed Alge.

Jamais homme ne m eque le fien non ait
ioye: Prov. The liuer tbe liuer-eater, is M
and much the better.

Foyer. as Fouyer.

ss :f, The flot ofa Stag,the: view of a Bucke,the se
ing of either.

Foyne. .4s Faine ; Beech maft:

Foynne. « Fouinne; 4 Foine or Polecat,

Frac. On ne trouve chez luy ni fric ni frac.; There’s
notbing to be bad,or gotten,at bis boufe.

Fracas :m.Violent breaches;extreame brnifes ; wracks,
deftruction ; bauocke, burlyburly.

Fracaflé: m. ée: £ Coran feds Ver + crufhed;
wracked ; battered ; ruined made

Fracafler.To crafh;to Hever ae > 7 . cru,
treamely; to wracke,deflroy,ruine, make bauocke cof,

ome :m, A crafher, violent breaker, batterer; or
cru

Fracein : m. as Vicere ambulatif.

Fracteur: m.A breaker; affo,a bankrupt; and bence the
PR
Frac du faëteur demain fracteur.

on :f. 4 frattion,or fracture; a breaking buriting;
av ing in peeces.

Frode” f, A fratture,breach,or burfting.

Fraéture faiéte en raifort. Looke Raifort.

prniunk: m.éc : £, Burft, broken.

te :f. A Frigate.
Fable om ie brittle, foone burft, eafily broken,


Fragile: f. ali, fagilitie, bristlene[e ; weake-


Sn neot: m, A fragment; a peece,or parcell, of a bre-
hea thing, a gobbet,or fhard.
Fragrant Li he ope oo
in fragrant delià, while sh’ offence is frefh in memo-
rie; or,pre(éntly after the committing thereof. :
Pois The feminine of Frais  Looke Frais ; or


Fra: com com. Fraile, brittle, weake,eaf ly broken.
Fails ake mée:f. Crumbled in peeces, broken into fral
crumlockes,or mammocks.
To crumble in cone breake into Small crum-


lockes (brittle things,
Frain: 1 bit; ‘be aa of a bridle which isin tbe bor-
\ fs mou
«Prendre le frain aux dents, To be werie carneft; jor,
to goe forward notwithfanding any commannd,or se
« Mite,to the contrarie. immo
Ronger fon frain. To bite of the bit, “es
- ‘A vicille nul frain doré : Pro, Said in
pe rer newly, on alee


Frat fe ffi fe to

as a womans dugs, when the menfir.

to dilate the veines of the matrix, : is
Prairie 4 sf. À Frierie ; a brotherbood, ec


False (dvatonme re Far late fes,


Fi eect |


oe HULLAC LAS + Soierhetri


FR A


\


FRA


Fraïfheur:f. coolenefle; fiefhnefe; newnefe ; lufti-


neffe, by '

nie :£.A flravoberrie; alfo, aruffe; alfo, a calues chal.
dern. é A

Fraifé:m. ée: f. (Looke Frezé; ) pain fraifé. 4 Pa-
nadoe of the crummes of fiale Manchet, fleeped fome
while in two or three changes of water,and then boiled
in a pipkin with butteror in chickin or capon broth,
often [lirred with a fpoone vatill it be readie,

Fraifier : m.A flrawberrie-plant;or,the bearb that beam
reth flrawberries.


Fraiflé: m.ée: f. Broker, bur{t (into many finall pee-


ces.)
Sa :com, gris: eue 3 )
Fraifler. Te breake, to bur[t (into many fall peeces.
Fraiflure:f. Brittlene(fe, frailtie. |
Fraiflufement. Britilely,weakely ; of a fraile frengtb;
in a fraile manner.
Fraifne: m. Aa Afhtree.


| Fraiz: m. Cofis,expences charges.


Peindre à fraiz. To paint with water-colours ow 4
greene,or new-mortered wall.


| Fraiz: m.Fraïfche :£ Leoke Frais; or, Frez.

| Fraize : f. as Fraife.

| Fraizé. febves fraizées. Pilled or fhaled,beanes.

L Fralaté : m.ée:f Racked,or drawne off the Lees; alfo,


powred out of one vefell ixto another,as wine,


| Fralatement: m. A racking of wine; a drawing it off


the lees; or fhifting it out of one veffell into ano-


| ther.
Fralater. To racke wine, to drawit off the lees; tofhift,


or powre it out of one veffell into another.


Framboife: £4 Rafpispindberrie, framboifeberrie; al.


fo, a pleafing finell or fauor in wine, or fruites ; and
ence 5


Ce vin fent fa framboife. This wine finells deli-


cately, ‘
Framboifier: m.A Rajpis bufh; the plant,er flornbsthat | .


beareth Rafbifès.
Franc: m. 4 franke,or flie to feed,and fatten bogsin,
Franc. A peece of money worth, in old time, but one Sol

Tournois; #0w it goes for twentie; which amount va-

to ij.s.f{terl.

FrancBourdelois. Is but 15. Solz Tourn, 18, d.


É eri,
Franc à cheval. 4a old peece of gold worth betweene


vj.and Sea now it goes,as th'ordinarie Franc,but for


ij.s. dter. Rest boa!
Paes pied. Another worth aboat foure,or five {hil
lings flerling.
Franc :m,Franche: Franke, frees at libertie ; fab.
ieËt unto noman , age from {ubfidies, dueties, or
“feruicess, alfo, franke, liberall, bountifill; courteous,
gracious ; alfo, valiant, hardie, forward, bold, coura-
gious ; alf,plaine,round,open-bearted ; fincere, boneft;
without any fault, or ill qualitie ; alfo,tame, natural,
kindlie, (eafonable, well tempered ,of the right ftampe.
Franc aleu. Free tenure; or, a free tenant ; Seeke


| “Alleud.


Franc archer.One trained bow-man in euerie Parifh,

“well armed,and readie upon fummons, and at a rate

certaine,to march ; inregard whereof he is exempted
omalltaxes and fubjidies. _


rane; as Francs deniers,


_ Francs Bourgeois.Free Burgeffes;wbich pay noyere-
Ge fines for them frecdome, nor fo many amerciaments
of Courts as others; although they yeeld fome other coma

… Aribputions ind feruices,vnta their Lords, 5)


Francs deniers en vente de fief, &c, A fellers free-
ing , or difcbarging of the purchafer from thofe fines
which be were other wife to pay,at bis entrie , unto the
Landlord.
Francs devoirs. Looke Debvoir.
Franc fief. A free,or affranchifine fief ; as all Ficfs
be(and therefore one fayes, that Franc # agenerall,
and perpetual Epitbite vato a Fief, ) whereof,at fir/t, ”
* none were capable but les Francs (a people of the Ger-
mane Franconia) who conquered Gallia; nor ought
any to bold them at this day,but (uch as are noble, free-
borne,and exempted from füblidies ; yet ifa villeine
get one of them it makes bim a free-man, though not a
Gentleman ; bat he cannot hold it without bis Lords
permiffion,and a licence from the King; and hence;
Droié&tde francs fiefs, ‘The fine thats due unto the
King upon the purchafe of a fief by a Burguer (ofan
unpriuiledged towne ; for Paris , and fome others are
priuiledged) Roturier, Villeine, er other ignoble per-
Jon: (this was certaine,viz: fix yeres value if the land
were beld of the King, and three yearcs, if of another
* Lord; but now it is whatfoeuer th’ Officers of th Exche-
quer will fet downe;) alfo,the power of enabling them
is purchafe fiefs ; a point of Soucraigntie peculiar to
‘the King.
Impofition de francs fiefs, The fame (in the firf
art.)
ranc homme, A vaffall,or tenant that owes fealtie,
Franche falaifon. as Franc-falé,
Francs Taulpins. Trained men; fouldiers leuied in
villages,or made of busbandmen.
Franche verité. An inquirie of diforders committed
within a Furifdittion,or Mannor(by efpeciall order em
authoritie from the Lo, thereof before any a£tuall com-
plaint, or apprebenfion of offenders be made ; a prinie
Seffuns. a
Cavefranche. 4 fat well feafoned, or fit to receiue
ncw wine.
Pierre franche. The (fofi white) free flone.
Repeué franche. A meale come freely by, or which
cofis th’eater nothing.
Rofefranche. À red Rofe.
Sergentfranc. 4a Officer which fome vaffalls may
keepe to looke unto their woods, and to fèife, and de-
PA Such beafis, as are found Dammage fefant with-
in them,
Terre franche. Mould, purefoyle,fayle of itfelfe; a
Sole without fand,grauell,flones,or ahs Ss 2
Franc au collier ; franc au traiét. That drawes, or
labours hard; that does, falls to,goes through with,bis
_ bufineffe luflily,roundly, willingly, freely,
‘A la franche Marguerite, Ja the plaineft fafhion,af~
ter the homelieft maner. ,
Refufer tour à franc. Torefifé abfolutely, denie refo-
lutelyvtierly altogether, and.to deprine bimftlfe, by
Such arefifallof all power, or means of acceptance,or
eelding afterwards, Sor
Lee de Carreau.'A certaine play with a peece of
money ata fquare croffed : (Rab.
Francarchers: m. Archers, or trained bow-men, that
ferue on foot ; exempt from Subfidies becaufé bound to
march,ona fudden ,and ata certaine monethlie rate,
whenfoeuer they be commaunded.
Franc-a-tripe One that feeds on free-cofisor,a tall tren-
_ cher-man,glution,bellie-god ; one thats bountiful to
x bis guts free to bis paunch; one that lones bis belie
i : da


Franc-eftu :m. The Garden Globes an excellent apple.
- France.


FRA


France. (The kimgdome of) France.
DeFrance. An bonourable addition, beftowed onely
on the French Kings children(as Enfant de France;)
or on th'immediate Officers of the Crowne (whence,
Conneftable de France; Chancelier de France;
Admiral de France, &c.)

Franc-fief. Looke Franc.

Franc-gontier. A good rich Yeoman, fubflantiall yon.
ker, wealthie chuffe.

Franche-mariette. The name ofa great, and tender
apple, (potted with red on th'one fide,

Franchement. Frankly, freely, liberally , bountifully ;
fincerely; plainely, roundly , boldly, without batting,
with an open heart,

Franchemulle d’ vn mouton, A fheepes call, or kell.

Franchi: m.ie: f.Freed,quit,vntbralled, fet at libertie,
deliuered ; redcemed,difcharged ; alfo,leaped,or inm-
ped,on,or ouer.
Le coup eft franchi. Overthrowne,out-gone,

Franchir. To quit, free, deliuer, untbrall ;redeeme, dif
charge ; alfa, to leape,iumpe, or bound, on, or ower ;
hence;
Franchir le Rubicon. Looke Rubicon.
Franchir le fault. To out-leape, exceed, goe beyond
(ordinarie,or fit limits;) and particularly,to grow pro-
phane,to make a ieaft,or(at leaft) baue no cave, 0 reli-


ion.

Franchife :£.Franchife, freene(fe,libertie, freedome,ex-
emption; alfo,good breeding, free birth,tamene/fe, fea-
fonableneffe, kindlineffe, right kind ; alfo,a Santiua-
rie,Franchife Libertie,Priuiledged place; alfo,the dif-
charge of a debt.

Francier, To fpeake fine, and eloquent French; (Ironi-


cally.)

Francifque : €. 4 kind of axe; as Ancon ; or a fafhion
of fword ufed by the auncient French.

Francois: m. Francis (a proper name.)
Mal S. Francois. Want of money.

Francois: m. oife :f. French,of France.
Compagnie Françoife. A wench’ (among wanton
Church-men.) as
Vins Francois. Wines that are gotten below the
bridge of Sens, and in the countries on either fide of
the viuers of Marne,Seine,and Oife.
*AlaFrancoife. Afier the French fafbion-, rafbly ;
tars bic: À leauing all at randome.


Tamais is ne furent veus recreus de bien
… faire: Prov. Frenchmen were neuer feene wearie of
~ wwell-doing.

Quandle çois dort le Diable le berfe. À Pro.

serbe denifed by the Flemings in taxation of the veft-

Lele bumor ofthe French, °


Qui fut François fi fut courtois: Pro.J/he a French
manwere,courteous be was.


Françoife:£ as Francifque ; Alf, the name Frances


A woman)

| Francolin: m. 4 delicate red-legged , of two
Bo ch pepsi ove like to a Partridge)

© fines among bi ea gah In
… deerer,and (perbaps) the daintier of tbe two ; In fome
parts of Naples they are bigger bodied then Hennes,
Fee fe pa
ned es ie,b VI pate and m -efleemed of


Candie, neere wbere-


FR A


ftw words,or fever then he was wont ; (for this fowle
being ir libertie fings(after ber fafhion)but in a cage is
AL, ;
Francoly. # Francolin : &Rab.
Francoule; er,Francourle. as Francolin; or(as fome
imagine) our Moore-game,or Groufe: €Rab.
Francquiefine.A certaine free tenure,or Mannor dif
fering from a Fief,and conferring on [uch as bold by it,
or owe it many priuiledges.
Franc-falé. A priniledge of fèling,and buying of falt(for
Priuate vfè) without paying any cuflome for it ; enioyed
by th’inbabitants of Auvergne, Rhetelois, and the
countries adioyning.
Francforeau. The name of a certaine peare.
Franétopin: m. A clowne,cavle,churle, chuffe,clufler-
fill, bind, boore ; er as Franc taulpin.
Pree mg .
rangé:m.ée: f. Fringed ; edged with fringe; a
wrimpled ; notched, fnipt, or ‘etd on the pe, Ms
Fuftaine frangée. Conrfe tufted fiflian; the courfe
füflian-like fluffe, thats tufted in fringe-like rewes,
Franyer. To fringe ; 10 edge, or fet with fringe ; alfa, to
crumple ; wrimple,iag,or nip on th’edges,
Frangible : com. Frangible,breakable.
Frapart. as Frappart.
Frappart: m. A knocker, firiker,beater.
Frappart : m. :£ Knocking,vapping,firiking, bea-


ting.

Frere frappart. A luflie, firong, tough Frier , a good

boxer ,a found knocker; a notable firiker, a bellie-bum-
er.


per.
Frappé:m. ée:£ Strucke, knockt,rapt,bit ; wounded ;
alfo,blafted as with lightning,
Cela eft frappé à la porte d’ yn trefpafté. All that is
labour loft,done to no purpofe, fpoken 10 deafé eares,or
Shewed unto blind eyes.
Tous frappez à vn mefme coing, All of one opinion,
EF fifbion, or fattion, r
rappernent : m, 4 firiking, knocking,rapping,bitting,
[ovine dafhin clapping ; alfo,a blafling, =
Frapper. To knocke,rap, clap, thumpe, bit, bat, flrike,
fie 3 alfo,to dafh; alfo,to blaft ; Looke Batre.
Frapper coup fur. To giue a blow vato.
+ Frapper dedans, Violently to rufh,eater, or break in


uv, e,

Frippecielioe. To foyne, thruft, or giue a thruflvn-
* 10.
Frapper d'eftoc & de taille. To firike euerie way, in
al pions, on all bands ; to lay pitta like « mad-
man.
Frapper en paulme. Looke Paulme.
Frapper des pieds contre terre. To flampe with the

et |


rapper à route. To roofe a Deere with a line-
boun 4 * À :


Tel cuide fra ui tuc: Prov. Some kill thofé
whom they would but flrike. me
Tel fe cuide bien garder qui fe frappe fur le nez:
Prov. Some thinking to defend, offend, themfetues.
Toufiours ne frappé l’on pas ce aque vife:
Prov, One alwayes bits not what be aimes at.

Frapperic:£. Kyiocking-fuffe; or,as Frappement; 4
knocking. yanping ser : hisses j :

Fra Aer ace 2 Spider whoft fling is neere,or
2. k ern: al


m . -
Frappeur: m. 4 rapper, knocker, clapper, bitter, thum-
creo eee.


Fra-


PHE-OHIO STARE


UNIVERSITY


FRA


Frarachaux: m, Cobeires, coparceners, partners in an
inheritange,or facceffion, - x
Frarager. as Frarefcher. (v.m.)
| Fraresche: € Partition of lands among brethren, meere
kinfinen,or coheires. |
Frareiciere To part land,or a fucceffion ,«s bretbren, or
cobeirs. ;
Frarefcheur : m. A partmer, a coparcener,or cobeire.
Frareufeté : £ The cuflome,cour{e, or title of Paftition
among brethren,coparceners, or cobeirs : €Wallon.
rareux : m,cufe : f. Parted, or partable among copar-
ceners; alfo, belonging to a coparcener : €Wallon,
Fratieparage: m. Fraternitie brotherboo v.m.)
Frafque :f. A gull,eullerie mocheries aljo,an odde trick,
. flrange pranke,idle part, ;
Frater. 4 Frier; (a word ufed moft commonly in moc-


kage.)


ing to a brother,
Re gs Frateraally; brotherly, *
Fraternifer. To fraternixe; concurre with ; be neere on
. 10; agree as brothers,
raternité: f, Fraternitie brotherhood. Rens
ratefque :com. Frier-like ; of or belonging toa Friers
alfo,hypocriticall ; fuperflitious. : es
ratre : m. A Frier's a brother ; a confederate, :"
ratricide :m. A murtherer of his ovone brother.
ratrifleau : m. A nonice; a yong, and unexperienced
Frier. ev
PA à Sar ie wr vers ee à
raudation : f. À defauding eceiuing,beguiling,
eck Fraud,quile decei-coufenage galletie-conin,
cheating trumperie. Beet
Fraudé: m.ée:f. Defrauded,deceined,beguiled coufe-
ned, cheated,circumuented,difappointed,
Frauder, To deceine, defraud ,beguilecircumuent,fetch
ouer,coufen,cheat,eull, difappoint, Bs
Fraudeur: m. À pr pps deceiner,cheater,
eguiler. ; :
Droles, as Fraudulentement; and the bet.
ter French({ayes Nicot.) en
Fraudulent. Fraudulent, craftie, deceitfull, confening,
cheating ,wilie cunning. À
Fraudulentement. Fraudulenth ,deceisfully, craftily,
| Suile ficlly cunningly.
Frauduler. To deceiue; as Frauder,
| Era einent.as Fraudulentemento7, fil craf-
tily,moft deceitfülly.
Frais tm. A deceiuer, cheater, coufener, crafiie


mate wilie packe ouerreaching con
ree CE eufe: f. M crafie, fraudulent,
g deceitful, QE
Fraux: m, Commons ; or common, publicke, and void
| grounds wayes,places ; or,as Fros,
Frax.A kind ofrauenous fifh(or as Lamie)called thus a.
: . bout Bayonne. 4
Fraxinelle : €. Batard Dittanie , fulfe Dittander.
Fray :m, 4 Frier ;alfè,the [pawne of fifh ; whence;
Quand la grenouille n’eft plus en fray. when the
is emptie,or without fpavne; or, when fhee bath
~ | donebreeding, 4 3
| Frayable.chemin frayable. As wall ,beaten,or well-
__ troden,mway. 1
-Frayé: mée:f.Hit fideline,erated vpon,raked along on;
ayo, rubbedeed narod eed, much ane by
rubbing ; alfo,defrayed; alfoyburnifhed, Lure
Chemin frayé. À way much vftd,or trod’ on; a bea-
 tenway. gles. th S
sh


Go. gle


Frayer. To bit fideling; te gratevpon; to rake along on;


Fraternel : m. elle: f. Fraternall, brotherlie, belong.


Frelateur: m. 4 racker of wine,


ie: € Frenxie,rauing, lumacie, On E
Frenatique: com. Fran aus ait 4.


FRE


Frayement. A hitting fideling,a grating upon, a rakin
ao on; a rubbing, fretting yang eine of ru


often bitting one againft another ; a burnifbing.


aalfo,to rub;and to rafe,or fret by often rubbing ; alfo,
to ifh (as a Deere bis head) by rubbing ; alfo,to
weare,beat downe, make plaine, fmeoth, or euen by
much vfing, or treading on; alfo, to fbawne,as fifbes,
ee; alfo,to defray, or beare the charges of.

Frayeur if. Feare,dread, {right affrighting, terror, [ea-
ring, borror.

Frayeure: f,.4s Frayement.

Freya :m.eufe : f. Fearcfiull dreadfull,terrible bor-
rible.

Frayoire. Theracke-flaffe, or nog of a mill; the little
péece of wood which rubbing againft the bopper makes
the corne fall from it,

Frayouér: m.  Deeres burnifhing of bis bead.

Fredaine: f 4 gudgeon,mockerie,wile, gullerie ; a de-

— part, a roguifh pranke, a knauifh or coufening


euice.
Fredinfredaäiller. To leacher : &Rab.
Fredon : m. 4 Semie-quaner,or Semie-femie-quauer,in
Muficke; and bence Dinifion;and a warbling, fhaking,
_ Or quauering,
Faireftedon far fredon. To heape curioftie vpon
curiofitie, toadde one nice point unto another, or ufe
many together.
Fredonner. To fbake dinide,warble, quauer in finging,
or playing on an inflrument.
Fredonneux:m.eufe:f. Full of Semie-femie-qua-
“À 3 or of quaucring, flaking, warbling ; diniding


much.

Fredonnifé. Shaked,quanered, warbled divided,

Frédonnifer, 2s Fredonner. 4

Fregate : f. A Frigate ; a fivifi Pinnace.

role 7 be Lote tree,or Netile tree,

FreBuereul. The little ffh called,a Mennow,

Frein. SeeFrain.

Frelan: m,4 roughyand prickled fhrub called Butchers.
Broome, Kneebolme, and Petigree; alfo, a Butchers
Broome,or a rough Pratl, made ther eof,

Frelaté. vin frelaté. That is fhifted out of old into mew
veffells ; or dravone off the lees, and kept in bottlesswe


Jaysracked.
ro done : m. À racking of wine ; or as Frala.
tement. ‘
Frelater. To racke,or draw wine fiom the lees, and put it
into a new veffell ; Secke Pralater. + ENS
Frelaut, 4 good fellow: @Rab, © ©
clon: m. A Hornet; alfoya Dorresor Drore-bee: (See
Freflon)al/o,as Frelan. + Ath ae ones
Freloque:: £ .4 tatter thathangs downe trailing from
Pt Pb elt @Rab.
relore : com. done, forlorne,lof?, ca :
Frclot MEélant. ue
Freluche:£ 4 moat ; a final flraw,or lint,
Freluquet: m. 4 Freich halfé-pennie; alfo,a Puce
dar fe,or prettie dapper flow."
Frelus. a5 Frelore; or , Ouerthrowne borJé dnd fiat.
mg me ‘Ais ate: eeu!
reir. To quake; tremble, sJhake; be exc qo
D mon citer ED wilde or fe. DD
Fremoirs : m. ‘na tg of à booke; alfo,a Foyers
À ight Chi e . Ç Can


a


FRE


himfelfe,out of bis little wit. VE
Frenouiller. To fidder,torake,to pudder in: @Blefen.
Frequence : £. Frequencie ; a great baunt,mecting, re-
fort, companie, affemblie ef.
Frequentation : f. 4 frequentation, frequenting baun-
tingsreforting , often affembling, thicke fetting tege-


er,

Frequenté:m, ée: f. Frequented baunted much vifi-
ted,oftenreforted vato, |

Frequenter. To frequent,baunt, vfe much, vifit often,
refort many times unto.

Frerage. as Frarefche; or, A partition made betweene
brothers cobeires.

Frere: m. Abrother ; alfo,a Frier.

Frere d’armes. A brother in Armes; (a title thats v-

fed betweene Prince and Prince, or where th'onei a

Prince; whereas ordinarie Knights tearmetbemfelues

onely, Compagnons d'armes.) ;

Freres de Cour. Mow vaffalls or tenants bolding

of their Lord in one manner , or by one kind of tenure,

and hauing equall authoritie in bis Courts,

Frere de laiét. A fofler brother ; the fonne of amans


Nuife.
© Freres des Lombards.(as Harpies;) Moles or Moon-
calues; tearmed fo becaufe they are oftaningendered
with alining child ; and. if without , yet being bred
in the fame wombe,and nourifhed with the fame milk,
they may in {eorne bee called brothers of the perfect
children; See Lombard. |
Freres vterins. Harpies , monflers, monflrous chil.
dren; Moles,or Moone-calues ; by the fame reafon,
Le frere veutbien que fa foeur ait, mais que rien
du fien n'y ait : Prov. The brother would bane bis f=
ter rich, any way, but at bischarges. | >: :
Ire de freres ire de Diables: Prov. Brothers angen
diuellifh anger. 1
Il n'y aterme qui paffe par delà celuy de frere :
Prov. Calls be me brother ? bow can he call me more?
no friendlie tearme exceeds the tearme of brother,
Frere-lay. 4 feruant,er boufbold Officer in an Abbey,or


Couent.
Frerer. To /well ; alfo,to itch ; Looke Fraire,
Frerefcheur. as Frare(cheur Acoparcener.
Frereux. Coufin frereux. À Coufen-germaine by the
brothers fide; my fathers brothers fonne.
Frerie : f. A Frierie. re :
Sac a or fhifting, fellow.

res :m. Charge, cofts expence.

Fres: m. Frefche : as Frais ; Frefb,new ;coole ; or as
Frez. :

Frefange. One hog;or more, due unto the Maifler of
| be waters qd frre of Aubigay (ond elfewbere)by
the farmers of the Maftage,and broufage thereof.
Frefcad


Frefaye:f. A Scrich-owle,

es:f. Refrefhments,or things-refrefbing ; as (in
. Summet-time) light garments, coole aire, cold places
~~ bowres, or fhades , ouerfpred with greene bougbes.
Freschedent: m.A glutton, rauenor, greedie fellow,
trencher-man ; one that eats as if be had beene


,ranknelfes


Frefle: com, Fraile, weake, feeble, britrle, fone bro-
LA pnw
Freflé: mée: £-Furled; undone, or flackened, & made


Up.
Frefler. To fürle; to flacken,or undoe,and makeup. | |
Freflon :m. 4 Hornet;alfo (but leffe properly)a Dorre,


Freflonné: m. ée : f. Bittenor fang with Hornets.
Frefhaye : £ Agroue,er wood of Afhtrees, 20
Frefnc:


pate tree dc. FA

hier: m. ere :f.0f Afb, Ashen, belonging to an Ash.
Frefñin : m.ine:£. + Frefni _ 4
Frefhoy: m. 4 grone, tuft,er wood of Ash trees,
Frefquades. Looke Frefcades,

Frefsurades: £ Complements of outward courtefie in


Ç* bu kneesor a flooping to touch one anothers knees ;
3!

Fressure,ou Fre

Fret: mi The fraught, or fraight of a ship; alfo, the
of.

Fretail de perles. Refi, orragged Pearles, Pearles of
finall'ualne. Wey iho gee |

Fretaillé om, éc: f. ig ga Les

… Chemife : de filets. 4 shirt , or finecke

Frete. A Verrilt; tlt'yr

Freté : m.ée:f.Hired.

Fretel. 4 kind of whi

Freter.To bire a ship of burden; cto fraught,or load ber,


€
Freteure:f. 4 faughting loading,u furnishing of a(bi }


Fretille: f. Straw: @Barrag.
Fretillant. La/cinious wanton, lufifiull,ticklishwrighag,


or Drone Bee; alfo,the fhrub called Pettigree Buscbers
Broome, Knecholme,and Kneebuluer, SE
Irrfter ies freflons. To prouoke angrie perfons,
Les abeilles ne devicment point freflons: Prov.
… Looke Abeilles. £


: m. An Afhiree, à
champettre. The field Afh,great Afb,common

Frefñe de montaigne. The wild A whic aes

Quicken tree, canes tree. rene

Frefne petit. Baflard,or falfe,Dittanie,

Frefne fauvage, 45 Frefne de montaigne ; The


Fr
A


ier,


matters of intertainment,or falutatien ; asthe bowing


rifling, fondneffe,toying, idle geflures, allions to
no pur pofe; alfo,a horfes lifting up of bis legs.
- fure. The inwards,or intraills; as Fref,
| de mouton. A sbeepes plucke.
Freflure de pourceau. 4 hogs bafler.


hire thats payed for a ship, or for the fraught there-


wrought Ras the skirts
cht in frets about the skirts.
né. 14 7 PARTS
den toole fromriumg, ©: ;
ted,and firnished,as a ship.
ich the Sowgelders of France
ufually carrie about them.


hired,
red) ship.


frigging,itching; bufie, mouing, wagging; nimble, fiir-
ring; flanding on thornes , longing to beatit,
Fretillard : m.arde : f. The fame ; or, as Fretilleur.
Fretiller: To mone,wag, flirre often, fland on no ground;
to wriggle, frig,tickleitch,lu{t to be at it,
Fretilleur: m. A lafciuious , wanton. ticklish, luft-
companion ; alfo, a bufie bodie, avefileffe fop, one
_ that often flirres,or figs up and dovene, as an
itch on bis breech, |
retillon: m. .4 little nimble dtwaïfé, er bop-on-my
thombe ; a Facke of the Clocke-bonfes a little bufie-
bodie , medler., Jacke-fickler ; one that bath an
ave in euerie mans Boat, or bis band in euerie mans


dish, ; Pie
Fretin: m. ¥urniture , fraught , provi, ns alfo , the
fixe, largenefe.or goodnelfe of Cod, or Greer ish 3(a
_ tearme


NN


ERI


! iret: m, ée:f.as

.” fed vato fale; x ;

7 Fripeties 3 “Aer eek 10p > vee of Brokers,

as * Fup sim, A faapsfauce, licke-difhlickorons feL

=

: Fripice m. À Fripier,or Broker ; a mender,or trimmer

“ up of old garments,and a feller of them fomended.

: Fripiére : £4 woman that {ells,or trimmes vpsold gar-
ments.


Fri on: m. A rag,or tattered clowt; alfoan vnworthie
llow 3 one that ufeth,or is ginen 10, hale trickes, and

fhifis; or one that bath no inclination to any goodne/fe;
whence:
Fripon de College. 4 wag,a rakehell; or one that
loues tobe gadding abroad whenhe fhould be at bis
boo

Fri ot: :m.ée : Rubbed much ; alfo, worne unto rags
(hy much rubbing;) alfo, beaté banged, belammed:
ted,robbed ; roughly bandled; afo,as vnder Eripe.

Frippe-lippe: m. A lickorous flaye,a faucie compani-
on: Gab,

reals To rub up and downe; to weare unto rags (y

kr fear mt ) alfo, to beat, bang, belamme, bela-


fpoyke.
Frippon. as Fripo
Fripponnerie: £. Pe Abaft Shift.pr ithe triche ,
Friquandeaux. as Fricandeaux.
Friquenelles: f. Slender,and finall chier nent
i (ab. .) alfo,a raftall companie, ora dy ur of
afe,and rude bifonians; ignorant clownes, els,
+ A
sec mA little flice , or[cummer, to turac fifbin.a
fiying-pan;alfo,a flicke of. Lickorice;alfo,.a kind of {par-
row that keepes altogether about Wallnyt trees.
Friquette: € 4 lingell, (mall sklice, littie feuramer sal
fo,aprettic mimble,gay,vollie,blithe;lafe.  i |


Frire. To frie.
ings be bad, no goad


I n'y aque frire. There is nothin
to be done ; we have not wherewi
cs fe piusquefrire. Alla nine madsen,


fin i. ‘juy chaut d so ee puis quiln'ya ips
que frire. He cares not for that which be canaot vje,


oe efieemes not of a thing (me then he, bath ufé
Frifcades. as Frefeades Pre aire coole De
Frife. drap de frife. Frifé sos


See Frizé,
Frifer. as Erizer; Alfo, to cut afiroake at Tennis, :


RODD,


Fin: 3 À Dutch tankerd s CT)


SBCA al,


a


Digitized


ÿ (50: ge.


bour ; ufe roughly , deale hardly with ;:rob , de- |


Prifé: m. ée :f. Creeley | Frodiere.


Fri ah F3 A fitting curlng,criPingsrflines as


rixeland. t
aon: m, éc: £ ried, cured raffled in many
+ com i a ts |


Re Totremble, quake, {re Pine die, |


er,earne,througb cold,or feare.


Friffure :t. as Frizure. 4
Frifure : £ 4 light. burt ; raft, or feratch; sai. .


feure.


Frit: m. 4 bending, qr leaning inwards (a Mafons |
dearme. N
Frit: mite :£ Fried pale aie en smart,


Refine frite.Drie élavified Rofen.

Sa part eft frite de. He may roaft ak bis part thereo,

= bis finger,or put it into bis ge and neater t
nger,nor eye.


Son m. A Fritters alfo, ti ni
ritou: m. A kind of fbell-fifh of a {pannes len tb, a
sf foell-fifbof a {p [4


t like a Muller.


Friture:f 4/rying.
Frivole : com. Friuoleus, vaine, flight idlestrifling,


of ne value,


Frivolement. Frivoloufly, vainely, trifling, tomo pur


Fruigule: Sn A toystrifle,nifle, frinolous matters
Frizailles : €resor,peeces of frife.
Frize :f, Fhe cloth called Frife; alfo (in bettie)


th@broad and flat band,or member , thats next below
the Cornifh,or betweene it and th Ar chitrawe; called
alfo by our workemen,the Frize.


Frizé : m. ée:f: Frixled, curled, crifped, braided ut.


fled; alo, razed or grazed alone 07 ; ; touched light-
«by pale fish er sonely, or but a title, Jérat-


Frizer. Tofrizle; crifpe; curle (as water Llowne on by


agentle wind ruffie,braid; alfo,to touch lightly,or pale
ouer fleightly sb’upmofi part of ; to raxe,or graze along
on ; to {cratch a little.
Frizer la queué. To leacher; or, t0 wriggle the tayle
(in leachering.)


." Frizer lescarreaux. To flrike a ball under the line


\ (ateTennis.)


Frizons: m, Frixled, or raifed pote of qu 07 fluer


wire dre 3 a fo.fione pots printed,


rad gr ée: f, Frigled, A réitist
Frizoter. To frixle


urle, braid, ruffle.


Frizure:f, 4 frix! LUC; as in Frifeute; alfo, the rai-


fed worke which is vpon ‘cloth of gold, or Tiffie; bod-


yh m.as Frou.
Frocdemoine. 4 Monkes Cole ; or Hood.
letter le aux orties, 4 Monke togbandon bis
Order,and profeffionsfand hence)alfo,to Apoftatife it.
Frocs.Common,or void grounds, watts,places;or as Fros,
Acoole place ; alfo,a deepe cave neere unto
a in which ibere is great flore of. yee all


Frodille. as Aphrodille.
Froid : m. (4 you scoldnefsciln fe
Avoir froid. To be acold,
» Avoir froid aux, rede
eafe(in eflate,or mind)to bane no me pe
or to be merrie’; alfo,to be iealous,
"Pomerat felt
1,07, 20e ely t0 510%
: < extreame toyle ;0v to beflow mi
: bor ls little forward; andbence, ne
alfo,as B jue,
Dieu donnele felon I
ee cooth ne fie


£


a thing,
ch toile & get
in =


By Pion. God fé
+ fiche


Froid: as ry 7 st, aaa


To be in ill-tcarmes, ori a


from Smithe Heu |


Froi


Froiff


Frond


tere;


? Me
perfr
Avoir les pieds
- Leoké Froid,
Dieu ren doint yne froid,


fa io oi ceed in procee-


froids. as Avoir froid aux pieds;


Froniure: £ Agathering, wrinkling, frumpling ; fow-
nin
The forbead; the brow ; the Front ,or forepart
ig


Baifferle front. To or fubmit bimfelfe ; to


de ioye.God fend thee much of bumilitie,or of fubmifc
of; 2: .


ill lucke wit


roi
roi


te
ct: mette : f. chilliecoldifh, Efchaufferle front à. To ne


ttle, warme, chafe, fet in
ettement, Chiy,coldifhp. RS okie


Froidement. Coldly, cbily ; flackly, vemifly ; weakely,
tly,
Froi


e frontrompu, as Effronté ; or, An impudent


frontlet; or forbead-band ;
applied to the forbead to pronoke
e


cux. Chill; See Frilleux.(v.
dure : £. Colduefe ;


Froidureux: m.eufe : f. Verie chillyverie cold,
roilon : m. as Freflon ; A Hornet,


Le frontal. The to a cord about the for-
€:m, éc :F. (rafhed, burff,or broken,in peeces; al- be readie to fiart out, À


So,crufbed,q
clattered tagether.
roiflement: m, A crafbing, burflin


peeces ; alfa crufhing,qua ing Or
er.


bruifed ; alfo,dafbed, knocked, or From im. ale: f, 3 belonging to the for-
ead.


tal. dn open face cleere countenance,
bead,


in: ing,or cla
Fete sock,


crafh, quafh,
ether.


Os frontal. The forhead bone.
Veine frontale,ou du front. Looke Veine.
frontlet; forbead-clorb; alfisthe


burfi , or breake in peeces; alfo, to
bruife ; alfo,to dafh,knocke,or clatter to. | Fronteau im, À fillet,


the forepart of a cart


roiffer laiachere.as Jafcherer : ENorm.
‘roiffis : m. 2s Froiffement; or,


crafbing, inflling, bufiling,


ronteau d’ vne porte. The baun(e of a dore.
Sight,or vifer of an helmet.
Sfrontive,marches,ox border of a coun-


The frontftall,or beadftall of


A rufbing, clattering, Fronteau volant. The
knocking of armed bodies
SAS eer 3 afo , fallow ground, plowed


Frontiere d’ vne bride.


Le froiffis des caufes, The confuitt, oy contr adiétions


D
Froiffi


aduerfe allegations,or pleadings,


front or accoaft ; alfo,to vef}, ov dwell on
4s Froiflement ; or, crafh,or breach. 5 of, : :


ure: f.


foinage.as Fourmage; Cheefe,


Froment


Frontifpice : m. The fronti ice, or forefront,of a boufe
(aay kind of) bread-corne; dre. fi Fa 34 <


See Froument.
Fromentée : f. Furmentie,or, fodden wheat
Fromentin : m.ine :f. Ofor
Pilure fromentine. 4 bite
Froncé : m.ée:f. Gathered, p
crumpled, frumpled,
roncer. 4s Fronfer.
ronceure : f. 2s Fronfure,


Froncis : m.4 plait,fold,gathering, a wrinkle,or crum.


ant, Frosting affronting neere unto a front,
toyer. To front,affront be neere unto a front.
oqueur: m, A mender
Fros :m. Flonds,riuers
of common waters; or
rotis: m.4 “re


of highwayes : Pic.
meares,ponds, [brings ; all kind


eS Reet


Frotté : m. ée:f. Rubbed, fretted chafed ; alfo,bathed ;


ple; or as Fronfure


Froncle: m.


7 alfo,lambd thyackt bafte
do fourcil. The knitting oftWeyebrowes, | Frotte-botte,  bafe drudge; boot-rubber,


bard bumpe,or five Ling, fear.


a Fellon,or vncome


Fronde, 4 fling,or en


Fa


fa


Frottée:£ 2s Frottement. |
ig rubbing, fretting;a lamming, .


; to fret,or grate avainff; alfa
Panicaut, To doe vaine, or idle


gi wherewith ones are caf; al.
SE CS Ped fan pm a


>


She per
the; alfo, to cudge
Sefrotter culau


Frondléesithe caf efit of (elolaraporbiow fom,
a fling,

Ding mefine frondelée.
, with one flone.
Frondelet : m. A baked-meat fomewbat refembling a


Fronder. To caf,


trifles; or in laxie,and va-


4
*
“4
“À
re |
-


At once; at one iert,or af.
| rotter leur lard enfemble. To coape,grapple,

together ; alfo,to leacher ite )
elqu’ vn fon lard. To bethwacke one


throwe out ofa
du. Ines yfait pas bonfrotter. 11 is not good medli


illon.read
thread,yarne érc,on :


or
Fronf.,


Fronfer, To


le.


with it the matter is fomewbat too bot Sor our band.
ling; (of which fence is ; ;

- Net yfrotte pas.((aid by way of aduife unto one that
meanes to quarell with a man of more
better meanes, then bimfelfe) meddle


dover. To branch
bes.


340 yeeld, or bring forth leaues,


a


‘ Éric labouche. Te


Fe


mouth
ronfer |


if you will : Or(becaufeF
het date, Jghifeatontha
Jou may lie on ber if you


€ front. To frome , or kit she braves.


FOR’ V


Onfrotte tantle fer qu’ à la fin ils efchatiffe: Pro.
Cold bumors may at length be vrged vato choller.


F VE"


Fruir. To enivy, bold, bawe + take the eege the
Pgo om oe rs :


Butane: :m. Fruitage, fruits.


} Frottis: m.# Frottement.
| FRE m. Arubbing, or friétion; alfo, a rubber, a as f. A Fruiterie ; or place’to keepe Prat

2 rubbine cloth,

a Frou. 4 publick,and common place, free for tuerie man Fraicioià f. Fruition ; enioying; yf or pofefion of a a
torefort unto,or make vfe of; hence, a waft ground, thing,

À highway,erc ; Pic. Frumentau. The wild Mulberie; se low forub.)

À Frouelle. 4a agnell, pinne,or warnell in the toe, Frumenteau. A kind of white vine,

; Frouër: a crumme,crumble,breake finall. Frumentée : f. Fwrmemie ; or wheat fleeped in wa-
= Froument:m. wheat; alfo, any kind of bread-corne, ter , then pilled, or skinned then dried in the Sunne ;
- Froument quoué. 4 fifi, hairie, earie, or [pikie then ground a verie little, as oatmeale, and referucd
| flower, sfosped like a Foxes taile, and ‘there fore called for pottage,Panadoes,eoc.
= Foxtaile Frumentelle. 4 certaine peare good to be dried; seit

; , Quicts tu meilleur pain que de froument? Prov. dried ,continning longer then any otber.
(A taxation of ouer-mucb curiofitie, or daintinefft) Fruftratioa. 4 frufiration, deranding dci a
would you haue better bread then’s made-of wheat. pointing; beguiling of an expettation.

Frumenté. 4 kind of fweete , and pleafing wbite: | Fruftratoire: com. Fruflratorie’; frufirati difep- >

. grape, pointing deceining; alfovoid, vaine,idle, fi at, of

: Froumentéc :f. Furmentie ; wheat beyled, pottage of rce,t0 no purpofe.
4 of wheat , or, as Frumentée.. atoirement.Voidl in vaine, with no eftasen.


Froumenteux : meuf : f Wbeatie ; full of, or aboun-
ding with wheat,

Froyé: m.ée:f. Rubbed, grated upon ; fretted, vafed,
much worne by much rubbing; or as Fraÿé.

Froyement:m, 4 rabbing; or ofien biling againf;
See Frayement.

Froyer : m. Avubber ; alfü,a rafpe.

Froyer. To rub; frct ra grate upon ; bit,or finite often
site ageinf? another ; See Frayer.

FruGtifier. To fruttifie ; to mcreafe of abound with
fruit ; to beare fruit.
Jamais grain ne fruétifie fi premier ne fe thortifie:
Prov. See Grain.

Fruétueux : m. eufe: f Fraifill; copionty Hentifill
commodious,

Fruétuofité: f. Fruitfulnefes plete flore ÿ et
dance. of, fruit.

Fruéture : BS The Fans) uf, fruition, pelo en

ioyiment
it: m. ale :f, Frugall,thriftie, paring, paiden,


ñecre temperate in expence,


Fiugalement Frugally , taifily , Pari; sig
Brigalité: €. Fragalitie shriftineffe ated bab


dries (paring, fauing , moderate or, pb: ‘
Fruict: m. Fruit ( of thesearth;:
males; our MA Ft re
mee Le time , out of tbe di !


Friés. ALL. the sum |
out of a thing ( whether it | l
“mouable) or receiued by 5) oF meanes
thereof. is Wks sions: l
| Sas don MALE ci wt por eye tort
; iéts naturels. 47 as
ture of thing,or D srl sat: in Sy
ples, hay,corne oc. !


“ane pr rpofe.
Fruftré:m. ée : £. Di/appointed, frufirated ; pubs
deceiued,beguiled.
Fruftrer. To difappoint | fruftrate , put by. mae
Woof deceine defraud , bequilethe expectation


F ee: am.The view,or footing of a Deere. ;
Bik iere. as Feuchière. sal
lade :f. Agreene arbor, or bower; « foadie'plac
l'un trees ; allo, the Shadow ofleaues; wef len


Fuciloge: m. Branched worke, in Painting ori wre.

rie,

Lemenfonge efl mal à couvert fous ce füeilla
Allie is but il countenanced by fach prevexts; ihe
Loris ave not fifficient to couer an se +

eillame: m. 4 bunch of leaueñ. "7" 40!

Pielfats : mi: ‘An Order of begging Fviers that weare
habits of a brownifh colour,

Fueillar: m. A greene, o7 leauie brawnch, or boueb
as a trees alfo, a clef theefe , pilferer 5 est


Fucile: fA leafi(of an hearbe, or tree) alfo sa.
"paper alfo, a flaw in'yron-worké; à nthe

# Lg > Or looking glaffes; and bencei a
grace, ana fe gloffe einen ‘unto; a cr €

or éxcufe made for, a matter. ;
Fueille d’vnefpée. The blade ofa fiword.

» Fueille d'Inde. At Aromaticall leafe , that (a fini
bold) fwimmes ox pooles , and ditches without any

‘apparent root ; yet Gerard Sayes3it is the leat +
reat (ree, which growesin Arabia , and Cab:
Erie from any water and call it Tanalapaua Ten
bul,and Malabathrum.

» Fueille de poulmon. A Lobe of the tunes ole 3
Il ne fçait de quelle fueille de poulmoni réfpiter,
He kñowes no it to doe, whether to b L
fare to bebiane binafelfe; she it enen rea cf b

17 XS, FSS aie

“Re de fei. . The teeth ofa fas Bln a

e indented,
Vin de deux til ne . Wine cee 4
~ Bourfe li sde porreatix, Tha


ML met A
' St
iho bon sone at


riginal From


Ce ME OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITÉ à 2
ee ee a CCE a ee |


FVE.


Les mauldiffons font fueilles qui les feme les re-

es :Proÿ. Thofé that curfe often fhall accurfèd

€.

Qui a peur des fueilles ne doit aller au bois: Pro,

(like our) let bim that fèares the wagging of feathers

kceepe from among wild ee

Qui fe garre deflous la fueille deux fois fe mouille:

Prov, Hee’s doubly wet a bim vnder trees,

Telle racine telle fucille : Prov. We (ay; fach as the

tree fucb isthe fruit.

Fueillée: f. a5 Pucillade; An arbor, or bower, framed
of leauie plants,or branches ; a greene arbor,

Fuciller.To leaft,or leaue;to beare,or bring forth leaues;
to wax greene with leaues.

Fueillet :m. 4 leafe(of a booke.) f

Fueilleté: m.ée:f.Leaued; alfo, looked,or turned ouer,
as the leaues of a booke:ferioufly perafed through) Ex
amined, fludied bard, read much upon.

Gatteau fucilleté. cake of puffe-pajt.

Fucilleter. To turne, or looke euer, the leaues of a
boake; As porufe , examine , fludie bard ,read much

| on,bookes.

Fueillette: f, A wine veffell, or meafure containing a-

bout eleven and a balfe of our gallons. ‘

Fueillette d'Avignon. Is fomewhat bigger then the

demie Scftier of Paris.

Fueilletter. 2s Fucilleter.

Fueilleux: m.eufe: £ Leauie, full of leaues, .

Fucillir. as Fueiller.

Fueillu : m. 4 kind of round, red, and verie fweet apple.
Fueillu marin, Sea-weed,Sea-moffe, Lungwort, Oi/~
ter-greene ; a broad-lcaued hearbe,

Fueillu : m.ué : f Leauie, full of leaues,

Ventfucillu. À weflerlie wind.
Fueillure : € Leauineffe; alfo,leaues ; alfo,leafe-worke,
1 ora leauie flo À
Fugitif: m.jue : f, Fugitive; gadding, flitting, run-a-

- way, runagate, quickly gone, of no continuance, of na
Sire abiding, of no certaine flay; inconftant, giddie, fic-
kle; (alfo) full of enafions.
ugue : f. A chace, or report of Muficke,like two,or more
<5 in one.

Fuir. To flie, eftape , rune fall, froure, feud,or flip a-
way; to fhew a faire paire of heeles ; alfo,to fhunne,a-
uoid efchew,refufe to deale with; alfo, to flinch, dally,
delay,excufe,put or fhift off, vfe enafions,

Remede contre la pefte par art, fuir toft, & loing,

retourner tard: Prov. According to the Latine, Ci-

_ t0,longè,tardè, à vi

Fuirolles. Fire-drakes; or,as Futoles,

Fuite : f..4 flight,e/cape, poeme away; afhunning,
uf


* auoyding ; enafion, excufe, delay. ;
Sans dre ie mefchant prend la fuite:

no Sele nbn ole)makes ines fi,

| Fuitif. as Fugiti 4 DE

Fulci : m.ie Fe ported,vnderfet,vpbeld;vnderprop-

ped, füallained: fortified.
oly ye underprop , fupport , fuflaine, vp-
» fay, forts

| Fuligine : f. Soot, footine[fe; finoakineffe.

Fuligineux : m. eufe: £ Sootie,blacke ; fmoakie,

Fulmination : f. A shunder-firiking.

Fulminatoire: com. Fulminatone; thundering, ligh-

 teningsdefroying,teriblee

| Fulniner. 20 thunder lighten, firike with thunder,blaf

A a lightening; to florme, rage, take on like a Di-


feel. EL AR QE ENR ER
: Pise: =. 4dengeg, nn AR nr


F V M


Fumat : m. Ray,or Scate-fifh : (Langued,

Fumeé : m.ée: f Dunged,manured, fattened with dung;
alfo, fumed, (moaked ; ewaporated ; befmoakcd; bung,
or dried in the finoake.

Fumeau: rm. 4 brand,or finoaking flicke.

Fumée: £ Smoake; a fume, reeke, Reame ; a vapor, an

’ exhalation.
Fumée des Peintres. Paiaters foot,or bleach ; got in
glaffe-boufes,and vféd alfo by Chirurgians.

Fumeés: f, The dung,or excrements of Deere,called by
woodmen, fewmels,or fewmifbing.

Fumées en plateaux, Flat grattiching, or fewmifh-
ing.

Fumelle, See Femelle, 3

Fumement: m.4 dunging,or manuring of th’earth ; al-
{6,4 fmoaking, fiming,reckine a bloating,be{moaking,
or banging in ibe finoake.

Fumer. To finoake, reeke ; fume ; euaporate ; bloat, be-
Smoake bang,or drie in the fmoake ; al{o, to dung, ma.
nure, fatten with dung.

Fumeron. A little dung-billa fnall beape of due,

Fume:terre : f, The bearbe Fumitorie.

Fumeuferment. Smeakily, fiuningly, reckinglf.

Fumeux:m.eufe : f.Smoakie, fiunie, recking; alfo,bot,
fümifh, cholericke.

Fumier: m, A mexen,dung-bill beape of dung.

Relevé du fumier. Raifed fom a dung-bill ; of a late
Clowne become a lame Gentleman.

Chien fur fon fumier eft hardi : Prov. We fay the
fame of a Cocke.

Pluye de Fevrier vaut efgoutde fumier: Prov. we
Say, April fhowers bring in May flowers,

re Of dung; as Eftable fumiere; a flable full of

lung. :

Fumieres; f. 2s Fumées.

Fumigation :f. Fumigation; a fmoaking, or perfuming
witb {moake,

ain. mettre yn navireen funain. To moore ¢ fhip,
or tie her under a lee fhore, 5

Funambule:m.4 Tumbler that watheth,e doth tricks,
Upon a rope. à

Fundtion : £.4 finflion; a charge,or office exereifed, or
executed,

Fundigue. 4 ware-houfe,or fiore-boufe.

Fundique. as Fundigue.

Funebre : com. Funeral! ; mourning, deadlier dole-
‘ful; done at,or belonging unto, funerals, .

Honneurs funebres. Looke Honneur .

Funebrement. Mowrningly, dolefully ; in manner, or
after the fafhion,of a finerall,

unerailles : f. Funerals burials,

Funefte: com, Mournfüll ; deadlie,mortall ; unluckie;
lamentable ; abbominable,deteftable,

Funge :m. .4 mufhrome,or toad-floole, e

Fungofité:f.spungine[e;bollownes,thinneffe,li .

Fungueux :m.eufe:f. Hollow, (bungie; thinne light; |
mufbrome-like ; fill of mufhromes.

Fur. pt de. Proportionably, according to, after the.
rate of.

Furain. Looke Funain,  - i

Furas. in lead of Fatras :@Rab.

Furculaire.Os furculaires, The points of the forepart of
the fhoulders meeting a little below the necke,

Furemplage. au furemplage de, Proportionably, ac.

cording iociuanse rate of.
t: m1. A ferret.

Fureté: inn Ferreted; fearched, bunted, boulted &
out; narrowly pried,neerely (pied into. eae

Rr iy


tt ie


EVR

Fureter. To ferret ;fearch,bunt, bault ont; prie, leoke,
fie narrowlh into euerie corner of. _ ÿ

Fureteur: m. 4 férreter ,fearchers prier, pier,

Fureur:£ Furie, rage,madnefje; fiercene([e, outragi-
oufhel[e ; extreame wrath, anger, impatiencie.

Fu :m.ée: f. Brannie,{calie like branne.

Furfures. Dandriffe ; the feurfe,or feales, which fall
from the head in combing.

‘Furgon. See Fourgon. A

Furial: m. ale: £ Raging, furious, firie-like ; borrible,
outragious. '

Furibond : m. de: £. wood,madde,r aging, furibus.

Furie: f. Furie,madneffe, ffenxie, woodnefse.
Furies. The Furies of bell. :

Furieufement . Furioufly, madly , ragingly, woodly,
wrathfully, bedlam-like.

Furieux :m.eufe: f. Furious, raging, moft impatient,
franticke,madde,wood,brainficke,outragious.

Furiole. See Furole. \

Furlucqué: m. ée: € Searched, ferreted, hunted


out,

Furole: f. A little blaze of fire appearing by might on
the tops of fouldiers launces , or at fea om the fayle-
yards, where it whirles, and leapes in a moment from
one place to another ; fome Mariners call it S. Her-
mes fire; if it come double tisheld a figne of good luck,
if fingle, otherwife. visi

cae ie m. Arobbing, theft, flealth, filching, purloining,
pilféving. . ,

Furtif: rs f, Filching , thecu'fb, felonious, alfo,
nimbd, pilfered, imbexelled, flollen,conneyed away.

Furtivement. Theenifbly , felonioufly , filchingly, by
flealth ; priuily , clofely, underband ; at unawares,

Furunicule : m. 4 félon,or whitlaw. |

Fufain. Spindle-tree,Prick-vrood, Pricke-timber,

Fufé:m, ée:f. Diffoluedsmielted sfpred, fcattered.
Chaux fufée. Slaked,or fleckt lime.

Fufeau: m..4 ppindle ; or poles, alfo, as Fufée ; alfo,a
flicke to fet Acornes with; alfo, (incafes of fucceffion)
thé feminine lin


es |
Fuseau des champs. wild baflard Saffron,
Demefler vn fufeau. To handle, manage,dealein; or,
to debate ; unpefter, difpatcb,vid away,a b

Ie {cay bien avec lequel vay à demefler ce fuseau.
I know we ll ynough whom 1 bent to doe with in this


ufinelfe,
Le fufeau doit fuyvre le gorreau: Prov. While the
busband labours abroad the wife muft not idle it at
home;or,a wife is to follow ber busband in what course
of bis fortune foeuer. |. EME can
Fusée: f. A fpoole-full, or indé fllsef. thread, yarne,
- dre salfoya fquib ; alfo,as F Lego 34
Fusée avec fes pefons; as Aftragale ; because com-
monly the worke on it resembles many fpooles and wer-
; _ bles threaded,or ioyned to ethers. re bit
Rena aa will iumble, confound,or
ma OKs UN ents, € iG be
| - Recherchon: = bom deporte. La ex retarn
|. ‘wntoourmatier. . ok
Wen fçair toute la fue. He 4 acquainted with the
ole matter, be knowes it all from the one end.to the
: ‘others FU ES TRE rites at plate tr élan :
a. HS ment n'eft pas fufée: Prov, He bath


Se
F


FV S-


Fufelé: m.ée :£, Spunne vpona Dinde, or (Pool al. ra


Jo,made like a fpindie,or fpoole.
elier :m. A fpindle-maker,a maker of fpooles. +
Fufible: com. Fufible; meltablegwbich may be melted.
Fufier. as Fufain ; Spindle-tree,
Fufil:m. A fre-flecle for a tinder-box ; alfo, the fleele
wherewith a Butcher whets biskniues.
Pierre à fufil. A flint-flone. ”
er. as Fureter. To féarch,or ferret euerie corner of.
ag + :com. Duskie, browne davke, fwart, tareniesof
a Moores bew. si 3
Fuft: m. Any flaffe, flake, flocke, fiumpe,trunke, or log
(thats beadleffe,or,under{iood without it bead:)bence,
the flaffe of a fpeare; the fleale of a dart,orianelin; al-
fo,the fiame,or carriage of a peece of Ordnance; alfa,
the great beame of a wine-preffe; alfo,füflines. |
uft defelle. The tree of a faddle. '
Aulner fuft Afutt. To give bard,flrait, or feantmea-
Sitve,where ell is laid clofevnto ell.
Livrement de fult,& terre. A forme of Linerie and
Stifin vfed in fome parts of France.


etre le doigt entrele fult, &I efcorce. Buply to |
: meddle with, or take notice of, the differences which


are betweene priuate,or neere friends.
Fvfale: f. Caske ; velfells for wine.
uftaillier : m. 4 Cooper,or Caske-maker.
Fuftaine : f, Fuflian. :
Fuftaine frangée.Tufied fiflicn in fringelike rewes;
therein differing from Fuftaine houpée;which is tuf-
tedall ouer. -
aine à grain d'orge. Buflian.
uftaine houpée, oumoufchetée. Tufied fuflian; a
courfe füflian-like fluffe thats tufied all ouer.
uftainier: m.ere : £.0f fiflian, belonging unto fiftian,
Fuftaye. 4 wood,or forreft of bigh trees ; and hence;
Bois de haute fuftaye. Great trees, bigh trees ; pro-
perly fuch,as haue not been cut,nor lopt of(at the leafl)
30 yeares,or as [ome affirme of 100 yeares; fir no leffe
time fernes.to make of a Copfe, vn Bois dehaute,ou


e Yer |
Vne chofe de haute od ga Lie lofiie,

dr or HE ay 22 ie
Fufte :f. A füifis a light gallie that bath about 16,07 18


oares on a fide,e> two rowers to an oave; alfo,caske; a-
er eece.for wine;as a Pipe,Hogshcad rc.
Ft € de felle. The tree of a faddle.
Futé: :f Fuflie; tafling of the caske,fmelling


4 the vefel wherein it bath beene kept; alfo, flocked,
anchle[fe, without boughes, as atree ; alfo,vified,
ranfacked, unfurnifhed by violence of all it bad, or


Fuftée:¥. Bois de füflée. Brancble fe wood naked, or


: trees. :
Fufter. To flocke atree; to cut off, or bare itof, it bran- |


ches ; alfo,torauage,vanfacke,rifle, carrie away by vi-
-olence all thats in a place. wt
Fufterne :£. Thvpper part of a Firve tree; full of iaynts,


Fuller Am Artifices that works in wood antCarpen-
Ru En ints ‘eb, re af
ation: LS upping, cour gingbreecbin 5470;
pis achine haine cee
«


Fufligué :mée:f whipped, , ed, four ed, bree.
4) ced ly cudgelled , carried balled, bee


jacked.


Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


ey cee ue :- ee tie ~ p
jouer. To wbi Leurgeetsneccsao,ocadge
oe cad a 9 7 TUE

- | Fu. |


Futile;
. Futur


Examen futur; Loo:
runae amay, .


All the prifoners
pure pemnileftsor


to dag

quic # ne,
Buran inde
Fuyard:


with ;


ter,one that draweth
F vpfhot,or to the pinch,


running, palling away ;


benfion of danger.
Fuye: £. A Pigeon-bouf ;
si han m. A flyer,
cher,


uzé: m, ée:f, as Futé,
Crane,
Fuzil. as Fufl. x
.4s Foy; Faith; Pic.
‘y. (Interjeét,) Fy,
it.


of Priuies.


treffe without money.
Fy de ieuncfe,
Proy.
litie,


cloake in faire weather.


laifirs, d'eflats,.
A+


on Ki
haueno part. |


(7 Aban: m.
&j aGabardine.


bardines,


mn. Light,vainesomprofitable,faolfo,
nes f Future, fucceeding,


tock-doue.
m.4 coward,a flyer, a runne-a
ner of companie ; alfo,a halter, flincher,
uyard: m.de:f, Momentarie, faone one,
away for feare ; whence;
: Fuyard en lievre. Scudding away like a Hare (with .
dogs at ber beeles; yor gone upon the firft,orleaftappre-
Coward, runaeaway ; runners flin-

£a fudal

Puzain : m.Spindle tree, Prick-wood,Pricke-timber.
Fuzée: fas Fulée; alfa, the
Fuzelier: m. 4 Spindle-maker. rere


Fy d'avoir qui n'a ioye, & d'am
noye: Pro, Fy upon meanes without mitthand amif-


& de beauté defgarnie d'humilité :
Fy upon youth, and beautie denoid of bumi-


sty de manteau quand il fait beau: Pro. Fy upon a
y
_&d'art, qui en raïon n’
nowledge, and


G ;
A cloake of Felt, for rayne weather |
Gabaonite: m..Amakerof fuch Cloakes,er Ga-


after, to


3 Laoke Examen,
Fuy : m. YC:f. Fled, efcaped, gone, euaded, flipt afide,


|
Tous les prifonniers s’ en font fuys de fa bourfe. |
are got out of bis purfè ; viz, be js
F be hath ast apennie left him.
uyant. Flyine, eftaping, euading, |
US efchewing ; excufing, pd loathing, loth


t away; {hunning,


3 al(o,momentarie, of. {inall continuance ,


basi when a matter comes.to an


porñt of tryall.
Sitting,


alfo, cowardly flying, running


alfosa flight of Pigeons.


tow Posie
barvell,or the axletres ofa


y


x: 9 : 5 %,
ar ma fÿ, 2) my féche ‘à


away, fi away, f} fs out vpn


Gould-fnder, fjer


Oh Wye


fans mon-


& dor, qui de vertu n’ayle
swealth, and pleafire,


a par:
which in reafoa


Foie >


on Art,
i LHS Got
16:13} sp D


F à


PSE


mas
time


G
la
G


t
aux,


a


Gabie:


a
it:
or


ac
a


PS
Gal adrill
| Gadille.asGadrille, 9. Ha) =) |
: Gadiller. 70 padle; iog,ar flirre up and-downes > >>
Gadoi ve i


Priuies


Gadouë


La charrettede la gadou
| Scauinger's Carre.
SR EX


Gadriller. (4 wench) to raump,or play the rig,


ille


rouill
word,applyable to any
An Iron bi à


4? e
© files intotheir foips.


Le defel.
ipt € Long who took for it a
the pound; after who Philip de Valois double


Unto, a rate vpon euerie Muid ; 48 vncertaine as the
former (being fometimes
and fometimes 45 pound) and rifin
will and pleafure of the Prince.


à Dake.of Buillon
Wine tran(ported,or fold by Great. ;

Cae : m.ée:
as


eller. To pay cuflome für ; alfo,
an Impofi,on.


DELOUX: m, A feoffing knaue, gibing marchant;cog-
Gaben To moche, flout, ride;
cofen, fetch ouer.
aberies: f. Mockes, flouts; tales, fibs, foifis, gleekes,


ce


Gabeur: m. 4 mocker, flouter;
coufener ; feller j
eSeux : m. Kogues,varlets,rafcals, Scowndrels,


Gabian, as Gavian,


are faflened ; t
Gabinet: m. 4 Cabinet.
abion: m, À gabion; a defence ‘for Canoniers,
great baskets filled with earth.
ionnade: £ 4 ranke,or defence of, gabions,
ionné: m. ée:f
with gabions.
Gabionner.To defend,or fortifie with gabions; to make
G: defence of gabions.


Gurnard ; alfo,as Gavot..
Gaboux: m. oufe: £
Pose sp


Sel se


The Impoft of fa ; fr begun by Phi.
Double (ij d Tour: upon
that;
harles the feuenth raifèd it wnto vjd, which

doubled by Lewis the eleventh 3 fince whofe
it hath been altered, from fo much upon the pound,


30 pound.fometimes 44 poied,
16, or falling, at the


Impoft taken by the
upon euerie Tunne, and Hogshead of


de Tonnieu. 4 certaine


f. Cuftomed for; on which an Impoft


to.impofe a chfiome,
ier: m. A leuier,or gatherer of1mpof.


cog with ; to gull, cheat,


3 gulleries.
as Gaberies,
+ m, A white leaper ; fo called about Bourde-


A
cogger, foifter; cheater,
of bargaines.


Se


£. The upper part ofa Mafl whereto the foronds
ft.


head of the Ma


made of


Gabioned ; fenced, or fortified


+m. The Ribbes,or Knees of a Ship.
m. A white leaper ; as Caquot; alfoared ff},


Full of flouts,mocks,ieafis derif-


eedior firftoms © |
afbing of water; alfo, the
of an Oare, or noife which it makes in row-
Red Goofeberries, beyond-fèa Gooftberries,
Currans,common Ribés. 4 ie

: m. A Gould-finder, lakes-farmer, fryer of |
3 alfa Scauinger. 4 EMOT
of Dart, filth; dung,ordure, Sut

©. À commion Dung-cartsor
as Gades. Red Goo/t Mrs ce te 2
: £ The little bird called a Robin-ved-breaf. >
ette: i A minx,gi -flirt,callet,Gixies (a i
beattell.) 9 }
nel)


G A


Gagate: £. The blacke flone called,let.
Gage: m. A gage, pawne, pledge; alfo,a wager ; and,a


keat play; alfo,a guerdon, reward,or falarie ; alfo,
a diftreffe,or Goa le taken for a diftreffe.
Gages. Plural. wages,bire, flipend,intertaincment ;
alfo,goods taken by a Sergeant upon an Execution.
Gage de bataille, ou de combat. 4 gage, or pledge
(and mofi commonly,a gloue,or gantelet)tbrowne down
by one that offers,or undertakes,to fight with another.
Amende de gage. Looke Amende.
Clameur de gage pleige, C’eft vne Action propri-
ctaire, & poflefloire enfemble ; quand aucun fe
doute qu’ autre face entreprife fur faifine poflef


foire,ou droiéture à luy appartenant.


Gage m.ce:f, Gaged,pledged,pavned ; alfo, taken to
P


dge,or inpawne ; alfo,betted, or layed, as a wager;
alfo,waged, as battell; alfo, difirained, or taken, as a


diftreffe.


Gagement: m. A gaging, pawning, impledging ; alfo,


a betting, or laying ; alfo,a waging of battell ; alfo,a
diftraining,or taking as a difiref[e ; alfo,the obligation,
affurance,or pavene of an obliged debtors goods.


Gage-mort: m. #5 Mortgage ; al/o, ce purs + fee


giuen for the deliuerie of beafts found Damage-fe-
fant.


Gager: m, as Gaiger. A
Gager. To gage, or ingage, to pledge, or lay 10 pawwne ;


alfé,to take in pawne ; alfo,to bet,or lay a wager ; alfo,
to wage battell; alfo, to difraine, take a diftreffe, or
take as a diftreffe.

ager l'amende, To diftharge, or pay the amerce-


ment.


Gager perfonnes en fon domaine. To arreft their |


aig or feixe upon, as a pawne, fomewhat about
them


Gager le rachapt. To pay,or offer to pay it downe.


Gagerie: f. A diftraining ; a difireffe ; or,as Gage-


ment.

a de one as in Gager.

Simple gagerie. A diflraining without c away
Spee


Gages A kind of artificiall fone (made of Bitumen) the
mo.
G


re ages drines away Serpents; (Looke under
age.
£,


Gageure: £. A wager ; alfo, a reall and aGiwall of.


fer. Ê
agier: m. An bireling,or ftipendarie; one that bath,or.
taketh,wages, ;


Gagnole: £ A little long, finall.eyed,and leffe-mouthe


in ftead of {cales, with a bard, and crufti
shi Some LH ÉD ent cmt


G AI


Gaignable: com. Gettable,winnable, gaineable tobe


of; anaileable,commodious, profitable.

erres gaignables. Rich, or fraitfill ground; ara-
ble = that yeeld much, or are of great, in-
creafe. ‘


Gaignage: m. The crop, or fruits of tilled, or planted


grounds; the gaine, reuenue, profit, or increase there-
of; alfo, a Ground, Coaft, or Countrey, wherein there
growes plentie of corne, and bearbes; a fuir Plot,
or Place; alfo,a Farme (fo tearmed by the inhabitants
of Champaigne;) al/o,a kind of graine.

ignages. (Hunters tearme fo) all kind of corne-
grounds,and gardens wherein there grow no trees.)
Bon gaignage fait bon potage: Prov. Fraitfull
crops yeeld fattening fops ; or, good bearbes good pot-
tage yeeld,


Gaiynaux. Prez gaignaux. Fertile medowes, which


yeeld a double crop,or may be twice mowed,


Gaigne: f. Gaine, profit, increafé, sommings in; or,as


Gaignage in the firft fence.

aigne couflumierc. The part, or portion of goods
whereunto,by cuflome,the furuinor of a married couple
fücceeds.

igné : m.éc : f. Gained,wwoon, procured,gotten.

letele Sine pa FT graunt it, 1yeeld it thee; 1
confe[fe thy action ; I gine thee the bucklers.
re © gaigné la mort. He hath well deferued
todyé, > ©
Sans l'avoir gaigné. without caufe, without defert.


Gaigneau. Pré eau. as Gaignau, €Poidteyin.
G signe denies 4 Pe


a orter ; o7,a day-Labourer; who,
in old time, tooke for bis dayes worke but a Denicr;
(but then it was of filuer,and worthvjd flerl) »
gne-iournée. À Labourer by the day.
gne-pain.æ Gaigne-denier ; (and bence,Vn bon
gaigne-pain. À painefull Labourer ; a thriftie,and
Prouident workeman;) alfo, the trade, art, exercife,oc-
cupation, or meanes, whereby one gets bis lining ; and
thence will the French fouldior tearme, oft times bis
Sword,and fometimes bis Harguebufe, Son Gaigne-
am.


Ghipnee: To gaine,get,win; procure, purchafe,obtaine;


20 profit, or thrine by; to atchieue, attaine; reach, or
come vnto ; alfo,te onercome,conquer win ; alfo,to me-
rit,or deferne, ‘
aigner fon avoine. Locke Avoine,
les champs. To runne away.
igner chemin.70 make haftrid way apace.
Gaigner le devant par derriere. To outfirip, ouer-
run, or get before, one by a contrarie comr{e ; or, to pres»
uent the defignes of another by policies contrarie to bis,
Gaigner les gigoteaux ; To betake him to bis beeles;


Gagril :£, The Robin-red-breaft.


. A generation of poore,irreligions, and verie la- to fly as faft as bis legs will carry him.


borious leapers,in Gaftoigne. Gaigner lehault. To runne bis countrey ; to fly asif
/ Gai. as Gay; Merrie,iocond, fire aes at bistayle. : ; à à


Gaian: m. A ffh (and by Gefners lotion the ninth Gaigner le hault bout, To win the fus carry a-
“kid of the fifh Turdus) not much vnlike a Pearchand~| waythe beft prize; alfo , to take the bigheft place at a
colour in fome parts yellow, in others,greene; onely table. , ae
ithath a white line running along from the gylls to the | Gaigner pais. Tofeale on,torid way, *
3 Some alfo call fo,the fifhAuriol, : Gaigner peine &c. pour gaigner peine & papier


- The vnfauorie,orill-taling efter tearmed lo. of abr, PAT ire
US, : ele, z
G e. A kind of Iurifdidtion, or Court, in Nor- Gaigner au pied. To run away,
à the parties mut bind. themfélues Gaigner le To difpatch; to vid away tin
porn free, comin, ar mate fod me ee


athe san leur vie à reculons. To line by going bac
Cag sm. À Church-sarden,or ouer[ter ofa particu ool rm Cab. i *


Churches bufineffes, Gaigner le tour du roule, Sec Roule. EX.


7 "GAD GAL |


oo Alex: pie malheur perd : Prov. yHe gets | Gaineaux. Prez gaineduit à Gai uz
| pnough ee a 4 Gainette: f, eee bot feabberd, tn
“Jamais ne 2 plaide à fon feigneur; (ou aing : m.# Gain.


ï
i procede à (6 To :)Pto.No man ener throue

fuing bis Lord or Maifter; (for either God ble[fes not
forndatifidla firife, or Puce fe Plures not in  forume-
quall a match.)
Marchand qui ne gaigne perd: Pro: The marche
loofés when be gaines notyandyet;
ul ee marchand qui roufiours gaigne: bet.
He trades not cuaningly that alwaies gayheth.
Qui bien gaigne,& bien defpéd ne uy faut bourfe
à mettre argent: Pro. Looke Defp
Qui bien gaigne,& bien efpargne emi tantoft
riche: Prov, He that gets well and {pares wifey,
sr a rich,
Tel change qui ne gaigne pas: Prov. Some change
- for the wore,
Gaignerlect f A tilled ground; alfo, tillage ov tilling ;

_ also, the profit thats made oftilagesor of the Cony bb
be vfed therein,
Gaigneur: m, A gainer, getter, winner, obtainer ; one
that tines by,or makes à profit of; bus irate,
À indufirie.
À +: Mon gaianeur. . My Hind, Husbandwnan, Plougbrhan

owe that laboursjand by bis Labour gers, for mepeap that !
| “labours to make me line,or gaine."


Gaings. The ar growing on, or comming of; tilled
che “pl the profit rares | in by fowing ii
Giese Gaings;and comprehends all kinds of graine,
pulfé, and fuch like fraits (tenants encore par les
racines. €Nicot.)
Gaiofle d'ün moulin , for Gayole; See Gayolc.
aiole. as Gayole; f. LA Cage. @Pic.
Gaioler.To pratie, tatle,chatter like a bird in a Gi age.
Gaion. A Fay,


ee \A wager. y

jure de rachapt; See Gagerie,

Gaiz (for Guez.) Foords or fhallow places.

Gal: m. A Cocke; alfo, a Derce, or Gold- -fifh. Lan-


| Gals efcouillez, Capons ; Enniüches. Rab.
| Galaétite: Pierre paladite. Sce Pierre. :
Galaffre: im. A rauenous feeder, greedie deuourer,glut-


on,gulchcormorant. ‘
Galati: f. Gourmandixing ; rauenous, or Arai
ee Ing,
| Galange: as Galangue.
Galangue:f. sweet ciperus, Engli if Galingale; or the
Aromaticall root thereof.
Galaxie: f. The Milkie way in the Firmament.
Hardi gaigneur hardi mangeur: Pro: A fore doper, non. Galbanum ; 'gumme, or liquor ig out
a found trencherman: 3 they that worke hard eat bard. of the Syrian Ferula,or Fennell giant.
Née vaut bon gardeur CS eign ina | Galbe. Awenne ; alfo,garbe,comelineffe,gracefillne(fe ;
auSee Gardiur, + “2 the bellie or forepartyofa doublet.
Gaillard: m. The round poupe. or binder afte ofa | Galbé: m. ée : f. Bien galbé. Comelie,gracefull well.
hip. Hire | Ss bebaued,bauing a good ‘gerbe,
Gaillard: tre: Ge Laie jBüebes falickes Diine, des . See Garbouil,or Grabuge.


checrefüll, blithe, ioco plafent, nefomes Gall-natjor Oake-a le; ferning both Graine,
gallant ; valiant well dippofed, in tune 5 | and making of inke. ee €
rafb,or fomewbat cndifereetbytoom iollitie.’*~" | Galeace:f. 4 Galeaft, 15

: ef ana fa: ef: jONRt Gale-bonstemps: 4 mere gris, « good flo, good :
I ale cerveau vn peu gaillard. He is alittle drunkard, pot-companion


Galée:f The top,or feuatle,of a galley.
Gale-feflon. 4 ALES -bum,or fcabd-arfe,


y


vous, toyifh, fantafticall newfangled, light-beade )
Ouvrier gaillard cele fon art: Prov. The indi indi


>xwworkman proflitutes not bis Art, ik igged,or trimmed pas à fhi
dé ir . Liuely, laftiby sebecrefiully, pe Ra ne 0 trimme , to ae 4
- gallantly,ike a gallant,
Gaillardet sm See Guaillardet: Gale m. Agir end of ips al


[Jes ioco glee; gallantrie, braniriés


Gaillardeté: f. = if
lie, indifcret: walt an sf
ie, indifcretion; or an aélra

ra


Caéhoëetim ‘An idle Vidi sa pore ame

ame

Galerriar: m: 4 Penman, VE Qu 100 hell.
penn Clit il di


4 | Galeote. grrr rs |


Grille Perdrix Bale. The French.


of great browne Partrid rt + mi Tbe Foi Yedrintd Bit. rete,
; vol Legs 908 Sen 298 Lo : er ee SRE fig
Gairnaux Prex gaimaux. «Crau ie anale à onais
nois, ' Galerien: hen Fi ie er
Gaia: m. Gaine, profit; acre; dluantace, ina Galley. HIGHS)
bites sin. Ré Re | Ch us = A Re 5 ‘2
ain de pois ss
see So TS ee an ae Fa
michle ; or light: A ; À erne: a zal
Gatrieshurpoest crade rs PE oflA ae Sire à th-wefler tovaltes )
Dans vne gaine d'or ftéau de Prov. | Nr 3 ap, Seri.
_ À leaden Mix «Sa e 54 godl j CS |
à MU, ES Ne nu Art cme non, Sete a ee


— £ 4 broad thin cake ; ; af, a His


Ne he É£ ras)


GAL


Galier: sd A adage dull borfe.
pier ae Pape greedie ine rauenous eater,
é:m, €e:£. Greedily fed on,rauenoufly eaten.
Galiffrer. To deuoure,eat greedily feed 26.48
Galimachué. as Maflué; a club, qPic.
Galimaffué : € club.
Galimatias. largon de Gal. Gibbrifh, Fuftian lan-
Pere er French.
Cas the Aromaticall root of the rufh called Cy-
€,


and Englifh Galingale.
alon. À merrie fcabd


Galin-Galois, ou Gali
wborefon.

Galion: m. A Gallion, or great foip of warre; See
Gallion.

Galiot: m. A Pirate, a Rouer ; one that robs, or fcoures
the feas with a Galliot ; alfo, a Rower in a Galley, or
Galliot whether be be a : flawe,er doe it volantarily; al-

fo, the bearbe Auens,Benncet,or Bleffed.
Ghlote: £4 Galle, afmall Galley,or Galley-like vef-
fell hauing twentie Oares on a fide, and two or three
Rowers to an Oare ; much ufed by Turkifh, and Moo-


Gabngue f. as Galangue; alfe,the ta-Toad,
thomme. A gallant ,goodlie; noble,wontbie;ver-
tuous ; alfa, a fubtill, wife, wath cunning, nye,


Gallantetie: £ Gallantnefe , worthinelfe, brauerie,
foul frankeneffe 0 bumour 5 alfo, « knaufh


Glen: f. ne pape salfo,a
gallant,and merrie pranke; 4 p noble,or o-
pen-bearted bumor.


Gill, Noix alle. The fruit called à Gall; alfo, an
Oake-apple.
alle:f. galling, fretting, itching of the at
fcab,o feurfe.
Galle S. Main. The wild fcab.
L'Amour, la roufle, & la galle nefe peuventce-
Saag Loue, tabs, and coughing Pi not bee


Guillem m. si f. paging ru feratched;
alfo,intertained with varietie of or glee.

Gallée. as Gallere ; a Galley.

Gallemar. A Pennar.

Galle 70 gall fet, its ale, to rub, erape, fora
claw, feratch where it itcheth; alfo,to be verie 10c
ur a to intertaine with varieti of port
game,or
Galler te Samal To make merrie, to -

time ple cmt ay sina anti
CR m. na ane
ce AGalley; alfo,an
la gallere. Let the wor' wag, fide, goe bow
ion a EURE
we finke or


0


cie Et a tm |


1: Len Sn


er cee sll et ars


fret
Gallerie: f. 4 Ga + rép alts gal
Galle £1 pes Cale
Tara


GAL


Gallico. Prendre au gal:ou :To prises take take
napping, car (4 yy ilar phrafe,that
feemes to base beene deuifed either in commendation
of the linelineffe,and quic: meet the French, wbere- |
by they are able to furprixe others ; oras a taxation of
their negligence, and carelefneffe , which make them
ne, to be furprized by others.)

: £. Garbe,or gracefülne[fe.
Gallien: m. A Galley-flaue.
ome me eurnie fellove, foifting compaztion ; or as
er.

Gallimart : m. 4 Peanar, a cafe for pennes.

Galline : £, 4 Gurnard fo called about Marfeillis.

Gallion: m. A Gallion, an Armada, a great foip of
warre; alfo,the bearbe Cheefè-runnell.

Galliot: m. The bearbe Aucns, bearbe Bewnet, bearbe


Bleffed.

Gallehes m.Scbollers in Viuerfities,admitted of no

Colledge, but lying in the Towne, and being at libertie

to refort unto what (publike) Readers, or Lellures they

pleafe ; tearmed thus, becauft,in paffing tbe fireets,they
commonly weare Galloches.

Galloches: f- High wooden Pattens,or Clogs, ére ; as


inGaloche.
Gallochier: ne er Font paf en ; one that go-
of the flefbjor shinne ;


eth to and fro on errand.
af im. eal patos
yas Galo’
ks cheveux. Hard curled locks.
m. é¢: f, Stroaked, cherifbed ; gently rub-
bdr cowed salfe,edged, laced, or tyed with galloone


Gallonner.To froake,cherifh,claw,or clap on the back;
to fmooth ; to rub gently; alfo, to edge, or lace with
galloene.


hr A
Galloper. SeeG Se M
Gallopins: m. Cookes,or Scullions in Monafle-

ries.
Galoche:m. as Gallochier.
Galoche: + A woodden Shooe,or Patten,made ail of a
ece, without any latchet, or ty of leather, and worne
sys ees Seyi rad >
cher.To bebane rudely onciuilly, wfical
pee apenas alfo, to fa sounder onal


up and downe.
4 :m. 4 maker of Galoches, dis


Cdier: rm. ere: f, Ba/é,meane,poore;al/o,clownifh,
rudesunciuillruflicall,without manners as thofe are
that, ordinarily, weare thofe woodden fhooes. 0) 4.

Galoife: f.4 féuruie trullfeabbie queane angie Pus
filthie whore.

Galon: m, Galloone lace.


Galonné: m.ée: £. 4s Gallonné ; and hence;
” Trefies galonnées. Lockes plaited, or ed p wit
sane ce.

. as Gallonner ; and, to plait, binder 9 "op


| ee pain fy spaces
ea Lis
om Ge sooty curried, ‘od


+" gue @ rudely,
* take


ad + iat iii


ar *


(


G'AR


Amour de garce & faut de chien nedure fi l’on ne
dit,tien: Pro, Looke Amour.

Garchote:f A water fowle, fomewbat leffe then, but
otherwife refembling,a Mallard,

on. A boy,lad; youth, firipling; See Garfon.
Folie aux garcons. Leacherie, whoredeme,mconti-
nencie, la[cinioufnelfe.
C’eft vn mauyais garçon. He is a fhrewd (or tall)
fellow ; one that will throughly both lay, and looke, a-
bout him.

Garçonné :m. ée:f, Leachered withall ; fayued,
vidden by boyes.

Garçonner. To play the boy ; alfo, to leacher ; to de-
flea woman, deflowre a maid; play the lafciuious boy
with,

Garconniere: f. A leacherous,or laftiuious queane.

Gardant. Garding, warding keeping, preferuing, refer-
uing for bimfelfe,or others.

Garde: m. A Guardian Warden,Keeper; any Officer
unto whofe keeping a thing is entrufled ; bence ;
Garde de bois. The Warden of, or a Keeper in, a
Weod, or Forreft.

Garde des Coffres. The (keeper of the) Prinie Purfe;
or,as Threforier des menus.
Garde general de l'Artillerie.The warden general,
er chiefé Warden,of the Artilerie; keepes a reckoning
of all the peeces of Ordnance that be within the realme;
to which end he takes particular Inuentories from all
Commaunders of Fortreffes, rc, os the num-
ber, fizeyand qualitie thereof, and informes bimfelfe by
them of all their flore,and wants : He alfovifites the
places themfèlues, to fee whetber the Peeces bee well
 hept,and (afely beflowed : Afterall which, be deliners
oucr the [aid Inuentories unto the Controller generall,
who hauing regiftred, redeliners, them . ‘Thu Officer
hath a Deputie refident in enerie one of the tenne gene-
rall Gouernments of France.
Garde de Iuftice. 4 royall Prouoff, or ludge, that
keepes either the Kings (inferior) Courts, or the Courts
of a 7a luficer ; ands inferior, in all refpeëls, unto
aBailli.
Garde des Livres de la Chambre des Comptes.
The keeper of all the Records of that Court.
eos d'un Malade. .4 Keeper ; one that lookes to a
fiche bodie.
Gardedes Monnoyes. The Warden of the Mint; an
Officer,who is to be gee at all finings allayings, and
prouings of Mettall ; and ouerfees both the delinerie
thereof to the workemen,and them in their working;to
which end he weighes, and viewes euerie peece, and
forces them, at their owne charge, 10 new-make the |.
light,and mifhapen ones,or cenfieres them otherwife as
be thinkes good : The Money being full made, be deli-
ners it unto.the Maifters ; to who,though in place be be |
inferior, yet may be at any time call them to an accoïit,
for as much as they haue receined from bim. -
rardes des Portes. Wardens of the out-Ports ; Offi-
cers, that looke there be no probibited commodities


= -tran|ported, or imported; They alfo receine of Mar-


chants the Bills that containe all the parcels they bane ling, to brag thereof. :
and the acquittances of duties payed, withi Se donner de garde. as Prendre Garde.
nd; and onely they,and the Searchers, may arveft the Eftre de garde. To keepe, ov continue long untainted; |
et fon aa de Le clins a ce F rg ee auf by vetlers,
5 oF 10 c aire la carde. Tom 5 fe reelers,
fi et fhe Reale bola Peed eke, ‘gp veins efaeey ae
Garde deu Lis Gun | at Len re MR
e 5 ¢, take heed; py fight, preni
_deluflice, WANS OTTER al 227 K # that a thing doe not bappen. ane ts
2 : a a
weed KO WO1e
; 3 _ Las 7


_ wbich Seale there is no fee taken of the Secretaries nor


. DH.
La garde d'un’efpée. The bilt of a ford.


=


G AR

Garde des Salines. The Warden of the (Kings) Salt-
pits ; pe vos that deliuers out the falt-vnio Mar~
chants, together with the Clarke thereof, kcepes a
Regifter of the quantitie deliuered, of their names to
whom it is deliuered,and of the places whereunto it is
carried. t
Garde des feaux. The keeper of the Seale ; one in
enerie Chancerie eflablifhed in the feuen(inferior) Par-
liamentall,and in the Prefidiall townes whither when
any of the Maiflers of Requefis arc come in circuit, be
is bound to bring, and deliner vp vnto them the Seale,
whereof at all other times be hath the abfolute charge,
and keeping.

Garde du feel Royal. The Commi fiencr, who in the
Sickneffe,abfince, or fufpenfion of the Lerd Chancelour
us appointed to feale,and palfe Letters Patenis,eoc; cr
be,that bath the keeping of the ordinarie(royall) feale
of contraëts,or of indiciall difpatches : For the vfe of


‘of the Lord high Chamberlaine of France (who keepes
the Kings Priuie Signet while be attends) nor of {ome
other Officers of the Crowne.

arde : f. Gard, ward, cuftodie ; fafe, or long keeping ;
the reftruing, or preferuing of a thing for priuate vfe;
alfo,the Guard of a Prince; (and hence) the charge of,
or looking unto, a thing ; and, beed, care, obfizuatien,
is nage hegre Encemaintenance.pro-
teétion, Safieselfsthe Waréfbip of an infant,or berrcs
(wherein Garde is moft commonly meant of dircét,
Bail of collaterall, kinfinen ; or of an againe-marricd
mother or grandmotber.)

= gardesd’un canon. The branches of a Canon-


Les gardes d'un fanglier. The deaw-clawes, or bin-
der-clawes of a wild Bore.
Garde faite. 7s, when beafls that ave kept in other
mens grouids make {poyle, or doe burt by the craft, or
fault of their keepers.
Garde gardienne. A Priniledge of the Schollers and
Officers of Vniuerfities and of the Priefis,Prelats,and
Poffeffors of fome Churches, Abbeyes, Colledges, Hof-
pitals, exc ; and of the Officers of the Crowne, and
Kings boufè,not to bé impleaded before other then their
peculiar ludges.
Garde liges. Seeke Lige.
ier de garde. A certaine fumme,or fmallpieceof
money, payable, by old Leafes, in flead of Kent, FA 2
€


yeares wherein the ground lay fallow.and could not
ed. 7)


eared.

Droié de garde noble. See Droi&.

Poire ge AWarden,or a winter Peare.
Prevoft de garde; ou,en garde. Am under Indge to
a Bailli; or, the Deputie of a Prouoft, or under-Pre~


uofi.
Il n’a garde de s’y laiffer aller. He bath no mind,lift
DR fhe? icy thither,’
Il n'a garde de s'en vanter.] beleeue be will not brag


~ thereof in baft ;or,be is not verie baflie, firward, wil-


Garent abfolue. One that vudertakes a fuit for ano.
ther, wholly ridding,and difth bim of it ; (This


warrantie is proper umtoreall )
Garent contributeur. One that s but part
of a fait for another ; whom be leaues to follow the reft


at bis owne charge.

Garent formel. 4s Garent abfolur.

Garent fimple.One that isvouched to 4 ioyne
with the vouchor in the proues and defences necd full in
a perfonall aftion.

Qui tire à garent & garent n'ha, fa'caufe perdué
il a. (Cela eitvit de la vieille pratique; n’a plus de
licu; The rigour thereof being qualified.)

Garentage: m. Warrantie warrantrxé,warrantage.

Garenti: m. ie: £, Warranted, fecured;vndertaken for,
borne out, faued barmeleffe.

Garentie: £ warrantie, fecuritie ; pretetnséliicd

Garentigionné. Inftrument ga. Amanthenticall In-
firument, made by a Notarie publicke, and figmfying,
that execution is readie to come out again a-confe{-
fing, and almoft condemned,aebtor ; By thé ide of
Bayonne 14 alfà a kind of inrolled Bond,webeveby both
a mans budie is fubicét unta arreft, and: ne un to
execution.

Gatentir. To warrantymake sonde filer
palfe with warranties to eee: efend,
protect,beare out, \

Garentiflement : m. 4 warronting, tee fir,

piv es LA good; 4 fecuring, faning barmeleffe protecting,
NES AT ae
Gani: : me Awarranter cs Gaseni:
2m, One that isvwarranted,. 1:
| Cares Toware,beware take heed of ; to Joue a
woid by flipping afide; See Gare...)

Garet. See Gueret. 20 Sonat

PE el f. The throat, sti ew
arganton ;m. 4 great glutton, or one at
wats bis fublance on nb nol

Gargantua. Great throat, Vs

Gargarcon: m, The forepart ofthe Paes nPall.-

Gargarization. as Capa star ead

Gargarizé. Gargled,gargarigeds. + 10h, 0

Gargarizement: m.. dt gurgling, or wermrnigs «
gargarifine, € 4 TES sy anne -

Gargarizer. To gargle,togargalixes +: so

Gargaffane: PEL eh ot \ Lap, Sais Renal ot

te: f oem ns ar Pic.


Gargatte: £The Vuula; a little,
refembling a Cocks. Po rant a a 9


voofe of the wes neere t age ve nofetbrils.
Gargouille: f, weafonof the throaty al-
fo, the mouth of. a Spowt, representing a Serpent,or the
Anticke face of fome wher mere ut
ad iy ser veids the on sde by
roofes, or és alfe, a bubble, o le, made
wind on the water ; af, the ioynt of a fiat bindges or,


ney. as isin Gees crap aad or
| Garg Gargled, gerard saree inthe
argatillement: mene


a eat. AT RTS
Garment an eine: dora


the throat, ait
Gargouillis: j


in aoe


= Val CPS Na
°


Sd - à be amet


GARB


Garguette. at Gargatte.

Garguille: m, (4 ein for) an odd smear fai
compamon ; fuch a one as we (fomewbat ¢ contemptuous:
ly,or 10 bus deragation) flile,a certaine fellow.

uillon: m, The Pipe,or throat-pipe,wbereby meat
eth ste the flomacke,or craw of birds.

Garieur : m. 4 warraator. qGafc.
arignon: m,..4 huckle-bone; whence,louér aux ga-

«To play at Cockall.

G es, as Guarigues,

Gariment : m. Garrantie wv warrantie, (Gate,
J enir en gariment. To bold part of a fief otherwife
then by fucceffion and upon conenant,to pay,or yeeld for
it fome dutie which is noble,and no way rotuxier.

Garine: f. The fbrub Ciflus,or Hollie-rofe.

as Galingal. 3

Garinnon, See Garignon.
ariofilé. Aromatique gar. 4 certaiñe compelition |
(wherein there are es: good fr the ps of the


heart,
Garioller. To oe een birds.
Garloph yllce Bake Auens,Bennet,or Bleffeds :
Gariot: m; The of a ber{e,or other beaft, . .
Garipot: m. The wild Pine,or Pitch tree,


Garite: f. A place:of refige, and of faferetyrall in «

- rowt, difafter, er-dang ot récourfe of fuch as are

pene. (bence) aif the dungeon of a fortreffe,

. whither the wered foldiors make their laft retire,

and flight; alfo, a by-way, 07 path that as one afide,

and out of the roi an, a agent eue lodge

fra Pate Se built on bi hy à ji

\ Prendre la garite. To fly, flip o't to- fp, rah en.
Garlande.’ ‘er Chirland de; peor 3 and hence;

arlande d'argent; is due infome parts of Auvergne


vaio a widow by the beire of ber deceafed busbandjand |


ought to be of the value of their nuptiall bed,
arnache: f 4 fracke for a Carter. |
let: m. Alatle Plaice.
armement: m.Prouifion,firniture,or munition layed
ad maintenance, er defence of a Place; alfo, a
Ul, at ie He rafcall, maughtie-packe, lewd Un-
: tb raceleffe patch,umeracions wretch one for who
the gallowes groane; (In which fence it is vfid either
(Ironically)alone,or with the Adieélive Mauvais;as;)
.o En mauvais garnement. Lordly naugbtily wicked-
ii nt pl 3 Sr A M 0€
denied filo à of; decked d,adorned,b
e ; deched,trimmed,adorned,beaxti-
i fet out with; perfected sbr oughly wrou tht.


i. Anarmed fra band that Volds à sa fone, 1


or pial ag to flrike withall.
Garniment. as us, : ‘
arnir. To garnifh; prouide, flore, fupply, furmifh, ac-
«‘commodate fil: vie re ym beautifie,
Set forth with.
Garnir vne accufation. To aceufe Py se bring
ink much euidenceymany witnelfes gre
Garnir à caution. To proui ring in fiveties,or
a (ufficient pavene for the fPmitis of a debr,&c.
ir la main. To take a thing to pawn,or morgage;
oe feixesor diflraine upon an execution, for debt; or
(more properly)an arvefled debtor to pay down what be
owes.or 10 gine faleable goods, to the wale of the debt,.
for the feturitie thereof.
Garnis. A kind of engine tacatch fifpwith,


* Garnifon: £.Store of fiamiture; prouifion munition,


paration ; alfo,the carrifonof of emer
‘towne,


ar


d ; prouided, flored, fupply- |


*


ea


"Eh


_ Garnifon de main. A taking 10 pawne, or in mort-
gage; alfo,a (eifing,or diftraining upon an execution,or
. otherwife, for an for.arverages of rent ccs or(more
property) prefént payment of a debt ; or faleable goods
delivered by the arrefied debtor, for the fecuritie
thereof et a) ’
Le magiftrat envoya le demandeur en garnifon
en la maifon du detchdeur. Put bim in pojfefion, ot
Sent bim to take polfelfionof the defendants boufe.
arniflement : m. À garnifbment,or garnifbingsa fir-
nifhing, floring, Supplying ; a decking, trimming, ador-
_ ning, fetting forthwith ; alfo,a taking to pavone, or in
mortgage; alfo, the giuing of affurancesor fecuritie for
a debt,&rc. .
Garniture: f. Garniture,garnifomi nt furnitures proni-
Jion,munition, flore neceffarie implements;alfo,a ruffe-
band; alfo,any kind of ornamentor attire, =
Garniture de doigts. .4 gloue ; ring; finger-flal;
thimble,and [ucb like.
Garniture d'efperon. 4 fhurre-leather.
Garniture d'un pourpoint, The facing; (alfo) tbe
quilt of a doublet.
aron: m. Pickle of fifh; or ,the liquor wherein fale fifh
bath beene refdlued, or long foaked; ao, the little An-
choua-like fifh,Garum, whereof (being beated inadifh,
with oyle or butter,aud thereby melted) the belt kind
of that liquor is made. :
‘ot. as Garrot,
rou. Wild, fauage, bideous,cruell.
Garoüage. Aller en garoüage. (A married man) to
($00 a caterwarling, or fleale abroad by night a wench-
“in


Garoupe: fThe fhrub called,Spurge Oliut and widow

wayle. Provencal. “wht

Garous. (A Syncope of the words,Gardez-vous,or Ga
rez-vous ; take heed, turne afide, looke toyour felses;)

See Loup-garou. 1%

Garoute: f. À Carrot root. |

Garrau. as Garrot. : :

~ Garrer vn bateau. ‘To bale,or Fg a boat afboare,orun»

der a fhed ; (there to trimme her;) alfo,to moore, or tye

her vatoa key,or under a lee fhore.

Se garrerdeflous. To skowke ; fhadow, fhrowd, or

put bimfelfe,vnder ; whence; )


le: Prov.
Garrigues, as Guarrigues. ;
Catiobe. The Carob-beane-cod; See Carrobe.
Garrobier: m. The Plént that beares Carobs. <>
Garrot: m, A boult for a Croffebow ; alfo, the wythers
of a borfe sec ; alfo,a wring or pinch in the wythersyal-
So,the Cudgell wherewith a Carrier,érc,winds up,and
firaines hard,the cord be binds bis packe withall. : \
Garroté: m.ée: f.Strained,or wound vp yas a pack-cord
with a cudgell ; al/o,hard tyed,or bound with cords.
Garrotement:m.Thé firainingor winding up of a cofd
with a cudgellalfoya binding,or tying bard with cords,
Garroter.To firaineswring or wind vp a pack-cord with
ns cudgell,ccsalfo, to bind faft in, tye bard with, cords;
c.


Garrulité: F, Garrulitiesprati atling;tatlitigseba.
€ à, , Kila el ala kes

Gars: m.4 lad,boy, frripling, youth, D

+ Allerà To bunt after lads;(amench) in aa


Pr )


tn ent
| Garicher. To chap, as the hands, or lips dog in a fbarpe
; wind. (vim.) Lun: yao » t te


ee SUGOY


SO gle


4%, ee ee ee a en eS. ae RE pl ie "tae SNS STONE


: Qui fe garre deffous la fucille deux fois fe mouil.


G’'A:S


Garle: f. A wench,laffe,gitle and (as we commonly
the fil) 4 punke,or mi 3 See Garce. a
tte: f. A yong laffe,little wench; pretie whore,
Garfon:m. 4 lad boy, youth,piripling ; See Garçon.
pn le garfon. To play he for; vf api{h,or childifh,
tricks. '
Garfoncfillette.4n Hermapbrodite.
arlonnaille: £ A crue of lads,a troupe of boyes.
arfonner: To play the boy,or fe boyifh tricks.
Garfonnerla femme d’ autruy. To lye with another
mans wifee (1 .
Garfonnet: m, 4 little boy.
Garlote: f. The water-fowle called a Teale. ,
o a: femme d'autruy. #5 Garfonner.k—
ef. Atorturing wheele upon which the accufèd
bauiag beanie bolts, or yrons on bis legs , is boyfed on
bigb,vntill be confeffe.
Garvences: f.Fitches ; Chichlings.
Garum: m. Pickle of alt ffhsor liquor wherein it bath
beene refolued,or tong foaked ; See Garon.
Garzignole:£ The name of a delicate Peare thats ripe


in PA
Gafche:f. 4 Oare, or Scull to row with; alfà, a flaple
for a locke; (alfosa cake. € Norm,)
Gafchement: m,4 rowing ; alfo,a flafbing, dafhing,or
plafhing,as of water in rowing ; allo, a waking of mor
ter;or,a mingling and beating of lime,or clay with wa.
ter,as in the making of morter.
chet. To row,or pull at an Oare ; alfo,to dafh, plafb,
flafl(as water invowing;) alfo,to make plaifter,or mor-
ter; to beat lyme, clay, or fand and water together (as
- in the making of morter.
-Gafcher du gros, To fhite ; alto {pues to purge vp-
wards, or downewards,
Gafcher du poiffon(falé.) To water it,to caft water
on it; or lay it in water.
Gafchettes pour tenir Jes doigts fermes, Splints for
oken,
C. :


br. d, .
Gal tans eM pe vaste
water.


Gitar: m. eufe: f Flahie plofhie,wafhie dafbing,


vb A :
Gathis d'eau: mA dafhing;pla(bing,or flafhing of wa- 3

ter im rowing ; See Gachis. ;
aon É AGafcon; one of Gaftoigne; alfo,the Mac-

re le ENTER .

Eshonte details, pilfor, Ye
Gafon: m, A greene fodd,a {odd of grafic earth; alfo,a
À hor nn ne nr nn Eros

| a(fie or moffie. EL DS lasik
Gafouil :m.4 warbling wbifilingsor whixing


‘


¢
a
7
J


Sa mtn
Ouilleur:m,A warbler chi phi vi
Gafpillé: me: f.wafted, lanifhedse: vole iaprodiga 2
Gaspiller. To fquander waft, lafh “fh med.
Galpllieuan dada mu role Lier
eur: -pend-all wajt- X
ee + prodigall and careleffe aller 3 whence;
‘A pere amafleur fils gafpilleur : Prov, A:
Gate: bem called tel pme on
S e: hl 1 Mu?
Gaft: m.w. le,erc ; or,as Gaftement, #7
A y ms AE SN HET
Gafté: m.ée:f. Marred,fpi sfpoyledyotten,viciatescor-
rupte ruine


x ir sméelolehdeflamhpennets


il ia iil bee à Se Ee te NS eee RD
er


GAS G A V


Gafteau: m. À (great) Cake. '
Legaltemiansoe pas pour luy, The cake’s not ba-
ked for him; bis part us like to be leaft in it; be is not
like to lscke bis lips after it ; (applyable unto any thing


saree, bled ere ame 8.


Gate. as latte; A bowle,or maxer. Pic.
Gathe: £. 4 little Shad-fifh. doute


thats in band for another then him that lookes forit.) | Gatte: f, The top of the maine Maft. ENorm.

Il a fa part au gafteau. He bath a band in the prac- | Gattouiller.as milles Touckle,

lift ; a part in the fruitor punifhment, thereof. as Geau,

Partir le gafteau. To affigne unto euerie con(pirator wache:m,. A countrey clowne, or cluflerfift ; and
the part be w to aët, or hare be is to bane, in a hence, any [covendrell,or bafe companion.

Praltife. Gavache : com. Lennow, flaggie, limber ; alf, G-


Trouver la febve au gafteau. To meet with the

thing be lookes for, to light on that which will ferue bis

turne,

Gatteau, & mauvaife couftume fe doivent rom-

pre : Prov. 4 (good) cake, and an ill cuflome fhould be
roren,


Gafte-bois: m. Anvuaskilfull Carpenter.


centious, diffolute, fenfuall, gluttonifh ; alfo, clow-


Gavar: m. arre: £ Shaling, (play-footed,or baker-legd;
(at Tours.) we
aubifon, as Gobiffon.
Gauché : m. A blowwith the left band.
Gauche: com. Left, left-banded ; ont on the left


Gattelet: m. A little cake; al/o (the name of) anexcel- | band; belonging to the lefi fide ; wrong, finifier,awry.
lent cyder-apple. Pied gauche. A Spay foot.
Gaftelier: m. 4 feller or maker of cakes. _ Plante fur le pied gauche. Looke Planté,


Gaftement : m, A marrinz,fpayling,fpilling,a wafting,
confiuming,corrupting ; a foyling defiling, diflaining; 4
ruining de facing, deflroying. 4

e-mufeau:m..4 litele round lumpe, er bunne,
made of fine meale,oyle,and raifins ; a Lenten loafe.
afte-pavé: m, À gadder, wanderer , earth-planet,
pauement-beater , pps way-wearier ; one)
that does nought but trot up and downe the towne.

Gafter: m. The belle. GRab.

Gafter. A woman to caft ber child.

Gafter. To wafl,marre, (pill, fpoyle ; viciate, corrupt, in-
uert, peruert, feduce, depraue ; infects violate ; fayle,
defile ,diftaine ; conjume, ruine,undee, deface, defitoy,
turne vpfide-downe, ,
Vous ne fçauriez rien gafter. Youcan dono barme;
(a Bowlers phrafe.) bs

Gaftereffe : f. A woman that marreth; waftetb;defiroy-


€ {1 . .
Gafte-(anté. Vnbolefome,infeftine healtb-fpoyling. -
Gatteur: m. A marrer, fpoyler ; wajler, confumer ; foy-
ler,defiler ; feducer, peruerter baleen iF


auché: m. ée: £ Wrong, wiyed,crooked,awry.
Gaucher. as Gauchier aad a Gauche.
Gauchi: m. ie: £. wryed; bent or turned awry or fiom
the right fide; alfe,auoided by turniag awry.
Gauchier: m. ere: f. Left-banded, key-fifled.
Gauchir. To wry; to turne,bend,wrytbe from the right,
or any way afide; alfo, to foun, or duoid by turning a-
wry; and hence;
Gauchir au coup. To efthew a blow by winding tur -
ning,bending,or wrinching of the bodie.
+ Gauchirlecoup. To give a winding blow,tothruf,
or firike indireélly ; to ayme at one plate, and firike
another.”


4
F
:
|


Gaudé, See Gaudez. ned |
Gaude:f. The flalke of a certaine plant, wherewith
Dyers make their clothes yellow, and afterwards (ad-
ding Woad) greene; we may call it, Dyers weed, or
greening weed ; alfo,e finall fluower of raine.
Gaudebillaux: m, The fat tripes of flall-fed Oxen,
audées: £. Babling prayers; or,as Gaudez.
Gaudence. An Eflate in an Inberitance,let fiom nine to


Galtier. An Officer appointed by Fuflice, at the nomi nine yeares,and fo forward for ener,


nation, and regue of the inbabitants of a place, to | Gauderon.as
gard and watch the fruits of their Grounds, & Vine- | Gauderonné. 4s Goderonné. 4

_ yards,and to keepe them from being imbexeled,or fpoy- | Gauderonner. Totrimms,decke,or pranke vp a thing ;
led by men,or beafis See Goderonner.


Gaftine : £. Awaf, a Defartya Rocke or fandie Ground;
alfo, a Clofe, or Pafture inclofed, and enioyed in com-
mon ; a Commons belonging to particular men,and the
particular Commons of a To ip,or Parifh; alfo,a
kind of earth found in Mynes of Iron, and helping to
melt it; alfo, the name of a Croffe in Paris, planted
where once the houfe of one whabore that name (and
was burnt for Religion) flood,

gy mou sole er atrefpaffe done in grounds by.


4
angers) beafls,


Gaudez : m. eh (whereof the Papifis bane divers)
begianing witha Gaudete.
Gaudi: m. ie: £ Scoffed, flomted, played on, ieafled


. at.

Gendine: £ A pleafant lafft,a gamefome wench,
Gaudinette. The diminutine of Gaudine.
Gaudipife: f. A codpeece, Rab.

Gaudipifé: m. ée: f. Codpeeced; or, wearing « cod-


peece. ét 3
Gaudir. Tobe pale, liuelie, iollie, pleafant,merrie ;


epiploique. Veine gas. The third branch ofthe | gybe,ieafts play. Dies pete tent
% ‘the i the Se: de.To offejeaft at, ant with,
righ ide heref fa reading shred i te eto e ER it. Flowting, pa gy rel being merrie
rin mn, Abe rat Sonera i : CA icafling flowting ; mei


merriment,
au t:m, Aieafer, flowter, pers 4 pleafant-
headed fellow; alfo, a glutton, pot-bunter, Ale-boufé-
baunter, (drunken) good fellow. 1e

+ f The gorge, or craw of a bird, wbereinio ber
meat is at firft receined , after flee bath fivallowed


= | ale oe à
Gaveau: m.AHole,Stueor little Pit to keepe fii,


Li x


GAY


avellé,quand il eft efluyé. qRagueau.
Givereaim. A kind of ha Pole hit ducketh verie
much, |
Gauffre. as Gaffre. rhe
| Gauffré: m. ée: f. Printed (as a garment;) alfo,fet with


puffes.

-Gauffrer. To print (a garment;) al{o,(but leffe properly)
to decke,or fet out, with puffes.

Gauffreure: f.The printing of a garment ec ; alfo (but
leffe properly) a decking,or fètting out with puffes.

uffrier: m.4 Waferers Iron,or Printsa Wafer-mould,
or Wafer-print. dd
Donner es gauffriers. To leacher, to firke.
auge. as [auge.

Gaugo. à gaugo. See Gogo.

-Gavian: m. 4 Mew, or fea-Mew,

Gavier: m. The throat. >

Gavion: m. The pr throat-bol.

us Te slg af : |
aule:£ À pole,big rod; long flaffe,or pearch.

Gaule de gibsere A hawking Pole.

Donner vn coup de gaule par fous l’huis; To lurch
ag fo gine a prime lift unto;to do a {bred turne,
or bad office,under band,

En Normandie l’on vendange avec la gaule: Pro.
The Grapes of Normandie (viz.Apples,and Peares)are

__ gathered (or beaten downe)with poles.

Gaulé: m. 6e: f Beaten with a cudgel; beaten downe
with a pole ; alfe,robbed,or defboyled of.

Gaulée: £. A beating,or dinging dove (as of fruit ec)
with poles ; and bence; a ¢ gelling, bafling, thwac-
king, lamming ; alfo,the décaying,or burting of trees by

an excefiue; or vnfeafonable beating downe of their


uit.

Gauler, To ding, beat, or fetch dowme with poles ; and
thence,to cudgell,thwacke,baft,belamme ; alfo, to rob,
vifesor defpoyle of.

Gauleur : m. An valearned, or countrey Surueyor, that
meafures land onely by the Pole. .

Gaulge. as lauge ; A gage for caske.

Gaulger. a Tauger.
aulgeur: m. À gager of wine veffels,

Gaulois : m. ife: £. Of France,French,a Frenchman.

Gaultier: m. 4 mad whorfin, mad wag,rakebell,good-
flow; ane noddie ninnie,goofecap,coxcombe,ideot;


348 ce
Gaultiere:f, A whore, punke, drab, queane, gill, flirt,


Strumpet, cockatrice, mad wench , common backney,


good one,
Gavot: m.A little fharpe-toothed, fealeleffe,liuelie,and
flipperie (ea-fifh,that at fir[t fig! Heir gudgeon,
or the little fon be be psp under.
among rockes ; where be is taken (at an water)
[ometimes to the takers er 3 for if be looke not verie
well to bim, he will nip him by the fingers. 4
Seip f. A (hind of} Brawle, daunced, commonly, by
one alone,
eee: f. A waïpe. Norm. alo, as Gaultiere; and
ce ;


eft vne Laide Sate Shek à flbie eublie ber

ee
a 2 f. 48 atent

Gau ek a Gover Arras Bh prea upfing.


4 Gaufle d'ail, Ævloue of Gar
| Gauflé. Mocked, flowted d,gybed,ieafted at , vid-
Gaufler. as Golfer; To mocke, flow, scoff, gybe, ieaf


den,derided..


Go gle.


Gavellé. (Ceux qui font le fell’appellenrgabellé,ou |-


> 'mabird ; that makes a whi


GAY
at, ride, or deride,
ur: m. A mocker, flowter, gyber, (coffer, ieafier,


Gautier. Toile Gautier; À kind of Scare-cloth: or
Linnen,dipped ina melted y à 7e

Gautte: f. 4 Shad-fifh ; called fo about Bayonne.

Gay. as Geay : m. Ai/i,4 lay; and fometimes (but leffé

irre) a ho Chough,or lacke Daw.
ay ; woence Hur le cay. Drunxkea,cup-(botten, Gund-
D mbiled, tbrougbirpled. rs em

Gay: m. aye: f. Merrie, frolicke,blithe,iollie,cheere.
full,jocond,pleafant, gladfome, buxome, light-hearted ;
laftie, linelie ; alfo, willing, beartie ; refolute ; quiche,
readie, prompt, in altion; alfo, light , or bright, of
colour.

Perdrix gaye. as Gaille.

Gayable:com. wadeable, which may be waded oxer,

Gayac: m. Gwacum,Lignum vice, Pockewood,

Gaye: f let.

Gayé: m. ée:f. waded ouer.
ayement. Merrily, ¢/adly, ioyfully, iocondly, blithely,
pleafantly ; cheerefidlly, luflily, willingly, with a beart,
with a good will,

Gayer: m. 4 Foord,or wadeable paffage oner ariner.

Gayer. To wade, :

& a let. |
ayeté: f. Mirth,glee linelinefle, checrefilnefe, iy fil.
nafisalsttvie glace fi D pi ree
tinefle.


Gayetier: m. One that makes all manner of final toyes
in let ; alfo, ont that carries people ouer a foord on bis
ers.


raymau. Pré gay.as in Prez guimaux,
Ga Fa an ca a prifin. &Pic.
ayole d'un moulin. The trundle; or, a pai
trundlebeads. Lie vd
Gayoler. as Gaioler.
Gayon. 4 kind of final ffh.
Gayvé: m. éc: fWayued; left, firfaken,abandoned;res
linquifbed, quitted,
Gayver. To wayne; to leane, abandon, relinquifh qui,


rfake.
Gayves. Chofes gayves. weifts; things farfakenmi(:
e er loft; Lube being iuftly Kida ae

anda dey may be lawfully retained by the finder,or

__ the Lord of the Mannor wherein they were found.

Gazaille: f. 4 Commons, or common field, wherein the
inbabitants of fêuerall parifbes baue diftinét parts.
aze : f. Cufhion Canuas; the thinne canyas that
Serues women for a ground vato their Cufbions , or
Parfeeworke , orc ; alfè, Ne fleight flue) Tiffa-
nie; alfo, 4 Mantle, Fall, Scarfe, or long peece
thereof’; alfo, wealth, fubftance, riches, goods ; anda


Princes Treafurie.
azeau. as Gazon.
Gazel. as Gazelle.
Gazelle, 4 kind of wild Goat. eu
Gazette: 4 certaine Venetian copne fearce worth our
farthing; alfo, a Bill of Newes ; or, a fhort Relation of
the generall occurrences of the Time, forged moft com-
monly at Venice,and thence difperfed;euery month,in-
to moft parts of Chriftendome..
Gazon: m, A greene fodd,or tr of earth ; alfo,vich,
and fat land; See Gafon.
Gazonné: m.ée: f. Couered with greene fodd.
Gazouil, #5 Gazouillis, |
illard: m.arde:£. Singing,chirping,or warbling,
iting, or whixxing noi à
Sig.


GYEA A


Gazouiller. To fing, a es” ae birds toge-
ther ; alfè,io warble, as a young bd when it firft be-
gins or learnes, to fing ; alfo, to make, or yceld a whift-
ding,or whizxing found.

L’oifeau gazouille felon qu'ileft embecqué : Pro.
Looke Enibecqué.

Gazouilleux. as Gazouillard.

Gazouillis: m, À fiaging, chirping warbling whiflling,
winxxing ; the confifed voice, or fong of many birds,
dc, together,

Gazouillis de fontaine, The trickling fall of water
from the cocke,or (pout, of a Fountaine.

Gé: m. Yeaft.

Geais: m. Dug. let.

Gealloye: £ A meafiere containing about twelue of our
quarts.

Geant: m.4 Giant ; a man of a buge flature,or fre.
Celuy qui eft fur les cfpaules du geant voit plus
loing que celuy qui le porte: Prov. We, bawing the
aid of our aunceflors knowledge enderftand fomewhat
move then they did,

Geante:£ A Gianteffe ; a woman Giant,

Geanterie: f. Giantrie; the generation, race, kind, or
brood,of Giants.

Geantin: m. A young,or little Giant,

peas m, ine: f, Giantlie,Giant-like,buge-bodied,

made.

Gearitifer-ro Giantize; to make as big asa Giantsalj,

_ Hoplay the Giant.

Wu: m. A Cocke.
sm. Jet; alfo,as Gay,
bene m. À caft,or throw,as at dice; alfo,the draught of
% Fifbuet ; alfo,a Marriners founding lead ; aif a
gard,or welt ; ; alfo,a full fet of Counters, * *
Les gets d'un oyfeau. À Hawkes leffes.

Geétons: m. Counters.

Gede. A wafhing Bowle,

Gehainer. To grone,or grant. 1"

Gehenne: f. Aracke,or tortures a lati panda
of racking and retching torments.

Gehenné: m.ée: f Racked; retched, or fretched up-
on a racke ; tortured,tormented,

Gehenner.To racketortare,tormentsto vetch,or fretch
upon the racke. =»

Ce ermre m.eufe : f. Fallofracking.

hi: mie: £ Racked,tortured; ov wrung out by ex-

v treame torture, ° :

Gehine: f. # Gehenne. y

Gehir. To rackes to ring out 4 enfin eae


torture, (vo)
Geindre: To grone; mourne, sé (as the
sa “epprefed) or dar av mourne as


Genet É al Ochenne:

EDGE: € Recheds rs bed upon the

| racke; tortured, tormented in ra 3 alo, extorted
ner. To racke, torture’, “torment ; to retebjèr

‘he so es >


Gelé: m. ée : £ Froxen; congealed ticened fie


effe. :
Gelée: f. A froft; alfo,ccllie.
Geleniabin. Honey mixt with Rofes. is Rab.
Gelement : m. 4 fieexing,or congealing,by cold.


Geleur: m. 4 freezer.
Geline:£ A Henne,


Gelinette:£. À little Henne.


Gelini


ass f. Ice, frofts alfoza freezing,


G RD


ned with extreame cold.

- Gouttes Be eel Tficles. ©)

— le bec gelé. To be tongue-tyed.

i eft gelé de nerien faire. He # euen farued with
n


. To freexe; to thicken,or congeale with cold,
Et plus gele,& plus eftrain& : Prov, The more the
earth freexes the cloftr it growes.


Geline d'Aphrique. 4 Guinnie,or Barbarie Henne,
Geline de bois. as Gelinote de bois.

Crefte à geline. The bearb Ccombe;emie graft
yellow and white ratle.

La journée d’une geline. 4x egge.

Laiét de gcline. See Laid.

Pied de geline. Hennes-foot, Hennes- Clam, bedge or
yellow Fumentorie; alfo, a trench, ditch, or pit under
ground, whereby. marfhes, and ouer- moifl ne-lands
aré drayned ; it is fed by many branches, filled with
flones (through which the. moiflure bath fig ficient paf~
Sage): and couered all ouver with carth.

sa qui poind, & ne pond: Prov . A barren


Lageline pond parlebee: Prov. 4 pe layes as
d.


En Aouft les gelines font fourdes: Prov. 12 Auguft
Hennes are deafe.
Jamais graffe geline n’aima chapon: Pro. Awan-
ton wife neuer loued a defiétiue busband.
Jamais chapon crefter n’ aima geline: Prov. See
Crefter.
Noire geline pond blanc auf: Prov. A black Henne
yer breed a white chicke ; a black woman a beautifill |
© j
Pour grafle que foie la’ geline lle a meftier de fa i
voila} Pat bis rich, or powerfull focuer a man ?


be,be m eid of bis neighbors,
Qui naift ait il aime a grater: Proy. (at af-
ter kind re bunt.


mie ‘cau, À Coote.
a as Gelinote; or, as Francolin
(in the left fin


elineux: m. tut. £Offor belonging to, Hennes.
ier: m. A Henae-houfe,or Henne-rooft,
inote: f. as Gelinote de bois.
Gelinote de bois. The pied,or peckled Pheafant or
wood Henne ; fomewhat rounder bodied, and much
daintier meat,then an ovdinarie Heane,
linote de Numidie, The Guinnie Henne.


te. as lambette. €Rab, nies
= ng Tarre; or Pitch: equ
u:m. Atwinnes : 2247
Gemeaux. Two mil of cul bi
“outward, the other inward, ig from the
~ root of the thighes Cond er meetingin the mid-
dle of t br re des ig grifile, that ends on the
beele; 1 NE, is to taine thethigh 41 in-


Ke Art LE


Origmal fram
HE OPIOSTATE UNIVERSITY =


pit


1 GEN.


| Geminé: m.ée: € Iterated, doubled redoubled,
Geminer. To donble,iterateredouble, 2
Gemir. Togrone ; figh, fob,mournc,complaine grieuouf.
y,as thofè which ave opprefl,or onercharged.
Gemiffable :com. Mot lamentable, fit to be groned
for,ov fighed at. :
e:nifSement : m,4 gromiag; fighing wailing, fobbing,
mourning beastie lamentation,

: Cee if A germe, aiewell, a pretious flone; alfo,

‘ pitch,

| Gemmé. couleur geminée. À pearle, or peacacke co-
Qurins ae. 5: 2 0 u

‘Gemmneux: m. cule: f. Pretious, rich, fall of gemmes ,
i¢wells, pretious (ones.

Genaux': in. Caflers of Natinities,

Gencive: f. Agumme. /
Souliers à double gencive. Double faled, or two-fo-
led, fhooes.

Gendarme: m. 4 man of Armes; a borfemanarmed
at all paints; one that [erues in compleat armor,and on
a great horfe. :

Genfdarmes des Ordonnances. The ordinarie
men of Armes of France; firft reduced by Charles the

.  feuenth(in the yeare 1444) into certaine Companies,cx
under particular Orders ; Part whereofbe; that the

Gendarme mt be,at the yonget,betweene 20 and 21
Jeares old; and muft haue beene, at leaft, one yeare,an
Accher (whichno man fhould bee but a Gentleman
e,and bred; or. one that hath beene a Captaine,

© Lieutenant, Enfigne,pr Sergeant Maior of a foot-Com-
panie fix yeares :) He muft alfokeepe three borfes; tivo
for feruice,and one for bis baggage ; In regard where-
of erc be bath 400.1, Tourn.of ordinarie,and yerelie,

| intertainments (Thefe Genfdarmes were at firft only

1500; but fiace they bane bin increafed unto 100 Com


| arpaniessi,N oi |
| se Gendarmer.To ffrout,or fquare it like a mi of arms;
to put the better leg before; alfo, to tricke, fet out, or
. frre vp,bimfelfe; 10 prepare bimfelfe for a fcuf fling ;
to arme himfelfe with all bis belps , againft a warre.
} Gendarmerie : f. The Gendarmerie, men of Armes,or
compleat borfimen, of an armie ; a troupe of great


; 1 DRE
| Gendre: m,Ajonne in law;(by the mariage of a daigb-
9} 4er.) ; |
D'unefille deux gendres : Prov. Two friends gotten
‘by one good office performed,or fanour done; a feuerall
gaine drawne from fundriemenby the venting,or vfè,


ofonetbing. a RO 5 ;
Tel ct le gendre commele foleil d'hyver: Prov.
viz: That does but alittle good, and that but a little
« KR" Toy TT 0 Vases


while. =", . À GENE Ag A pe
Gendrefle:f. 4 daughter in law(bytbe mariage of a


Sonne.) |
Genealogie:f, 4 Genealogie; Pedegrees "11
General Pm, AGererall,pr chief? Commaunder ; of an

Amie ; or of an Order of Friers,drc. à

Les Generaux des Aides, Were at firft foure Com-


“outiall the kingdomes to which end each of them ‘bad
affigned bim certaine vouinces, whofe parti-
cular Townes, Dioce, a aye be rated at fuch

fismimes.as be thought eare > At
2 rs: à they were made ordinarie 0
_ cers ; and haue fince increafed much in number, and
À © fomewhat in itie ; bei 5, and next in
degree, vatoles Prefidens de la Cour des Aidess


Digitized oy (eran gle


miffimers deputed for the leuying oftb' Aides through. |


© whereof they are filed ordinarily,Confeillets gene-


GEN


_» faux,or Generaux Con@Millers,
(1 Les Gencraux des financés. The Treafurers, or dif:
ofèrs of the publicke treafure 3 Or as Threforiers de
France.
‘vLesGeneraux des Monnoyes. Ave Counfellors af”
Siftant unto the Préfidentsof the Court of Moneyes, &
th'ordinarie riders of circus for that Court ; 18 which
Seruice balfe of them{by. balfe-yerelie turnes)are fill a~
broad,(licenjing,and fwearing of Goldfinithes, and gi.
wing them authoritic to fine their Laveures ; vifiting,
and fearching the boufès of money-changevs,and proui-
ding,jn generall, that tb'Orders of that Court be duely
obfeued and the breakers thereof quickly reformed, or
informed. againfl) while/t th'other halfe attend, and fit
in,the Court, without any vacation, fiom before eight
vata ten of the clockein the forenoone, and from three
to fiue in the afteruoone .Thefè are alfo tearmed Con-
feillers generaux de la Cour des Monnoyes.
LesGeneraux provinciaux , & fubfidiaires, des
Monnoyes.whereof there is one belonging to euery one
of the fèuen (infériour) Parliaments | within the pre-
cintls whereof he rides bis circuit, with authoritie like
vato the Generaux that be feat from the Court of
Moneyes , valeffe they meet; for thenhe giues them
place, and does nothing before he hane acquainted
them withall.
Les quatre Generaux. The foure bigh Treajurers of
France ; or may be alfo meant of the Generaux des
Aides, who in their firft inflitution were but fonre,
General: m. dle: f General, vniuerfall ; common,or
kindlie,untoall, ~ ae
Confcillers seneraux de la Cour des Aides; &, de :
la Cour des ‘Monnoyes;as Les generax des Aides;
& des Monnoyes.
Les Threforiers yeneraux. Tearmed otberwife,Les
Threforiers de ne. whereof there is a number
certaine in eucrie Generaltie ; Looke Threforier, :
La Generale : f. 47 Admirall gallie,or fhip.
[ nent. Generally, uninerfally all~comprehen«
ding, altogether, :
Generalité: f. Generalitie,generalne(fe,oninerfalitie ;
alfoja Generaltie ; a place of general receit of the Fi-
nances ; whereof there be at this day, 21; viz: Paris,
Rouen, Caen, Nantes, Tours, Bourges, Poidtiers, |
Agen, Tholoufe,Montpellier, Aix,Grenoble,Lyo
Dijon,Chaalons,Amiens,Orleans,Lymoges, Soif
rs and Moulin; each baning it peculiat li sand
Officers. 7 ENORRY Poa Bs SEs ae ar:
Generateur: m. 47 ingenderer, begelter father , pro:
genitor ; creator, RCD Fh oe PEG
Generatif: m. iue : £. Generatine ; ingéndring ; of an


ingendering facultie,or breeding PRE 5
Generation: f. À generation,linage, brood,kind; alfo,
an ingendring,begetting, breeding. MEN Sin
Generatrice.humeur gen.#bich breedeth,or ingende-
relhe , ERQUY EE
Generé :m.ée: f. Ingendered, begotten, bred, brought
forth ;made,created, forged, framed, : © |
Generer. To beget or ingender as the male ;tobreed,or
hie forth, as the female; to make; forge, create,
rame. 2° FANS
Gencreux : m.cufe :f. Generous; noble, gentle vor |
tbie,gallant ; of a braue bumor of an excellent vace,of |


th ] flampe 3
aus bardie flout. :


Plaids genereux. Sefionss As: gVale Ne


hy nois. ©


Origine from


THE QHIG- SRE UNIVERSEL SX
a N TR yo.


a > =~ eo Ie


of a good kind ;alfo,valiant,courage }


Vin genereux. Strong,luflieymightie wines À.


GEN


Gencrofité :f, Generofitie; gentilitie, gentries gene-
roufneffe, nobleneffe, great worthinelfe ; branerie of

qe ion, gallantne(e of bumor; courage, valour,
neffe. 5

Ghnehe Generation,natinitie; alfoja kind of bearb
of fundrie colours.

Geneft : m. Broome; (efpecially that kind therof which
& called,Baflard Spanifh Broome.) :
Geneft d'Afrique, as Geneft d’ Efpaigne ; Spanifh
Broome.

Geneft d'Efpaigne. Spanifh Broome; (fome alfo
= Gaude fo, becaufe they refemble one ano-
the7,

Gencft cfpineux. Furres, whinnes, Gorfe, Thornes
broome.

Petit geneft. Sweet Broome,Heath,or Ling.
enettay : m. A Broome clofe.

Genefte’:£ Ordinarie Broome, er the Broome whereof
Beefomes are made ; alfo,a kind of garden bearbe re-
Sembling Beets.

Genefteux : m.eufe :f. Full of Broome,

Genefticr : m.ere : f. Of Broome, belonging to Broome,

Gencftriere :f. A ground,or countrey full of Broome,or
luniper.

Genes in. Akind of bit with a round port, a bit fir a
Genet; a Genet-bit. |

Genethliaque. Birtb,natiuitie.

Gencthliatique. 4 Cafler , or Calculator, of Nati-
uities.

Genette : f. A Genet,or Spanifh borfe ; alfo, a bit for a
Genet; alfo,a kind of Wee/ell,blacke-fpotted,and bred
in Spaine.

Vne houfle à la genette, .4 verie fhort foot-clotb,
Ordre de la genette. Seeke Ordre.

Chevaucher àlagenette. Te ride with verie fhort
flirrups.

Genevre: m. luniper. al

Genevrier : m. À fhrub,or plant of luniper.
Genevrier rouge. Cedar luniper ; the crimzen, or
pricklie Cedar,

Gengive : f.as Gencives A Gunne.

Genial : m.ale :£Geniall;belonging to lucke,or chance;
or toa mans paler SID i ion.

Gonie.la g. Ones good,or bad angel; alfo,jus nature,in.

find, inclination originall difpofition.

Geniculiere. The bearbe Salomons feale, Scala coli,
White-voot,or Wbite-wort. .

Genillette. À Henne : Savoyard.

Genin: m. AWittall.

Goniffe :f. À bepfer.

Mener la geniffe au taureau, To play the Baud, fell

a Virginitie, proflitute a maid. ‘

Genital. Genitall, fit for breed, apt to beget, feruing to
oa tif: m. The Genitive cafe.

Genitif: m.iue: £. Naturall, ingendering, of an ingen-


enitoires: m. The genitories, or genitalls; the prinie
avts,t pram ge ine AR
are: f. Arace ¢, progenie,ger 3alfo,
abirth; aningendering,breeding,begetting,
Genne:£.2 Gchenn .


Ge m. The bearbe called white-voot, or white-
wort, DO D An Scala cor,
NTI T/* : ene Teme


A


Rx


Go gle


G EN


Rompre I anguill ie au genouil. To attempt impoffi-
_ bilities, to labour in ine. es sip
nouillé :m, ée:f. Krottieskneed ; fill of ioynts, as
the. flaulke of fome beaïbes. F ; °
enouillée :f, Kneed graffe; alfo,as Geniculiere ;
Some alfo call the bearbe Stitchwort fo, becanfe its


of ioynts.
Genouillere: £ Salomons feale, Scala celi Wbite-root,
White-wort,
Genouilleres : £ Pullie-peeces ( Armour) for the


Se

Genouillet : m. A little knee; alfo,a knot,or ioynt in the
flautke of an bearbe,or of corne ; alfo, as Genoillct.
enre :m, Kind ; a kind of.

Gens: m. Hen,people, folke ; nations inbabitantsofa À
countrey ; alfo,tbe ordinarie attendants, or followers
of a great man,

ens d’ armes, Compleat horfemen, men of Armes;
Looke Genfdarmes.
Gens de comptes. The Officers, or Onerfeers of the
Chamber ef Accompts.
Gens de are de corfage. Tilleiness or fuchas
bold by aféruile tenure. |
Gens @ eglife. The Miniflerie,Clergie, Church-men;


Heber athe Friers,erc.
Gens de Juitice.counfillors, Judges, Fuflicers, Ma-
grates Officers of Fuflice. ~

le main morte. as Gens de poefte.
Gens de meftier. Artificers,or bandicrafis-men,
Gens d'Ordonnance, Trained hor{men;or as Genf.
darmes des Ordonnances.
Gensperdus. Defperate people ; alfo, fouldiors expo-
fed unio the greateft baxards; the firlornehope.
Gens de pied. Footmen; or th’ Infanterie of an Ar-


mie.

Gens de poefte,pofte,ou pore. Yeomen Roturiers
_— US rat ; vanoble perfons. ,
sens de robbe longue. Lawyers; alfo, all otbers,

Fes ciuile proféffio enioyns them ordinarily, toweare


gg . ‘
Les gens du Roy. The Kings Counfell learned.
Gens de fac & fe licol, Rafcalls, rakehelis, rogues.
vagabonds, loytering fcoundrells ; alfo, begging Friers.
Gens de fuitte, Villeines ; Looke Suitte.
Gens de voirie. Scaningers', Dung- farmers, Gold-


Gens de bien font toufiours gracieux: Prov. Good
men are euer gracious affable,courteons.
“A gens de bien on ne pertrien: Prov. One feldome
looses by dealing with , or dwelling necre, boneft
men.
De gens de bien vient tout bien : Prov. From good
men comes all goodnlfe
Les gens de bien font tousjours bien, ont touf-
jours bien, & font tousjours bien : Prov.
lly a gens & gens: Prov.There are of all forts, good
and bad ; there is much choice of, great difference in,
men ; one fhould not expect (that cannot defèrue) as
much as another. -
Tant de gens tant de guifes: Prov. Asmany diffe-
vent natures as nations; as many feuerall fafhions as


lhe.
Contd: sue Looke Gendarme,
Genfemy : m.Thelittle fiveet flower Fe{mine,Gelfo-
Got iespeen Place kind lego


lie,kindred ; Looke Gens. 14
Gent :mgente : f, Neat, fpruce, fine,cempt, eae
« 3


G EN:


i À, L ed , feat üited , intly dreffed,

vist dd lager
Le gent corps. Aunciently fignified one of a finall fla-
ture ; and may yet be applied to a prettie dapper man,


._ or(if a woman)to a pretie foule,
Gente : f as Tante,
Gentement. Neatly, fprucely, finely, comptly, prettily,
featly,quaiatly bandfomly; alfo, gently eafily,fofily gin-
er


gerly.

Gentiane : f. Gentian,Bitterwort,Felwort Baldmoine,
or Baldmonie,

Gentiane grande. Great Gentian; beares yellow

wer. ;
Gentiane moindre. Croffewert Gentian ; bearing a
blew flower.
Gentiane petite, Little Crofewort Gentian ; beares
a finall red flower, ;

Gentienne. as Gentiane.
entifame: f. À Gentlewoman,

Gentil: mile: f.Gencle,tame,traftable; mild ; affable,
courteous,gracions ; kind, louing ; pliant, foft, fupple,
tender ; fmooth; alfo,comelie, fighthe ; prettie, quaint,
neat, fine; well-fafhioned , well-bebaued ; goodlie,


tile,Pagan, Heatheni{h; (when Gallia was conquered
by the Francs,or ancient French,the Giules,who were
at that time Chriffians, tearmed the Coquerors, by rea-
Sonof their Heathenifh Religion, Gentils, or Gen-
ti!s-hommes.) i |
Gentil bois. wild Line,wild Flax,

Bois gentil.Spurge-Flax,German Oline Spurge,He-
ying pis
Ouvrier gentil à I hofpital: Prov. The fine worke=
wan dies in an Hofpitall, (whether bis pride,idlene(fe,
er illabusbandrie feldome failes to fend bim,) Looke


Ouvrier.

Gentileffe : f. Gentrie,Gentilitie,Nobilitie,

cag es. Prettie conceits, dewifes, knacks, feats,
7 trickes.

Gentilhomme :m. 4 Gentleman; alfe, acertainbol-
low engine (fet thick on th’ outfide with pikes,and char.
ged with powder and fhot) which difcharged, featters
it fr. to the ruine of thofe it lights on; Looke Gen-


ti
Gentilhomme fervant: 4 waiter, or attendant on
the King, at mealestimes. ;
Gentilhomme de ville. 4 Gentleman of the ff
- bead an vpfart Gentleman. *
Iliure comme vn Gentilhomme.He fiveares after
a thoufand pound a yeare,
Gentilhommeau:m. 4 finall,or fingle-foled,Gentle-
man; a Gentleman of law degree. ral jh
| Geatilifer, To gentilixe i,iue as the Heathen, play the


Pagan, \ |
Gentilifme: m.Paganifine,Heathenifhnefe.
Gantilité : f The fame. oust
Gentillaltre um. 4 meane Gentleman ;4.new Gentle.
man,one that is {carce a Gentleman; one that paffes,
or affects to goe, for a Geatleman,tbough be be none.
Gentilla(treté :f. Poore gentrie, meane gentrie; ufur-
Ped,or new gentrie,


Gentillement. Gent! ingly ki ;! i | ol t~
en tnd mala noel
Genis les Gentils. The Gentiles, Pagans, Heathen
peop Le : 1112 te ps
Gent iment. « Gentement; er # Gentillement, —
| Ge ntre. Lenkelantre ARAL of


faire ; gallant, noble; deligbtfome,pleafant ; alfo,Gen-


haut ie. ul ie
. nd A Pe ¢ *


GER


| Genuflexion : £ 4 bowing,or bending of the knee.
Geoffroy. Gefiey; a nor ht sda
Geographic: £ The defeription of the carth; Geogra-


- hique: com, Geographical , earth-defcri-
in


:m, À Goalerfhip ; or the being in Goale; al-
So,the fee thats due to a Goaler at th’entrie sand depar-
ture of a prifoner. -
ie tf, A Goale,or Prifôns alfo,a cage, or coope for
birds; alfo,the pinne,or circle i the middle of a white,
er marke at fhootings
Geoliage. a Geolage,
Geolier :m. 4 Goaler ; 4 Keeper.
Geoliere: f. A Goalers wift,a woman Goaler.
Geollage. as Geolage.
Geolle; & Geollier. Looke Geole,& Geolier.
nantic : f. Dixination by points, and circles made
on the earth : (Rab.
ometrie. Geometrie ; the meafining, or proportio-
ning of figures.
Geometrien : m, 4 Geometrician; a profeffor of, or
Maifler in,Geometrie,
Geometrique. Geometricall ; of, or belonging to,Geom |.
melrie.
Pied Geometrique. The Geometricall feat ; is foure
hand-breadthes,or fixteene fingers-breadthes,
grise as that Gifs
eratien. A kind of blacki e.
Gerbe de blé. 4 fheafé tint
Faire gerbe de foarre à dicu.To mocke,{torne abuse,
delude defraud God «4 bus right; er(in matters of Keli-
jon,and con{cience, where bountie is véqhired) to
for Maker fe the Jewes law it was hel a pagel
pietie in any man to gine the Leuites chaffe or flraw,jn
flead of corme;thence came this Proucrbe, wherein ma-
ny abufiuely, vfe Barbe,in fleadof Gerbe,
Gerbé: m. ée:f, Bound vp (as corde) into fheaues; al-
f, ranged, ranked, or placed in order one vpow ano-
ther, +


Gerbéc:f. 4 che, balfe-thraue, or beape of fheaues;
ea bn Se ne i . ;

Gerber des javelies. To bind corne of fwath into
pousse fheafé up coine.


erber des tonneaux. Te raunge,or fet wine velfels


one vpon another.

Gerbicr: m. A flacke,or halfe-thraue, of corne ; alo, a
great Garner to keepe falt in.

iere: £ À reeke,or Racke,ofcorme. =

Gen :m, ce: f, Chapped, riuen, cleft, chavened with
cota, . :

Gercer: To cleene,riue,cut in many places, and by {mall

elefls;to ake dr ‘as th pra) does)
the face bands dc. Ex


erceure. 4s larfure ; or Gerfure, = ~

Gere :f. The Hebrew balfepennie more then
our pennie,4o of them going to the ounce.

Geré: m, ée: f. Done, wrought, executed, managed,
handled ; alfo, carried,brongbt,or borne,

Gerer. To doe,make,worke,extrcife, execute, manage,


.… bandle ; alfo, to carrie,or beare, J
t:m, 4 Gerfiulcom; the greatell of Hawks;cal-
led alfo,Faulcon gerfaut. a, aoa
Geninain.(A proper name for a man)German


Germain :m.ine :£Germaine ; come of the fame flock,
bred of the fame kind; neere of kinne,of all-one race,
maine. The name of an Apple, that yeeldes ve
cleere,and pleafant cyder. its


;
;


¥. L =" TT NOTE 1
:


GER Gil Be
Germandrée: f: Germaunder, Englifh treacle (an | Getiffe, verre getifle. ‘Such as is ice ont oe
(bearbe.) boue crc. .
Germandrée aquatique,ou deauwaterGermen- | Gets.


der,Scordion,Garlicke Germander.
Gengpndrte baftarde. Baflard, or wild German-


Gene des arbres,herbes, &c : m. A yong fhute.fprous,
bud, fn 1B” twig of trees ec.

Germe des auix,oignons,&c, The middle flaulkes
which are betweene the blades, and roots of Garlicke,
Onions rc.

Gerine d’ vn oeuf. The fperme of an egge ; the little
ftving which is on either fide of the yolke of araw,or a
reare,egge.

Fauls germe.4 Moonecalfe;a bard fwelling.or fhape-
leffe peece of flefhinthe wombe, which makes women
beleeue they are withcbild when they are not.

Germe. 4 fafbion of open beat,or barke without batches,
fed in the Leuant Seas for the tranfportation of mar-
chandife, and paffengers.

Germé : m.ée: f.Budded,burgeonned, fprouted,fprung
out,put forth,

Germeinent: m. A fprouting, budding, burgeoning,
putting forth, flouting out,of trees, érc.

Germer.To (pi out bud,burzeon, (pring put forth, foute
ont, yong fprigs,buds, tenderels,@c.

Genneux:m.eufe : f. Spronting, budding, burgeon-
ning; alfo, full of yong (brigs, or buds; alfo, full of
feed.


Germination: £4 fprouting,érc ; as Germinement.
Geron. Looke Giron.
Pr €, The finall,or white Cackerell Sfr: or as Pica-


Gut: f.A Woodloufe or Ladicow.
| Gerfe : mée:f. Looke Gercé.

Gerfure :f. A cleft,rift, chinke, chap, chavene ; salfost the
neb of a pinne.

Gefante. vne gef. A woman thatliethin, \

Gefier.as lefer. The guiferne of a bird.

Gefine: f. A hing in child-bed ; a Wingin. :

_ Bras à la poitrine, jambeen €: Prov. Keepe
a fore arme to thy bofome, a fore bi thy bed.

Geir. To die; 10 lie downe,along, or by sob in
child-bedor à in the flraw, asa 4% ;4 Moto conf ce
or ref} in ,alfo,toremaine or ab
Gefir aupres. To lie neere Satie bound, sat, or
border vpon. +9.
Nous fçavons ou gift lelievre. Seeke Lievre,
Ma viceufticuen PAIE ift bad lien therein, or


depended thereon,

Tant gr: ee ee gift: Prov. One of.
ee. pele mr pal rags of
| RÉ ER en pail peril ne ft ds Al
~ Toutcequegilten n'e + Prov.

is not fat in Len 543 —


| CRE re agar beer: , Fu te
eee


; jute be repents


Looke Geéts,
Gettéen: m.enne: £ Of Jet ; blacke as an
Getter. as IeGer; Tacafi,éc.
Gettonner, To bud, prowt,or foute ont.
Gettons: m. Counters,
Gettons des arbres. Buds; Looke leGtons.
eve: a A cage, coope, or open basket, to keepe chic-


CCD.

Geural: m.4 Certificate Paleo Safeconduéi fer a
traueller,
eure. as Giure.

Ghirlande. 4 garland.

Giaret :m. 4 nal | bright-coleured fea-fifh, not much
unlike to, but that it is fomewbat leffe (ard yet bigger
{caled) then,the Cackarell : @Marieillois, -

Gibbar. 4 kind of flender, and long-nofedwhale, that
bath a bulchbacke, and a pipe on bis forbead, out of
which be fpouts water with great violence.

Gibbafñle: £. 4 pouch, or budget ; alfoya great bunch,or
hulch-like fwelling.

Gibbe : £. 4 bunch,or fivelling; a bulch; any thing that
fends poking out. \

cier: m. A pouch-maker.

Gi ibbeciere: fA pouch,bag.poake budget.

“toe gallow-tree, pas of gallowes ;

‘an Beste all Gentlemen that baue Haute lufice, }
baue alfo(or may baue) gibbets(for th’executing of ma-
lefattors) within their tervitories, though (ordimarily)
with fome différence in making, or féfhion,according to
their difference in eflate, or dignitie ; for the gibbet of

- the((imple) bigh Tufticier bath but two pilerss the

_ Lord Chattelaines, thi'ee; the Barons, foure ; the Earls,
fix; and the Dukes, eight; And yet thefé ‘differences -
are more precifè then send for all cuflomes agree
not in them.) }
Que pipet veut dire cecy? What a ns i meane À.
rte this ?

left plus malheureux que le bois dont on fal le
gibber He ia mofi unfortunate man.
lere vient troptard:Prov, Too
repentsat tbe gallowes.
Les beaux hommes au gibbet: Pro. Faire men come
& to foule endsybeproperer the men the worfe their

Gibb x meufeif | Hulch, bunched, much fircline,

Gibbuyer:a: Gibbey ei:

Gibbier: m.Game(of any kind thats nondeilse bawked
at ; butmofi pos the later) fovle; whence ;
seh de bier. A hawking powle,.

Cc pas de voftre gibbier. This à not your

tra Dust your profiffion ; this is no fubicé fir you to

fpeake,no courfe iodeale, in; 5 you are bere ont

of your de element.

Fe par ——— Euerie one to that bee à is fit
> für, to that

Eftre en beau. ee To be fire and firs 10 like


Gibbon :f. The eng bulcbr backt spring


Gib yer: Tobawke; Es 3 fiwle, on, 1 forvle,
Gibboyeur: conn ome i et


Pei wiper JO wT afte D: A


‘Little pockets of nei)
hens they are prefirued fie oom fe


Gibier.


WIVERSITY


ne


pe atand fudden prs ofraine.

pale ete

a. ca ie poled Gierogliphicall; of or belong,
1, Giero


Gié as Gels; A haves
G lard. ard de :f, Chu ay PR
ch: “upsn the facesand throat.
rf, A cheeke,or chap ; or(moft properb)the ig on
ee Side of the chap , wherein meat is b 50


.


Gigandal: :m, ale: f, Huge, monfirous bigs Giant-


Canal The [me
Série im. ine: Hi ¢, big-bodied, of an extraer-
. inarie fiature, G: rane
‘ Gigantomachie :£ The warres of the Giants againf
the gods
Gigot (de mouton, ).4 /eg (of? mutton) cut large with
LE the wiole bone at it,and (à roafled ; fome alfo, cab fa 4
loyne from which the chine is taken.
RES je A knuckle; or,the bonie end of the leg, .
Gaigner lesgigot goteaux. To betake bim to bis legs, to
| Slee. heeles, to runne away.


tte ue la gigotte. Looke Chauffes.


ee ‘lle. To flie, giue the (lip; runne away;
er will fone Says vas gille; Out,


citer ame
i Roue Fiflula.
exer A certaine greene (weet apple.
Vis 5. Gilles. A fafuon ART TEE vaulted
qe hee as F. Faire gille.
tim. en
| Gimbreter. Top
alia bey, leacher it.
} -Gimbreteux: m. eufe :£, Leacherous, rec lafti-
uious.
mi pier : m. maker of reine for bed
Ris Guns Cr 2
Cope re: m. Ginger.
eblane. white Ginger.
ey de iardin. The bearbe Dittanie, or
Die a lant that bears Gain


peercer. ‘tt


Gingenbré: mé: F3 «fred freed
| wit a Ry 10
| Gi nd yellow fruit of a reafona-
Dada coh bat is th abe, which
joe. ÿ


_it bath beene be ge ates nd
| Gingioulier: m. e narron-leaued Hee that beaves
the Gingioule.

* Ginglyme :m, A mutual reccining, or lodging of de

bone within another,
Drogue: : m, Sower wines Panky firfigiven. so

inthe yeare 1555, which extraordinarily ¢
_and moi, the grapes could not poffibly ripen.

‘ ph Small,poore, or fower wine; called fa


ma A Tone eee tar.


the wanton, te doe laftinionfy $ to


Pon ae kay oui 2° «Cet ee Te ee
GIR
Giraffe:f. 4 certaine potted, and long-necked beaft,


| (as tis thought) by a Cammell on a female Pan-
À re fore-legs are much longer then her binder;
‘both which fhee moues, as fhee goes (in their feuerall
turnes feartber.
+m. A certaine Snyte-like bird, that ufes ta
or wheele about, in rifing * k :
Craie, : f. A Girafole;or MS. flone of the kind of
Opals, that yeëlds an eye-like lufter, which way Joeuer
you turne it unleffe it be toroar ds the Sunne; for then it
cafts forth beames like the Sunne.


i cone f. The name of an Apple,


£. The Cawle, or Kell, wherein the bowels be
wrapped.
Giré: m.ée: £ Veered, or turned with the wind ; wir.
led, whirled ,or t ned about,
Girelle: f. 4 little fharpe-nofed rocke-fifh in the Italian
(eas,that bites fifhers,and fivimmers,lke a flea.
Girer. To veere , or turne with the wind, 10 twerle,
wbirle,or wbecle about.
Choad tin, Armour for the thighes of borfés.
ade. as Girofleé: q Langued.
Girofladedemer. 4 certaine Gillouer-like a
cence growing on vockes.
Girofle. cloux de girofle. Clones.
Giroflé: m. ée: £ + et, flucke, fwectened , or feafoned
with Clones,
Girofleat, Made of Cloues , or of Gilluflowers,
SS £ AGilloflower; and,mof properly,the Clone
Gilloflower.
Giroflée jaulne. The winter,or wall Gilloflower.
Giroflée de Inde. 4 kind of Tanfie that beats. a flow-
tr like a Gilloflower; or,as Ocillet d'Inde; the French
Marigold, Affrican Gilloflower or Gingioline flower.
Girole:f. The Skirwort or Skirret-root.
Giromantie: m. Dinination by circles : (Rab,
Giron : m. The lap,or bofome.
Tender le gironen la luftice. 4 defendant to ap-
peare,and con Pad the Altion,
Il ne fe faucher ni à femme, ny au giron : Prov.
(For neither of them keepes verie furely the things en-
trufled vate them.)
Gironnée : f. A Lapfill,or bofomefidl of.
Gironomique: com. Circular : Rab.
jrouet ‘ m. as Girouétte.
Girouëtté+£ A faae,or rs flags alfo,(but nothing
fo properly)a weather cocke.
Girouëtté: m.ée:f. Furnifhed with a fine , or wea-
thercocke ;al/o, inconflant variable, praets euerie
wind, as 4 ‘fine,


Giroufle. as Girofle, À


| Giroule. as Gigole ; A Sherret root.


Gifant :m. Toe loweft of the three railes of a ide w
Le gifant d! vn moulin. The Bed, Bedder, or vnder- |


mil.


© Gifant: :m,ante: f. Lying, lage lang


Gifante : £ A woman that lies in.
Gifté :m. The gyferne of birds,
Pie: m, bc deg placeto lie om, or to ore


Gitte d' yn lievre. The firme ofabare
Droid de gifte. Loske vader Droit,

~ Toftaterg eft la fouris qui n’a pour giftequ va
ch: Tov, Look Souris,

Gilte de ‘spent £, À vand of becfr; a long, and flee |

ce cut out from betweene the flanke,and bustocke. |
ae — githen, Bifhops wort , Saint, Ras


Peels Romane Poke


GCLO À).


Serene a a eg rie,
or fea.
eu To barke; pen der à :
latiffant. Barking 3yarmling bawling.
Glatiffement : m. A batkingyor. bawling,
| Glatifleur : m. 4 barker; bawler, pawler,
| Clareapa im. The Burre Docke, Clote Burre, great


| Glatcir,Glattiffement, GltiGeurse Glatir, &c
Glaumet : m. A Sea:cab,r Sea-gull.
Glavoir: m. A brayiag, yelling, skreakiny,bavoling,out-
crying :(@Blefien.)
Glay. 2s Glas; A noift : Pic. alfo,as Glaye.
aye: :f. The blew Lillieor Flowerdeluce.
Glayeul : m. Corne-flog , Cerne-fedge , Corne-gladen,
rièbt Gladen,Glader Sword=graffe.
Glayeul baftard. Sedge,wild flags, water flags, yel-
low wild Ireos, baflard Flowerdeluce, water’ Flower-
deluce, Lauers,or Leurs.
Glayeul jaulne. Thefame,
Glayeul de maraiz. as Glayeul baftard.
Glayeul puant. Stinking Gladen, Spurge-wort, wild
Ireos,
Le cul de riviere.Sedge,water-flags,Sword-graffe,
den,Glader wild Flags ; yellow baflard,or water,
| rare Leuers,
|: Glayeulfauvage. as Glayeul puant. —
| Glaz. 2s Glace: @Rab.
eux: m. pha f, Choddie, tur fie ; fit fat,


clayi
Clee Ces land belonging to a Parfonage :Norm.
Glene. 4 fmall hollowne(fe im a bone; and (slp properly)
the outward concauitie of the fhoulder-blades,
Gleneur : m. eure: f. Gleaniag,o? gathering after.
Glenoide. as Glene.
: on. as Glatteron ; The Clote Burre.
| Glette :£. The froth of an eegesalfo;the gellie of any thing
| that congealeth;alfo,the flegme,or filth,which a bamke
\_ throwes out ather beake,after ber cafting,
Gletteux : m.eufe : f. Slimie, frothie, flegmie, filtbie,
Glic.joucr au glic. To leacher; to play at faft and looffe
liceau. A-boitome of thread. (v.m.)
Glimpe. light made of the flaulke, or flemme ofan
Pa dried,and afterward greafed oucr.
Glincer. as Gliffer ; 3 To glide,or (li ia ren)
Gln: read Dire,or,luy dire : €
:m, À imine wins to
lithe. as row qPic.


iffade : f. nd yada ing fai eating
Gig Se ec sueur ie MINS origling
Sant. Séppin 3. or
creeping pris vet {Upperie sensulererpunccinasa®
bold can be taken:
‘Glifsé : m.ée: f. Slipped ; ieee lena:
Glifgeau: m, A bortome of thread. 5
| GlifSement:m, A flipping,erc ; as Gliffade. 5
| GlifSer. To flip 5 to


| fleale along 5 tobe flipperie ; to rune glib to tickle
| -wdowne by lit little. >
& oS. cee qui ne glifse: Prov. The
+ voit (2 po
Rs ch spa su
| Better oe Longue trip. ue
Glifse-tousjours. As Ener gliding, fill wri
mouing. A {se


or glide 5 creepe, wriggle,on |


G L ©


Glix :m. 4 Dormoufé :qRab.
+m, 4 Globe ;'a round bowle,or ball. re
Globeux :meufe :f. Globie ; round like a globes gr
belonging to,a globe ; fill of globes.


À Globuleux.æ Globeux.


Gloc. The clocking of a benne : qLangued.
Glôe. A clouen peece of wood : &Norm.
Gloire : f. Glorie, fame,reputation, renowme, a great
+ name,or generall commendation; the confent of good
men in the praife of,
Faire gloire. 10 take a pride,
a vaine aflez fleurir, porte fucille,& point de
: Prov. Vaineglorie brings forth nought but
D ner, 3 or, vainegloric bauing bloffomd,
perifbeth,
Gloriation. 4
cracking.
Gloriette:f. Small glorie, little praife, not much com-
mendation ; alfo,a little roome in the top of a tower; al
fo,a little banqueting houfe in a garden.
Glorieufe:f. kind of Scate-fifhthat hath ahead like
4Toadanda venimous prickern ber taile; called fo,
becaufe of ber flow, and (feeming) fatelie, manner of
fivimming.


A glorying, boafting, vaunting, bragging,


Glorieufement. Glorioufly, renowmedly, with great


pe re çà alfo, proudly, vainely, bualiingly, vaine-


Conceté. f. Pride,boafting, vaineglorie, crackiug,
vaunting, felfe-loue, felfe-liking.

Glorieux: meufe: f. Glorious, frmous,renowmed,no-
table,excellent, exceedinglpejiccmed, much praifed,
much praife-wortbie highly commended, of great re-
putation ; alfosproud,vaunting,boafling vainegloriuus,

à Genres ing ; felfe-conceited, (elfe-loning.

26 4 :f, Glorified ; ma enified, renowmed,

Siena: To glorifie, to bring unto glories to renowme.
se Glorifier. To vanat,cracke,brag,boaft of bis ownc
atts; to commend,ov magnific,bimfelfe.

Glorin. Akind of Scate,called,the Forke-fifh.

Glofe :f. 4 gloffe; comment,or expofition.

Glofé: m.ée: f. Gloffed; expounde ed,commented on.


| Glofier. 4 kind of white Vine,verie fruit fill.


Gloffateur: m. 4 Gloffer , an Interpreter; one that
writes a Gloffe,or Gawment upon a text.
Gloffement : m. The clucking, or clocking of a brood
Henne, £
Gloffer. To clucke,or clocke,as a Henne.


Glouglouter. To guegle ; to found like a narrow- |


mouthed pot , or firait-neckt bottle, whén it is emptied.


Glouffant. poule glouffante. A slecking Henne. x5
Glout: m.gloute: FE Glutionous, greedie, rar
1 shérieun.


Gloutement. Ghtemuf yauenoufy ged.
slouteron: m. The Clote,Burre Docke, or great Burre.)
 Peritglouteron. The Loufe Burre;Dit Burress è


TDocke. +
Glouton: m..4 glutton,deuourer cormorant;rauiner ;


?


Mouto
Glouton: | m,onne :f. Gluttonous,greedie,rauinous
Gloutonnaire : com. Gluttoneus, greedie, deuowrings
ormandixing.
outonnie, Gluttonied ranining, denouring, or ges |
eating,a FN" oe Seeding,
reedie,denouring ae


‘Gidea: :m. A bundle offre. Rone


Dips — ul,bellie-god,ereat eater ; alfo,a tenenestal |
file low,
Chair - mouton manger de glouton : Provsee |


‘à
4
;


wr di


4


por GOB
G È dy)birdlime,
re oe Baa na amet


Alfyrian P lumme.
fee im.te: f. Glewifh, glewie, clammie ; glewing,


ok eth,
luaux : m. Lime-twigs.

chee To flay,or pill.

Gluc. ergo gluc. (4 word uféd by the Schollers of Pa
ris,in deri hon of an abfurd conclufion,) Well conclu-
_ ded Roger; wifely brother James.
Glué : m.6e:f. Limed ; caught with, ov intangled by,
birdlime ; alfo,glewed.

Gluement: m. 4 glewing ; 4 fafl-ioyning, fisre-clo~
figs a liming, a catching with , or intangling in sbird-


Gb. To lime ; to glew ; toioyne,or clofe verie fall, as
mish birdie or w; ; to catch with, o im,
birdlim

Feet 7 A glewer,

Glueur:f. Glewimeffe, clammineffe.

Glueux: m. Glewie, full of glew ; alfo, as Gluant.

Gluits : m. Long,and whole fra.

Gluon: m. A hme-twig.

Gant f. Glatimofitie , Doris 5 clammi-


Ghuy gs Clits ; Straw,
“prit m, as Clifoire; A Plaiflerers boffe:


Checker drix ©. The gray Partridge.
| Goalon.A yen fu A weares bis clothes unband-
LAPS or puts them on carelefly; fo tearmed about


Gob. FarsBascut de gob, At one gulpe ,or,as one gob-
bet,be fiwallowed it,

Gobeau: m. A bit,gobbet, or morfell ; alfo, avioll, or
ftrait-mouthed veffell(of g glaffe;)alfo,a Mafer,or great
Goblet,

Gobelet: m. 4 Goblet, Bole, or wide-moutbed enp to
pes hel in; alfo, the flower Crowfoot, Gold-knap , Tel:


Le Le gobdet du gland. ‘The head, fhell, or cup of an
Acorne,

Legobelet d'vne Rofe. The bud of'a Rofe when it
# aol füll-blovne ; or(mere properly)the fue-leaued
Cup,or buske ther cof ; called, by fome,the fue brothers
of the Rofe.

Le retraié du Gobelet. The Butterie , or Wine-


Gobelets. des gobelets. Crowfoot ,Gold- knappellow
Craw, Butter-flower
Gobalin: m, A Goblin,ob-gobi, Robin good flo,


oe To play the Goblin; to rumble, or make 4 a
- _ borrible noife like a Goblin,

mouche.as Moineau de haye.

winaut: m. À greedie feeder, a ravenous, and
lie deuourer; ene that makes bricke-walls of bis


= ae pr pa cachamed gob-


4 Te «


‘gobbets.


gr Dee


re


pré À flicking to , like birdlime, wbatfocuer it tou- |


Gobelin. face gobeline, À crimzon faces à vifage | G


a oo ae à | déduit lt ES je: dit, D de


GOD


Gobier.chant gobier.Plainesbewielie,ordinavie with-
out Art.

Gobifion:m. 4 fafbion of long,and quilted borfemens
cafjocke,or coat,ufed in old time.

Gocourt. 4s Court; Short : rs (v.m.)

Godal: m. 4 tit, a jade: qNorm

Godde. vne lafche godde. 4 loathfill bylding. .
30ddon: m. A filthie glutton , er fwiller ; one that
bath a vile wide (wallow.
ide. as Godde,

au: m. A Gardeners Setting yron.
En odeau. Right downward;(a Gardeners tearme.)
odeluré : m.ée : f. Fumbled,crumpled, ruffed.

Godelureau: m. 4 gull, fop,affe, coxcombe ; a proud
woodcocke,

Godemare. The difeafe called, the Nightmares alfog
found made,or word caft out, at a feaft, whereby the

efis are warned to forbeare cating for a certain time;
(rh Godemare was a King of Bourgongne, fore-
doubted by the French, that th’onely found of bis name
aflenied them, dr made them defift from that they were
in band with: yet was be at length furprifed by Clo-
taire we, and the terrour of bis name turned in-
toa ie

Godemiche :f. 4 Dildoe.

Goderon: m. The fet of a ( fingle)ruffe after the Spa-
nifh(or plaine)fafhion , alfo,tbe ferting thereof ; alfo,a
ruffe fo fet; alfo, as Godran; alfo, a fafhion of im-
+ mi vfed by Goldfiitbes@c sand tearmed knur-


os de beau langage.affectation in ffeech,the
trimming of the tongue, with quaint pbrefès, choyce
tearmes, oc.
‘A goderons. Wrought with knurles.
Goderonné : mée:f. Set, as a ruffe ; pitched or tigh+
pa as a fhip; aifo , knurled , wrought or fet with
wrles,
Ocufs goderonnez. whofe white,and yolke are bea
ten together with a little verinice,
ronner.To fét,a rafies tovpitch or tight a flip; 10
worke , or fet with
Godet: yop +2 Sr »or Fug.
Godichon. men godichon. My pillocke,
Godillon:m. 4 girdle: &Poiétevin.
Godin: m.ine:f. Neat, fine, trimme, fpruce, cumetie,


chiot mette: £ Prettie;aÿper, feat, peart.indif
dl ifome.


girle,
Godiveaux. See Goudiveaux,
Godran : m.Sbip-pitch;or tbe Pitch(and Tern)
with fbips are tighted,or trimmed. .
on. See Goderon. .
>odronné: m. ée: f. as Goderonné. :
onner vne fraife. Tofet a ruffe. elke?
| Goerin. as Gorret. sits
Goés. The name of a kind of Grapes. dite >
Se" f, The Blacke Art , dinellifh Magieke, or


Goff: eo Dull, fottifh. doing ki ee |


or tr gg ve AE

A nie ci ‘a akinde

off, itech mao erdinari a ee thebuner
it yee Ids is more like, inc to à,


Goga og cheerefull, —*


chers ae | €:


Oriainalhfr


Yi
THE OHIO STATE: UNIVERSITY


inette:f. Aprettie peart laffe ; alouing, or Bes


+
)
4


eu J


G Orn;


Gogo. À gogo. with full contentment , or bis belle


Gogue : €. A fhecpes pauach,and thence,a baggas made
of good bearbs, chopt lard, fpices,egges, and cheefe; the
w'uch incorporated, and moiftened with the warme
bloud of the (new-killedjbeaft,are put into ber paunch,
and fodden with otber meat.
Gogues. Jollitie, glee, ioyfudne(fe, lightbeartednefe;
and hence ;
Eftre en fes gogues.To be frolick,luflie, linelie,wan-
ton, game{ome ; all-a-hoight,in a pleafant bumor, in a
verne of mitth,or in a merrie mood, ;
Goguelu: m. ué: £ Proud, cocket, fcornefall, brag-
girdvaineglorious ; that takes more flate vpon him
| _then becomes bim. a
Goguelureau.A proud coxcombe;one thats ofao worth
al all, bow well foewer be thinke of bunfelfe.
| Goguenarder.To buffornize it; breake ieafts,tell mer
|. netales.. çà
! Goguenelle: f. 4 fained title, or tearme, for a wench;


like our Gyxie,Ca ety Minx oe.


se Goguer, To be moft frolicke., linelie, blithe cranke,,


merrie ; to take bis pleafure , hort at eafe , make
good cheeresfet cacke-a-hoope , throw the houfe out,
at wiadowes ; easoy all wifhed delights, or affected
4 contentmenis. : LA Ne 73
Goguctte. 4 fmall fheepes baggas ; (made, as before,
| ae Cagnes) alfo,a kind of black:fh,and {hor tetarled
LL Cherrie, *

Avoir yne femme en fes goguettes.To haue bis fall
pleafiure of a woman. | resi
fre en fes gouuettes. 4s Eftre en fes gogues;; er
to be fet upon the merrie pinne. eo
Gobelins MAN Des of cite

tertainment at meeting: (Norm, ;


Goiart : m; 4 long hedging bill ; or hooke; a Welfh


hooke. } re
: Goibier:m.ere:f, Baker-leed; alfa, fplay-footed, fba-
à  lng, ill-fauouredly treading, |. d<
| Goie:f. A4ule band-bill, bedging beoke , or hedging
kn . . À ptnl
QUE au Lionnois. A?
-Goilant:m, Aceriaine white Sea-fowle as big as a
| Pigeon, which when tempefts approach flues up unto
- fe waters, «
| Goildronneur . À pitcher , trimmer , or tighter. of


1m


Ds.
oth pre.asGoinfre, . . -
Goinfre:m. 4 wag, flipfiring, knauifh lad; a merrie
conceited whorefènne; a notable good fellow,an excel-
Goitan. x Bondiée kind dr singe ag,
oiran. as Bondrée; A kind. t-winged I
that lines a rg en sli


| Goitre : £, A Weane; a (welling, bunchor offich |


under the throat; verie common among tho[e which
_ dwell about the Alpes, becaufe they ufeto drinke much
' coldand umwbolefome water. NE


 Goitreux :m. eufe:£ Full of Wennes; or bauing a wen
under the throat. = * a

Goitrons : m. waddles , or wattles; the two little,

and long exctefcences,which hang,teat-like , at either
fide of the throat of fome bogs ; a , the wennie
bags. that breed under the throats of the moft inbabi-
tants of the Alpes , by reafon of thei continual drin=

king of water, FAST + aan

| Goiveau. i fait goi. It is deawie; (a rufticall word.)

| Golette de maille. # Holette. =

| Golfe: m. 4 gulfé, whirlepaale, or bottomeleffe pit ; at-


: Gondolier: m. A Venetian wherrie-man.


GON


4 a ere gulfe of the fea betweene two Capes, or


Gomar :w, le gom. d' vn Boulengier ou Paftiffier.
A kneadurg able ; the boord whercon they worke their
_ bread,or make their pies.
mene, # Gumene.
Gomir. To vomit,caft, fpue.(v.m.)
Goiniflement : m. 4 comiting,cafting, fpuing.
inme : m. Gumme.
Gomme Arabic. Gumme Arabicke; comes from the
Shrub Acacia,the Ægyptian thorne,
nme Elemmy. Seeke Elemy.
Gomimé : m.ée :f. Gummed; jtiffened, thickened mix-
ed,or feafoned with Gumme.
Cire gommée. wax mingled with Roxen, and 2 u1-
pentine,
Gommement : m.4 gumming ; a thickening pr fiiffen-
ing with Gumme,
Gommene : f. See Gumene. :
Gommer. To gumme ; 10 fisffen, thicken, feafon; or an-
noint,with Gumme.
Gommeux : m. eufe :f, Gummie, fill of Gumme,fiiffe
by gumming thicke with Gumme.
morrhean : m. A Sodomite,a Buggerer.
Gomphofe. A faltening of one bone within another,
a of 4 nayle, or wedge into a peece of wood; fo are
the teeth fet into the ns bone.
Gonagre. The Gowt in the knees.
Gondole: £, 4 Gundola,or Venetian wherrie.
Sateftefe berfe en gondole. Hishead totters like a
boat in a florme.


Gonds d’ vne porre, The bookes , or bindges of a


' Sortir les gonds. Te grow impatient, fall into ex-
treames , flie out, forget bis duetie; proceed with too


much violence,or vebemencie.
Gonefle . 4 illage neere unto Paris | wherein ex-
ceHent bread is made; and bence ; Pain de Go-
n €.
Gonfalonnier. # Gonfanonnier,
onfanier : m, Am Enfigne, ov Standerd-bearer.
nfanon : m. .A little fquare Flag , or Penon
at the end of a Launce ; or (more particularly) an
old fafbioned Banner , or fquare Standard , berne
on the top of a Launce ; fach as , eutm to this
du is ujed in the warres mades by the Pope ; and


€;

Le gohfanon de I’ Eglife, The Generall of the |
Eux forces ( before whom fuch a Standard is
carried,

Gonfanonnier : m. 4 chief? Standard bearer, |

Gonin. Maiftre Gonin. 4 ry imbleor |


aétiue Tumbler, one thats perféétly fèene in trickes dr
cleanlie conucyances;(and thencejalfo,a fubtile whore-
Sonne wilie or flie mate,a Maifter in craft, or bus crafts
"M [1 ‘i à n
Gonnelle : £. A whole Peiticote ; the bedies, and skirts
being iayned together, RE
Flers hs : RER
Gonorrhée: f. The running of the reines, i
Gont-fanon. The royall Standard; (fo tearmed in old


time ) or as


Gontier. franc gontier. A rich Ch FF sata


Itbie wborefonze ;
Srbion ae Pure,


GOV


apa pane ea; se ae, ai,


Goren m. AE Sb pr Bairow-pig.
Poiffon,gorret & cochin, vieen l'eau & môrt en


vin: Prov De meates requiring mich
wine to be drunke with them ; Re |


pent :£ Acap; affo, aiuflle, iurre ; thumpe, or


Gorge :£ The throat, oF gullet, (of properly) the bot- ||

Gonz: of the mouth ; sor,the moft de éd part

thereof; it d woman, ihe outware iper part of |
the breaft, betrweene the necke rca alfo, the
gorge,or craw of birds; and,a ele gorge full ginen
vato birds(efpecially Hawk kes)

Gorge droitte, it Architetture’; a Nafielle.

Gorge renverfée.A omg reuerfl,or an Ogee.

Gorge-couge. A Robin-red-breaft, |
|” Tetter F le feu par la gorge.To ER onex- ||
| treamely, play terrible reakes.
| Pafferle pied furla pret Z à. Looke'Paffer.

Rendrefagorge. Te caft, vomit, (pue.

Rire foubs gorge. To laugh in bis fleeue.

Tenir le pied fur la gorge à vn. To haue one at bis
oon bis throat under bis feet; bis necke vader bis ||
| girdle,  :

Voler furla gorge. To exercifé, or labour hard, en a
fill ftomack €.

| Gorgé: m.ée:f. Gorged crammed, filled with.

: Gorgée de vin. A gulpe,or [wallow ; ds much wine as. ||
one lets downe bis throat at once. |

 Gorgément. Vp to the thront.

by er. s'en gorger de viandes.To gormandie it,or

gorge bimfelfe,to eat untill bis belive cracke.

Gorgertt f, A Gorget, Mocket, Bib, or breaft- ||
clorb

 Gorgerin: m. A Gorget of midile, alfo, à Cavkantt |
(worne onerthwart ae breafty alfo,the nécke-peece,or
coller of a garment; and fometiones the weche i? throat

| itfelfe ; and hence;

| Teftbien vuidé du gorgerin, He bath a goodlie ||
wide tbreat,or fooallow.

Gorgerin. (in Architellure ) is a fall round memiber,
accompanied with afqware one , in the foot, oF bot-
tome ofthe Chapter of a Piller , &c; a {malt Bonl-
n (with a fillet under it ) in the Chapter of à Piller,


| Gone m.ine :f. 0f, orbélonging to,the throat.


_ Gorrier: m. ere: £, 4 Gorgias ; or (more then it) gal-
lant both in aparlcrrisgs cand geflure; alfo,proud,
 brageard,vaunting, vaineglorious.

Gorrierement, Brauely, "pail, gallantly ; proudly, |
vaineglorioufly.
orron :m.:4 Sheat,or little yong bog.

Gort :£ A weare in a running water ; 07,28

| Gofaran.A nacklace,carkanet, border; anot
the bofome,or necke,

ps. See Hours 4 PARAIT

ier: m. The throat ; and(mofi properly) that part o
afer = |
e evo
Er : f.The Bumball,or Colt buf: fait
that beares Cotton,or Bumbafl.
fle: £. as Goufle ; Alfo,a) coffegive flowt.
€ d’aulx. A clone of Garlicke:
im. ée :f. Mocked, flomted, (coffed at ; boorded


Goll To ibe; deride noce, flowt, feoffe at ; bodtd,


Coir e: eet M gibine.
fleur : m. 4 offer mocker voter, giber,eafter.
X. a8 Goitreux.
Cothigue com. Gothlike ; rude, cruell,barbarous.
Gor m.i# ft flead'of Groton ; A little grot,
nico. as Goalüh,
süafche. Akind of Partridge ; as Goafche.
| Goubeau. as Gobeau.
- Goubélet. as Gobelec ; Alfa kind of ie
refèm FF our PE


Fr gorgerines . The Kings euill (a8 the newest ive i Seda

eat | lets,but without rs. > nha

Gorge-rouge. 4 Robia- vedcbredfis- ates at ee Nip ones 7 dar À

Goïgette: Apreitie little throat,or mob | Gôude:f. vd Mtarigéld,

Gorgias: m. es Een gente Gouideau. 4 Godeau. |

Gorgias: m. pe rer ra Planter au goudeau. « as Planter à fa’ bate See
gallant, gay, fine, trimme ;Guaiatly clotbed, that Barre,


tired. Am yarelled ; alfo,
ting , 07 plants æ < pu setae safe, fee fe rn free


ling with mirth.


Got ae a
seer iafer. To flaunt,braue,or g ren re


Goud- fallot.4 boone companion,a good fellow: R:

Goudiveau : m. 4 kind of open Pie , made "esta
 véale, AE À Picebaked together and af
terwards bard yolks of egs put om the top of it ; alfo,a fi-
gure in caruing Jike that pie; ora long p ainted Onall.


i whole peece; alfo, to b D'or pleafe Goutlronné: m. ée* £ Set(tiffe as a ruffe ; afo,pitéb-
in, the Dhanerie ofa we ed Favs te apr 4 ‘ip; seeCodesohn fe Wp
RÉ: :f. Byanérie, ga Je MERE trim dronnet, To fera rae rep, trame, OF
mle ai ct afbip: See God
Sara The thicke cb bag bee od at ene m. a Gotten That bath a wen,biaich, |
- their Sr tage: pale: the ouerture made vider their ner bist
© throat ; pee ce i pete ‘Thea fa inf on soe abd afd
| St i
Î Gonete re (ti Fes ae Nom.) | Gouét : m. 4 ind of little Jhôrt kk wibevewiib in
a brnere gale er + SSM th Be ee hide alt;
bas 3 de 4 ure


re il mar- |
RAS n gout AN A aone ; à drbpt


Ham, RE CE at ne


or: mp pa


*


(4
| =


GOV
Vn fiero miss 4 oft vnfatiable fimallow-
weatih ,wafl-copne,
cux: rue of, ‘Cale 2 fill of gulfés; infinite-
ly deepe ra Li euouring or {wallowing vp
wwhatfoeuer approaches or comes into;it.

Gouge.as Vouge; Alo a Fiyners Googe; alfo,a Soul-
diors Pug, or Punke ; a ; aWhore that fallawes the Camp;
alfo,the Hammer voberewith trees are marked in t e
King Forrefis.

Gouhourde: f. 4 Gourd.
oujar. 4 Gudgeon.

Goujar de mer. The Sand-eele,or Sea-Gudgeon.

Goujat: m. 4 Souldiors boy.

Gouyataille :f, A troupe of Souldiors boyes; @ crue of
crackropes, a knot of flipftrings.
oujate :f, A Souldiors wench ; ang:

Gouwjaterie: f.la g. Souldvors beyes, or peungrate
bells that follow a Campe

Gouillarder; &, Gouillardife, as Goulet &,
Goulardife : Savoyard.

Gouillart. as Goulard; À glutton,or gréedie-gut.

Gouinfre : m, A mad-cap,mervie grig, pleafant knaue,
conceited wborefonne.
oujon : m, A Gudgeon-fifh; alfo, the pinne which
the truckle of a plas runneth on; alfo, the Gudgeon 4
the Spindle ofawbeele ; any Gudgeon. ii}

vions :m. Shackles,or fetters, for. prifoaerss
QUIT, as louir, To enivy : Pic. 3
sOUju:m, UC: Full-cheeked, plump-faced ; chi
or puft up inthe face,

G :m,A rane sense foal guy
greedie feeder.


Goulard: m.arde:f. Rauenows, grecdie, devoir,


that bath a great fivallow.
Goulardé :m.ée:f. Eaten greedily » denoured afi

Pak oe or gogcled downe,
arder. To eat greedily, feed haftily, die ex-

Eu torauine, goggles glubup, Swallow dune,
emenfl ar mouthfuls

Got ife : £.4 rauening,dewouring, baflie or greedie
Ange Hox

uldron, as Goultran ; alfoyas Gosidercin


ouldronné : m.ée : f.Pitched,or tighted asa lip,


as Gouderonné.
Gouldromner. as Gouderonner.


| Goulée : :f. A throatfiull,or mouth full o dre. Ys ;


__Ellen’en peut dla youlée. She can get
but a {natch and away; there is na lying for her at rack
and manger; 3 See eas


| Gouléeur. as aa Guleurs 4: Sur.


GC of land , st eae thePole,

f let ; ‘Condoit, oi
Tete D deb felfes al the “es
: mecke of a Violl, Bottle , or other:


row-neckt Veffell ; alfo , the bole , pe a |


Fox , or Badger ; alfoya nariow brooke, or.
ter of water.


| _… Goulet de, cheminée . The PEL


* chimn


Goulet de face. Ame, locpebole, or dang


nCrannie , inthe wall OCs
Ga) herd ai mé


a Agen rame
| a i ee Am A


wat RATES
Aad}


sy


4! Hcleseapen een
‘Goursunaie: À f, Gluttonie » gormandixing s deuon-


G 0O V


Goulfre. as Gouffre.
Goullardife. as Goulardife ; 4/0, ribaldrie ; “Teen

ous vi diffolute tattle.
rompt Prinily, fecretly, by fealib ; or, as in


Cone m. The pipe of a finke,or gutter.
Goutlrans a, Sto pice + sas
Goulu:m.uë:f. Gluttonous , greedie, ranenous, de-
pue, fivalowing up.
ale te red, gluttononfly,ranenouflylike a
g


Gouphon:: zm. The bindge of a doore, window, cc;


:m, À Fox.(v.m.) à
‘A endormy rien’ne tombeen la gueule:
Pre an june wbat’s fit to be done, aa ufes
10 fleepe when it fhould be done, lines a beaft,and dies
a begger,
Goupille: sf The yron pinne that goes through the ioynt
af a bindge,or bafbe of aclafpe.
illon. 2s Guepillon; Aa bolie-water fprinkle ;
be brufh of briftles wherewith glaffes,eo-c,be 1in-
ched ; alfà,as Toupillon ; a ftopple ; alfo,a yong, or lit-
tle Fox; whences
ieee oupillon. To play the Truant,
Gourat. fn Goujat.
Gourd: m. as Gourt; or, A whirlepoole; or decpe
hand loag ) bole mariner ;or otber water; alfo,as
G urd rm. de £ Nine onied,afleepe, fiffe,fe
OUurd :m.de: eaflonied,a fice e, fiiffe,fence-
Jeffe, benummed, as the bands with ce cold ;alfo,
om . , duljbeauie, lumpifh,
oulement : wm.ÆAcrafhing,or bruifing ; a mor-


tifying, by violent handling.
iit Numme, benunimed,aflonied, flonnied(by cold.


es be aumme.fencel]e amie, Sipsied,
)


(by the extremitie of cold.
Gounetsas Gorter; A Sheat,or Barrow big,
Gourfoulé : am. éer fi. Crafbedbruifèd ; mortified, B
Sale mg: $
oulement.# Gourd-foulement.
de uler.To crufhor bruifés to mortifie, by a violent
hanelling,ere.


Gourgias. as Goriass 4 Afsproud fie, Patelie fan-
ding on bis pantoftes : €Rab,
moulin =f: The Conduit ofa water-mil ; 3
ae water-courfeser ditch, that is snp under the
eele..
Gourde: :f A enffe on the mouth , a pall on the


nh wn


Li LES be A
dant. lansing grmandig 5s
»tmifisfing.


Cotes Ver deuoure, glut,, gormandixe,


or gluttonixe me frillup, frallow: dawne greedily;
alos. to domineere , infult, ov crow ouer ; in-
Solently to taunt M Eu Le cr tocurbe ;


Gourman telle, A


ring, rauining ; exceffine cating P merry fre-
ding.
Ttiy


tm 4 estan; bellie-god,
34 Fok sn hay »gully-


elutionneffe.
x À da erdobétel La :
debs Gen £ Rs


4


CHOSE NS AS at > ee ee


’

-

a.
x


| i ‘rene on
: Gant: 3 FE PL 3


G ©@'y


GO LY
Gourmandife tue plus de gens qu’efpée enguer- | Gouté: m. ée:f. Gowtie, or troubled with the “aa
re trenchant : Prov. More are killed by fiw feting thee


by the fiverd.

Gourme :£, The Strangles ; the thicke bumor which
young borfes void at their narells, alfo, foame, or a fea-
mie flime,

Gourmé : m.€e: f. Curbed; alfa, cuffed oa the mouth,


pefed on the nofe, or faces alfo, purged from flime, or
Conti To curbe (aborfe ;) alfo, to knocke, buffer,


pommell,cuffe,pafh on the mouth,or face. .
Se pa Poa void. bis flime, to purge bis foame.
Gourmet : m. 4 Wine-cunner ; a Wine-marchants
Broker ; one whom be trufts withthe we and
… binploycs in the venting, of bis new-come
lies.
Gourmeter. To curbe,
ourmette: f. À cwrbe.
Tenir en gourinette. To curbe, or keepem ame.
Gourmetté: m.éc : £. Cutbed,
Gounmnetter. To curbe.
Gournauld: m. 4 Gurnard fifh.
Gournay. The name of a towne in Normandie.
Vous avez paffé fur le pont de Gournay. Youre
without care, {bame, or feare; youdare pant:
(cene thing openly,
Gourneau. 4 Gurnard,


Comes Beguiled, cheated , couféned, crea
Bar!


Cds as Gourgias; or,es Gorrier.

Gourt 3m, .A violent flreame,or gulfe of mars or,a
whirlepoole,or deepe bole in a water.

Gone f. The buske, fwad, cod, bull of beanes, pease,


Goutte d'aulx. A bead of Garlicke,
ouflé : m. ée : f. Dewoured.yauined, eaten; ; fed
with Fating.

Gouffepillé :m. ée:f. Shaken, or tugged, as a Cat by a
Dog ; alfo, vnbusked, fhaled,uncafed,, (tripped:


Goufpiller. To, ke or lg, as nés
&c; alfe, (and moft properly) to 5 0r take
pale out of the fiveds 5 earns ar 7
RACE RS DULOM! HOw
Confit: Te sat, rauine, ‘deuoures,to itl
meats bu: OED 2 ARR 1?
Gouffet: m4 Gufs the prece of rer oft,
whereby the armebole is couered; alfo,a


en sn


Gaull: HAT Codie shale  bie rad


tn Tbe


Gout: To sal kr fey me


ouceit, or penal eff


Eur pee


EE ae


ol cag te
eo JARbAstWI0 |


ae coin :m, Ship-pitch; or Pitch wherewith,
Goutte :f. A drop of water,eoc; alfo,a littleyai iot , a


wbit,a verie finall deale,

La mere goutte. Vapreffed wine,or oyle; that which
of it felfe,and without preffing, comes from the grapes.
pen + as foone as they are fettled in the Preffe~
troug!

Goutte à goutte, By little and little , by degrees,
Pa after drop , or, one drop after another ; 3
ence;

Goutte 4 goutte on emplitla Cuve : & , gout-
te à goutte la mer s’efgoutte: Prov. *

Boire la goutte furl ongle, Toleaue emptie bore

make cleane cups; drinke up all but fo much as il

fland en the drinkers nayle,

Ien’y voy ny grain ny goutte. jee it not a whit, 1
cm it not aiot; I perceine, or conceine it not at
au.

Dieu garde mal qui voit bien, & n'oit goutte. For

wy part, am loat! a: it, though Lfceit,well


Tet bien povre qu’ ne voit goutte : Prov. Hee’s
verie poore that wants bis eye-fight..


Goutte: f. The Gowt.


Sue crampe ou,crappe.?be Crampe ; or, a Con-
Goutte delin. The weed called Dodder ; See Lin.

Goutte maurequine, as Goutte ferene.

tte nouge. The Gowt in any of the ioynts.

Goutte ferene. Blindneffe, or extreame dimneffe of

ÿ Ces by the obturation of the Opticke Sinewes.
Outte Sciatique.The Sciatica; a pain,ache ,or fitch
in the bippes.
La oe en la hanche, la fille en la pance: Pro.


» tale dese tte le medecin ne voit goutte: Prov.( As
pr A sls d GE pes gun belpe pe Lors that bane pnd


<p m. a viellLas Cruet wherein Ole, or Vi-

negar is jee to the table; alfo,a Smalt Ewer, or La:
mer afo,a little drop.

Goutte-rofe. 4n extreame redneffe of the fuce ; pim-


led,and fitt Or fierie [peckles, : ”
Peu à sf. Gowtie, full of. ‘3 Gort.
ser; achannell.
i eeousiercs: little firrowes that runne aleng the
bead,or bornes of ared Deere.


“Bonnets quatre gouttieres. Foure-cornered, or
Square, on
Gouttreufe.A certain ahite,long-beaked end tongelf
- bird,that bath a great red pouch banging from ES


- therbeake tober breafi; otherwife (in bi nefès and
» Yhape) po vefembling a Swanne.
Gouvernail:m. The radder,or flerne rez wi


seed Gouvernal. The pe
éfied in-
thts 0 amex |


Goüvernant. Governing, ruling,
be à re rm, À ee ra
ernante: f: 4 Gouerneffe
Gouverné:m. ééif. Corns
‘ed maiftered;ordered,oner stempered ghoder ated;
alfo,intertained with talke,) rela mieu. Bs
Gouvernement:-the rule,
Secs tael paver empire, deinio, regiment,au-
rei tg


ae -


s


GRA


policie, or courfe of proceeding in State-matters; the
managing of publicke bufineffe in a countrey.
Gouverner.To gouerne,rule,commaund,masficr,fivay;
ouerfee ; to feignorixe,or baue authoritieouer ; alfo,to
pus Le der ,dirett,condutt,looke vntosbaue the charge
of; alfo, to temper, moderate, reftraine ; alfo,te inter-
taine with difcourft.
Quigouverne bien la bouche. That és a temperate
feeder,
Qui gouverne bien fon cas. One that lookes well to
bis bufine Je. \ \
le le gouvernaytefteà tefte environ yne bonne
heure. 1 conuerfed with bim band to hand ; 1 beld bim
chat, or in difconift, J intertained bim with talke, an
boure together, ‘;
Celuy gouverne bien mal le miel qui n’entafte:
Prov. Hee's but an ill cooke that licks not his owne fin.
gers ; Looke Miel. jive)
Gouvernerefle : f. as Gouvernante.
Gouverneur: m. A Ruler, Gouernour, Commaninder,
Ouerfeer.
Gouvert. a Gouvernement.
Ouytrouz. as Goitrons ; Swines wadles.qRab,
Goy’: m, A little band-bill Vine-booke sor V'ine-knife.
Oyart. A long hedging bill,or welfhhaoke. .
Goye, : f, Joy. Pic. alfi,as Goy.
elle: f. A utd of Cheefe-cake ;as Talmoufe.


Pic. 4
Goyon. 4 Gudgeon,
Gozal: m. 4 fitting Pigeon. qRab. -
Grabat: m. A poore mans bed ; a courfe Mattreffe, 4
Straw-bed; alfiya Couche. : : :
Grabeau:m.4 garbelling of (pices,eoc; (hence) alfo, a
curious examination, ty 00 of, precife fearch in-
to, matters, . eit
:m.¢e:f. Garbelled; alfoneerely examinéd,
precifely fifted , narrowly looked, curioufly fearched,


 wato.
2 Grabeller.r0 garbell (pices ec; (and hence)alfo,to exa-
mine precifely, fifi neerely, looke narrowly, fearch curi-
into. ; |
x #1 Focal allufion to Gradué ; a Grad-
ate, ‘
Grabuge: f, A great coyle, irre; garboyle, turmoyle,
Grabagersn heepea foule coye;to make a great firr
Grabuger. To keepe a sto make a gre e,
or monftrows burlyburly. . Aino 4
Grace: £. Grace, fauour,good will good liking good opi-
4 3 ere ion ; alfd, beautie, feeme-


Ons Cre.
lineffescomeline(fe, ” 34 Decorumsa grace
in,or bcos erence a


_ good difpofition, roditelfes alfo, a
par iueneffesye id time
the Licence procured by Gentlemen for


for Roturiers to
buy their Fieks, (voben they wanted monty t0 follow the
warres) was alfo tearmed Grace.) à
Graces (Plurall.) Thanks.
Grace de Sain& Canart. The beflowing of a thing
which the beftower cannot kecpe ; or,a fanour done be-
~eaufe one cannot doewithall, =. |
Grace de Sain& Paul. Acertaine little flone thats
againfl the biting, o> 9 mm beafls
ae ould fell 5e)
onnegrace. as Bonne-grace ; a » 4 Snufin, or
Muffe. et iat Sees : bs + Lier


the meere gracesliver Joiriiepr joie


Le fai, & gouvernement d'une republique.Tbe |,


GRA
=


Prince ; and which be may ve fife without violation of

‘common right,or of the Lawes ; as Pardons Remiffions,
Gifis,Graunts,Difpenfations, Priuiledges, Patents of
Offices Warrants for money, érc ; more particularly, a
Pardon for Murtber, Manflaughter, or of a perfon
condemned for an offence, which the Law, of it felfe,
cannot difpence with; (in which fence, this ward grace
4 alfo generall,both to Remiffion and Pardon, (ryihRa-

» gueau ; though another maie it a {pecies vito Remif-
Dm) And this Pardon is to be procured from the King
bimfelfe,and in the bighet Court of Chancerie.

Moines de grace. An Order of white Monkes, which

weare on their eine a great red Croffe.

Avec grace. Gracefitlly, decently, plea finely plaufib

with a fafhion, ia come fort, Fk “te

manner,

Degrace. of courtefie, 1 pray you heartily, 1 befeech

you fir.

Pour grace. The (ame.

N'aurois-ie bonne grace de ? would it not become

me well to? ‘ :
Graces: f. The three Graces; viz, Aglaia,Thalia,and Ÿ
Euphrofine, eu the daughters of lupiter and À
Venus , and adored as Goddeffès , by the auncient À
Painims; whence,
Ila befoing de facrifier aux Graces. Hews a har{h,
nny rongh-bewed , currifh, or churlifh, fel-

‘ow.


Grachinoier. as Grafigner.

Gracieufement. as Graticufement.

Gracieufeté: f. Gracioufneffe, fanourableneffe ; affabi-
litte courtefie; bumanitie benignitie, gentlenefe ; alfa,
as Gratuité.

Gracieux: m. eufe: f. Gracious; gentle, affable, cour- ¥
teous, benigne, plaujible, debonaires See Graticux.
Gracieux feigneur. 4 skaleleffe fifh,ofa lone forme,
fun te unto De ff eae and feldome

ound, that countrey pe old bim a fit prefent for
their Landlords, Ky Hii

Gradation: £ 4 Gradation, flep,degree, flapre,

Grade: f, A degree, flate;or dignitie : aduancement un-
10 greatneffe ; a flep,flayre,gree/e.

Gradé: m. ée: f. Graduate, or bauing taken a degree.

Gradot: m, 4 Gurnard.

Gradué. 4 Graduate ; one that bath taken a degree in :

PA Are à sm à |
raduc: m. CC : f. Graduated, bauing taken a dègree.
Homme nongradué. (Oppofèd “ah, rel :
rié) a fingleor unmarried man. cies

Graduel. 4 atafe-booke,or part of the Maffe, inuented
by Pope Celeftine in theyeare 430.

Graduellement. Gradually by degrees,orderbsflep af.

ter ep, from band to band, 7 RTE Foi 4
en ' mo ce fèratch, or fèrape ; to rend, orteare up
ith the nayles, pale ns
Griffe gtaffe, By hooke or by crooke, feambling- |
bycatch that catch may,anyWays "12 720 a

Grafhons. -Ja o!d'time the Lieutenants of Earles were,
now a kind of the beft fiveet Cherries arc called fo, *

Graier: m, The Officer that gathers the Kings vieht of
Graricér woods, and forrefis. at

Graigneur. as Greigneur; Greater. ENorm.

Grail'ant. as Grailleux, |

Graillat:m, 4 Kooké,or white-bild (row,

Gtaille:f, Thefame. ; |

Graille: coma Grefle; Slender, SA

er. To winde a Horne bollowly; to blurtea Trum- À
pet ; to peake boarfely, or with bide — | ;


>»


“Vee


GRA


barfb},vatuneably ; to croake,or cry like a Rooke.
Grailleux: m. eufe: f. Speaking boarfely founding bol-
lowly,or bar {bly ; blurring ; ratling in the throat; croa-
king like a Rooke. :
rain: m, Graine,corne ; feed ; alfo,a graine,or bitt of
falt, fand,exc ; a Moat; (and hence, a little sot ,whit;)
alfo, the kernell, or little {lone of a Grape, or other
Esrrie ; alfo,a Grape; alfo,a Barlie-corne,or the fourth
part of an yach,in meafisres; alfo,a graine,or the foure
“and twentieth part of a pennie-weight; (alfo,a whirle-
wind,or florme of wind,at fea, €Norm.)
Grain bernage. The peculiar corne of one countrey ;
or corne that grew on a mans owne land,or in bis owne
forte i alfo, Meffelin; or wheat ,Rie,and Barlie mingled
together. .
Grains de ladrige. Spots of leaprofie; mexild fpots.
Graindefel. À graine of [alt ; Vn gros grain de
fel, A great ball,or forest falt.
Grain de Turquie. Turkie corne,Turkie wheat,ladi-
an wheat, Mays.
Grain fur bord. Scant, or bard-flricken meafure of
corne, falt,eoc.
‘A grain d'orge. Ina triangular forme.
Ie n'en ay grain, ne goutte; &, Ie n’y voy ny
one ny goutte. 7 neither bane aiot,nor [ee a drop,
of tt. :
lly a plus de paille que de grain. There is moretra
then ad fluffe to be bad. 3
Joyeux comme fourmis en grain. Asmerrie as an
Ant on a Corne-heape.
Jamais grain ne fruétifie fi premier ne fe mortifie:
Prov. Seed neuer comes to fruétifie untill it firft bane
mortified, ee
Nul grain fans paille: Prov. No corne without flraw
(or chaffe;) good and bad arecommonly together.
Tel grain tel pain: Prov. Looke Pain,
Vin de grain eft plus doux que n’eft pas Vin de
prefle: Prov. The fir Wine is better then the (econd
expre(fion; good offices bord done are of much more.
owes then f[uch as be pere ; 7
Vn fac percé ne peut tenir le grain: Prov. A facke
thats full of | pp tal no Pa
Grainant. Sceding,runningtofeed.. 5)
Graine: f. The feed of bearbes,e>c ; alfo,graineswhere-
- with cloth is dyed in graine ; Scarlet dye, Scarlet in
graine ; whence; . #
Graine d'efcarlate, as is Chermes. . >
… Graine de Paradis; Graines of Paradifesor,the [pice
which abe: cee | phase Sift
Graine de perroquet. Wild Saffron, bafiard
mocke Safen,Saffron dere, er CEE
Graine des vers.as Mort aux vers. 1:11 «0
Laiffer vne fille fleftrir pour grai eepe a maid
long without a busband ; of [ucha one may be fayd fhe
islet runne to feed, as well as of bearbes vngatbered,
der vne filled graine, ou


g | |


GRA


Graifleté. a Grefleté. k,
Graiflayer, To liffe. :
Graiffe’: f Fat, feame, greafe. de
De bp graïfle. Full,plumpe,goodlie fat well-fed,in
good liking.
I nya ps grande graiffe. Thereis not much good
to be done,wealth to be bad, profit to be gotten,gaine to


be made. :
Graiflé: m.ée:£. Greafed, annointed, or fincared with


fat.
se Graifle-fondre. To fivelt,fivelter founder.
Graiflement. Fatly,zroffely,greafily.
Graifler. To greafe ; to aunoynt or fneare with fat.
raifict: m. The little(venomous) grcene frog,or toad,
Graiflewire: £ Fattine bsgreafdalispreafion
Graiffeux: m. eule: £. Fattie,ereafie, full of greafe.
Graiffier : m. One that loues fat things ; alfo,a Grafier,
or fattener of cattell. / .
Graiffin: m. Fat mould, or dung-to manure ground
with. a0 ; Has
Graller. To parch,as Peafe,Nuts,dre. Blefen.:
Grame, ou Gramen. Couch-graffe, Quitch-graffe,
Dogs-graffe ; alfo,any kind of graffe; and hence;
Grame de Manne. Manna-graffe, Deaw-graffe,
_ (whofe feed the Hollanders eat,as we doe Oatmeale.)
GramedeParnafic. Pernaffus graffe, white Liner-
wort, : ; ; ù
Gramie piquant. Pricking,or fharpe Dogs-graffe.
Gramigne-Couch-gralfe, Quitch-graffe.Decs-grafe
minaire:£. Grammer ; the Art of Grammer.
Grammiairien:m. 4 Grammarian ; a Profeffor of
Grammer. ied
Grammatical: m, ale: f Grammatical ; of; or belon-
ging vnto,Grammer. obi
Gramment. as. Grandement ; Greatly. (v.m.)
N’a pas gramment. 1f4 not long agoe. :
Gramouse : £ 4 difh made of flices of cold meat fiyed
with Hogs feame,and ferued up in fauce of beaten eggs,
and verinice boyled,a while, ina little of the broth |
wherein the meat was fodden. 1B 5
Grampé: m.ée:f, Taken with the Crampe ; or, not able
toftirre,asonethathaththe (rampe. — - "

The fea-Crab tearmed,a Grampell, Grit,
and Pungar, hs
Granche: f #»Grange ; alfo,the Carkaffe of a file.
G + m, Legrand des biens, ou dela terre; the
_ whole (malfe lance, ot inberitance, thats to\be

parted among Cobeires @Breton,
rh m. est: Sr ; big, A ; buges migh-
tie; tiall ; alfo,bigh,lofiie; flatelie. sea)
Le re Dar es arme and hand together.
rands iours. A general, and'extraordinarie Seffi-
ons called by Commiflion, or Letters Patents, fromthe
King, (molt commonly) afier a warre, ciuile broyle, or
Infurreéion, whereby Law, and procee-
dings of Iuftice bane beene impeached; Looke Tour:
Grand d'oye. Good fiore, a great deale,abundance,
numbers of. NE Eh eae
qd epiece: Looke Piece. — aw)
-yLe d'vendredi, Good Fri à. gear
On a veu d’auffi grand vent venter; we bave heard
as big words asibefe without tremblings or, little y-
nough bath beene feene to come of be words 5 a
Mountaine bath beene brought to bed of a Mouferere


now, pes lh 5. aft.
Grand bandon fait grand Jarron: Prov, Great li-
bertie makes great theenes. ene


nd bien ne vient pas en peu d'heure! Pro,
ome


x
Jrigjnal trom


ARABE OHIO. STATE-UNIVERSITY :: à


.x GR A

*

Grapir. To creepe, crawle, or climbe up (hardly, and
with fome paine.) |

Grappage: m, Clujter-gathering ,Grape-gathering ,Vin-
tage, Wine-haruefl.

Grappe: £ A bunch,or clufler of grapes:

Grappe de mer. 4 thing in the fea couered as it
were with the flowers of a Vine ; othenvife of a rude,
and ouglie fhape.

Il fembloit mordre à la grappe. He /pake fo beartily,
fi carnef, fobotly, that he seemed to att what be ut-


tered.
Grappelle : f, The Lowfè-burre, Ditch-burre, leffe
Burre docke.
Grapper. To gleane after grape-gatberers.
Grappes: f. The Scratches (in horfes legs.)
Grappetant. Gleaning after grape-gatherers.
Grappetté. Gleaned,or gatbered(as grapes.)
Grappeufe : £ 4 grape-gleanereffe ya woman that
gleanes after grape-gatherers,
Grappil: m. The graple of a fhip.
Grappillage: m. Grape-gleaning. \,
Grappiller. To gleane afler grape-gatherers.
Grappilleur: m. A grape-gleaner. |
appillon: m. A little clufter of grapes.
Grappin : m. # Grappil. |
Grappu: m.uë: f. Grapie, chufterie, full of clufters of


apes.

Gute: £. The Kings vight,part,or fee, in euerie (ale of
wood made in the forrefis of bis fubiedts, due*unto him
by reafon of the Iuftice done, and good order kept,
within them, by his Officers ; be doth alfo challenge

thereby a part in the propertie of the foyle, demaine,

fruits and reuenue thereof ; (for generally, la grarie is

a Right that one hath in the propertie,and file of ano-


© apart of the price when they are fold,and of the fruits,
ec,when they are gathered.) He o
ras: m.Vn ga A broad,or bawdie,tale.
a


Le gras de la iambe. The calf of the leg.

Gras: m. grafle: £. Fat, greafte, well-fed; groffequar-
rie; pur fie ; alfa, fertile much-yeelding bse)
SR boyau. The Inch.pmne,or fnne-pinne ; See


yau. se \
«Le gras double, The fat tripe ; or, that part of the
Ne which yeelds 2 taf and ibickef ripes.
_ Caufes grafles. Bawdie faits immodefl attions.
Pain gras. Thats doughie,or not baked ynough.


Paroles urafles. Ribauldrie;lafciuious {peeches.
Son gras. Bran that hath fome meale among it(where-
by F4 feeles finootb, fill, or fattie;) Some call it Pol-


_ Vin gras. Fat,aylie,or greafiewine, —
3ra$ comme vn cochon, as fat as a Pig.
ras comme yn gliron, as fat as a Dormoufe.
ras comme vn moine, ou comme vn pourceau ;
as fat as a Frier. dc.


‘ ny
Dormir inee, in bed; repe
em Emre


| Ê


lormir la
se 9 a it.) Ven
en fait fes choux gras. He gaines well, gets much,


D


: £ Fe


greffe


ther mans woods, and forrefls; whereby he lookes for) |!


Parler gras, .A lifping;or not pronouncing of R. |


Graflelctsm. ete f. Fattifh, fie, fimewbat fit, in


GRA
¢


Graffier. To te. (v.m.)

Graflure. as Grafleur.

Grat: m. Paflure, feeding, grazing fir cattell ; alfo, a}
feraping, fcratching,or clawing. À
Envoyer au grat. To fend a grazing; a maïfler to
turne away bu (èruant.

Ge Scratching, fcraping,clawing,rubbing, ferub-

ing.

Gratant le cul au foleil. 14h, flouthfully, lazily like
a lowfie begger.

Grate: com. Gratefull acceptable, pleafing unto,

Sue: m. éc:f. Scratched, feraped, clawed, ftrub-

Grate-cul: m. 4 Hep ; the fruit of the wild Brier,


Ce
LaRofe en fin devient vn grate-cul : Prov. The
Rofe at length becomes a Hep.
Grateleux: m. eufe : f. Scabbie,itchie, fcuruie.
Gratelle: £. 1ch; or feurfe.
Gratement: m.A fcratching, (raping, clawing, ferub-
bing ; alfo,an itching which makes one feratch..
Grater. To foratch,to ferape,to ferub,claw,rub,
Grater pais. To flye, take bis beeles, trufl to bis legs,
runne away.
Tant grate la Chevre que mal gift.(4 Prouerbe ap-
plyable to fuch as cannot be quiet when they are well,
Trop grater cuit trop parler nuit: Prov. Too much |
fraiche burts the skin, too much talking the whole
1e, 2
Apres Ja fefte on grate la tefte: Prov. Repentance |
begins where feafiing ends. ha
‘Qui flare il grate: Prov. Great flatterers are great |
Serape-goods nok ;
Qui naift de geline il aime à grater: Prov.Hethats |
« borne of a Henne loues to be fivaping, ACC
Qui fuit les poules apprend à grater laterre: Pro. ||
Henne-followers turne earth-{crapers ; wee quickly
learne the bent of thofe we much frequent. "1 |
Gras a . The Dog mars Goufe-fhare,
oofe-graffe,Loue-man,Cleaner en: 10
Gratia Dei. Elaphobofeum, or Harts fodder, beld by
fome Authors to be a kind of wild Parfenip, and by
others the wild, or baflard Dittanie, wee call other |.
bearbes ; viz. Hedge Hpffope; and blue (rancs-bill,
or Crowfoot Cranes-bill; and Dwarfe, or low Ciftus,


Gratieufement. Gracioufly,courteoufly,affably,ve (pec
tinely ; benignely gently, favourably.
Gratieufeté: £. Gracionfneffe, fauourableneffe ; affa-
bilitie, courtefie, refpettineneffe; bumanitie, benigni-
tie; gentleneffe, : :
Gratieux: m. eufe : £ Graciows,courteous,affable,re- |
peëtine,debonaire ; gentle,benigne, fauourable ; full of
bumanitie ; alfo,in good grace,or in great fauour; with;
See Gracieux. ET A2
Gens de bien font toufiours gratieux: Prov. Home
people are ener fill of refpeët. han
Gratification: £..4 gratification, or gratifying ; the do-
ing of a pleafure inlieu of a pleafire done.
Gratifié: m. ée': f. Gratified ; boneflly recompenced, |
than kfilly requited, ps ‘al
Gratifier. Tegratifie ; requite, recompence ; conférre a
benc fit on,doe a e pe ehel
is é: a ri fevaped,clawed,
ratigner. Tofcratch,claw, (cvape. ost
Gratine ait “The remnant of childrens pap, left in,or
ickin ¢ bottome of the skellet wherein it was


i hats


Cra-


GRA


Gratiole :£, Thebeard called Hedge-bylfope, and Gra-


- tia Dei,

| Gracitude:f. Thankefülne[fe,gratefülnelfe.

“| Graton de pore, Of the rife aa Et scale bving
melted, there remaines a flefhie part which cut mm pee-
ces,is thus tearmed(at Paris.)

Grattement. See Gratement.

Gratter.as Grater.

Grattoir: m. 4 bread-grater,or great grater. :

Gratture:f, Aferatch, a ferape ; a Scratching, or fcra-

ping.

Gratuit. don gratuit. À free gift.

| Gratuité:f. 4 gratuitie,or free gift.

Gratuitement. Freely of meere good-will ; without
hope of recompence,or of returne.

Grauade:f. A reproach,taxation or bard tearme; alo,
any bard meafure.”

Gravage dela mer. The fands,the fea fhore.

: Gravaigne. Thewild goof tearmed a Barnacle.
Gravan. The name of 1 finall fea-fifh; asBelonne.
Gravant.Grauing,caruing ,cutting;alfo,creeping ¢limb-

ing,or fcrambling vp a thing.
Grave: £ Sand,or grauell; al(o,the pulfe Ax-fitch,batch-
~_et-fitch,ax-feed,ax-wort, :
Grave: com Grane;ftatelse folemne; feuere,auflere;flay-
ed fetled,coftant;fage,diftreet,aduifed;(ad,importast,
heauie; greeuous.


4


ve: mée: f. Graued, carued, cut; pearced, or en-


. tered into,
Gravée :f. A fhaking.ENorm. :
Grauelé. cendres gravelées. Afhes made of wine-lees


burned.
Gravelée. Tartar ; old lees of wine. ! ;
Gravelleux :m.eufe : £ Grauellie,full of the fione.
Gravelle: . Small grauell,or fand; fuch as is in (prings, ~
__ or flreamesyalfo,the flone.
Gravelleon : m. The ftone, ee
Gravement. Granely ; (olemnly; feucrely,aupierely ; fet-
Ledly conftantly, flayedly ;fagely, difereetly, en ;
| fadly,peauily.
| 4 Graventer.# Greuanter.
‘Graveolence: £. Aa euill finell, fimacke, or fanonr.
ver. To graue, cut,carue ; pierce or enter mto,
Graveur: m. A grauer,caruer,cutter. j
Graveure :f. A grauing,caruing, cutting ; piercing.
Graui: mie: Climbed,fialed, crawled, (crambled,
crept up,or oan ,
: mx


| Gravier ; fand mixed with final lanes.
4 Gravir. To climbe,{e le,feramble,creepe, Up or
À _vpor ttle and little. Pes :


nonfnelfe. Le HAN ever
e vne grofle gravite. To like.an.
man ; be furlie, take a great deale of rate
Gravoir: m, Abeapeofgraucl, =» - ad
Gravois: m. Grauell, - à arr à St
Gravonner. To proke, or dig, with the fisgers, into the
ground; (bence) alfo,tofearch out... |
Gtavouer. «Gravis 4
Graux : m. Sluces, or open paflages, made of purpofe to.


pe ppp 0 8 Sete Kg
Chugh; SeeGrole, 7 0 ees


“GRE


confent ; affeétion ; bart mind ; wifh, de fire bumor ; ak
fe Ei Fear ne LI gratefull and
good acceptation, ©
‘A oré.willingly, freely, without confiraint, of bimfelfe,
of bis ovone free will,with bis whole confent ; alfo, with
good fuccefe,after a mans wifh,vnto bis likmg.

A mon gré, Willingly,by my good will; after my mind,
according 10 my fancie or humor, exen as I would
baueit. x

En gré. Gratefully, thankfully, acceptably , in good


part,

Tout de gré. Wittingly, willingly, of (et purpofe.
Porter gré à quelqu'un de. To take thank/illy at the
hands of, to acknowledge bimfelfe beboulden to, one


le vous enfçay bon gré. 1 like you well, or giue you
bartie thanks, for it.

Bon gré mal gré va le Preftre au Sené : Prov.
Needes muft be goe whom the Diuell (neceffitie) dri-


ueth,

Greal.fang greal; Looke Sangreal. qRab.

Greau. À difh,or difh-full of qBourg.
rebe. as Griaibe.

Grebonde:f. A feruice at Tennice, wherein the ball
vunnes not along on the boufe, but bounds on the fide
thereof.

Grec: m. À Greeke, or Grecian , one of Greece; alfo,a
booke ufed in Popifh Churches.

Ileft Grec. He 45 a moft craftie, or fubtill Courti…


er.
Grec :m.Grecque:f.Greeke ,Greekifh,Grecian; of,
or belonging to,Greece.

- Beauté Grecque. 4 foggie plumpneffe, or fatneffe
of bodie ; (for the Grecians bould the fat bodie the


fire
Foing Grec. The bearbe,or feed, fenegreeke.
Ortie Grecque. The Koman,or male,Nettle.
Vent Greclevant.4 Northeaft wind.
Relier yn, livre à la Grecque. To make the backe
thereof plaine. .
ecanizant.Grecanizing, or Grecianizing it; fpea-
king Greeke ;imitating a Grecian.
Grecizer. To Grecianixe it ; to play the Grecian ; or to
(peake Greeke. 1
Grecques : f. Gregs,Gallogaskins,wide venitians.
ecs : m.A wild bores upper tufhes. réf
Gredillé m.ée: f, Frixled, curled ,crifped ; alfo, pucke…
aN or crumpled, by beat, érc,; ao, flattered,or foo~
thed. ET ER
Grediller. To frigle,curle,or crifpe the baire ércswitb a
bot 1ron;alfo;to crumple,or pucke lh beat alt
Te
réc:f. Anagreement,accord,attonement. (Bret.
Gretm. Ge: 8 Agreed untos


igre ea en
Get. see Cri.


+


seapranali


es et J
| Greffe: m. Th Office of a Pregnôtäri Sette À
chiefe Clerke to a Court ; a Regis 5 << oF


fices. " Dong ' ent gr 0)

Droidt de greffe. 63:s. 9: d:Tour. du, in diners pla-

ces,unto the king upon euéry fale wood. |”
Greffe: & Agraffe s «flip, a Jo, gref-


d. | ;
Gree de Monten 7 nf a certaine great |.
feet TN


xs & ne: £ Gra ec i ed. 1x |
Fe ey ee ee deal ‘ails


1


NON es AR PEN E TR


7


>. ~~. P "
ELS eat at is


‘,


ez a


. yen ni - 4 wil FOI


-G RYE


Greffier : m.4 Regifter Pregnotarieor principal clerke
toa Court; a Secondarie in an Office,or Court;a clerke
of ‘Affifesor of Far oll ments,

Grefhiere: f, À Norareffe,Regifireffesafhe Clerke, a Re-
gifters, or Cler kes wife.

Greffiers: m. 4 kind of white bounds; as Bauds.

Gregeois: m. oife: f, Grecian,Greekifh,of Greece.
Feu gregcois. Looke Feu.

Gregual : m. 4 Noitheafl wind.

Gregues: £ ride Slops,Gregs, Gallogafèoines, Veniti-
ans; great Gafcon, or Spanifh;hofe.

Greguefque. as Gregeois.


Greguciques : £. Slops, Gregs, Gallogafcoines, Veni-


trans,
Sepigoeu Great ; alfo, greater, larger, bigger; el-


; Greintelle: f. A Goofèberrie,


srelacc: f Great Hayle.

Grelle. a Grefle. Hayle.

Grelot, Trembler le grelot. as Grelotter.

Grelotter. To fhake, tremble didder, quake for cold ; to
fay an Apes Pater-nofter.

Grelurette. as Gurluret.

Gremeaux de fang Clots of congealed blond.
remeler, as Grommeler.


Gremil: m. The bearb Gromill,Grummell,or Graymill, |


Peare-plant,Lichewall,
enade : £ A Pomegranet; AU, a ball of wild- fire,
made likt a Pomegranet.

Grenadier: m.A Pomegranet tree. .

Grenadille: £ 4 Pomegranet bloffome; alfo, a little


Grenil. as Gremil, Hearbe Grummell,èrc.
Grenouillant. Swilling quaffing ; bibl fvingsalo,


Grenouille: £ A Frogya Paddocke.
Grenouiller. Continually to bib,tiple,fip,fwill in drinkes


Grenouillere: £ A froggie place; as Grenouillieres
Grenouillette: f 4 lutle Frog.
Grenouillette : £ Crowfoot, Kings Kob, gold Cups, geld


Gabtiguilliene £. A froggie places
Grenouillon:m. A little Frog. .
Grenu: m. ué: f. Grained ; fill of graine, of feed, of


Gres. as
Grefil: m. Bayh aise 3 alfo,reeme,or the bise froft


GRE


croakine;like a Frog.


Grenouille pefcherefle, The fea-Frog, fea-diuell, )
fea-toad,


to pend bis whole time in potting; al/o,to croake,or cry
like a Frog.


& ops butter Flower.
resets aquatique, Water (rowfoot, marfh


Grenoile de bois. Wood Cromfrot, freet(ras-

‘ot.

Grenouillette dorée. Gold-crap, golden (vowfoot,

gold-baire Crowfoot, jee Craw,

Grenouilletteheriflonnée, white cremfoot,or Vr-

chin (rowfoor.

Grenontlierre petite, White Crowfoot 507, as Gre-
ette de bois.


feces


that bangs on trees, …
Srefillé. Drizled on; conered,or boave, with reeme..


Grefiller. To bayle, drixle, fleet; reeme to fall; alfo, as
Greziller.
Grefillon: m: 4 Cricket.
Grefillonné.wbitifh,or boarie as graffe with fair.
ome ogg % creake,or cbirpe like a Cricket.
Hay
Grefle: com. Thin, fmall, flender ; Due little, preties


Pomegranct. : :

Grenage : m, Graine, come, feed ; of the growth, or in-
crease thereof.

Grenaille: f Graine,or feed ; alfa, the gold, cr, oc,
taken out of water,whercinto it bad beene throvone red
bot out of the Cravible ; fo tearmed, 5 becaufe it is com-
monly in graines.


Grenaille de bronze. The skalie duflor fubfiance ly-
ing on braffe, dre, after it bath beene melted; and fal-
ling from it oe it felfe,or with a little blowing,
Grenat: m. The precious ftone called a Gradat,or Gar-
_ net; alfo,a Carbuncle of a Pomegranet colour,
Grenat rouge. A kind of botch,or pockie ee
Bs ose m. The little border ingranen about a feale;
ap fermes becaufe tis like a row of Pomegranet ker-


“Gren :f 4 final Granat,or Garnet ; alfo marble
cn ved whetber naturally or artificial. °
x as Graine.
né: m.ée:f. sine ME


der fit fr the Canon


tf “Groner To feedves' bearbes; seras corne:


Greneterie: £. The place,or Ne ct the Control


te, É genet | poe Kiets Garner.


“s refide
:m. Ouer, rime
por


diminifhed ; alfo, fbrill,or (queaking


G ie me (nally, flenderlys Lankeb; pr


l Grefleté: £. Smallneffe,litilenefesexilisie, flenderneffe,
cle :m. — f, Haylie, fill of bayle, fubieétvnto


qe or Poe marble

are egrenée. Great be ae "Grefli

Greffer. ast
in ,

: eu ‘ation; on tafe .


a ca cag
ae a


é:m.ée:£ Hayled on; af, Poe, or that batb


alfo, fhrilly,or (queakingly.
er. To
‘Grefler fit pet. sere
uerfarie; to 0 ut againft one
re not able to refit bibs et
+m. ¢tte: f. Little, ettie defi, fmallifh. >


bayle ; flor mie.

er:msere: f. Haylie; HU
PRE greslier. A bat for the bay con dé
while it bayles.

Cas Graifle Fabs reais o ; #1


| Secs Payee: Æ Fate TRS


Grettes de lint The words, or eile gate
Grevable : com. Grieuons, ge Uikelie to


Hat Et


se + armee og


7 c


ro» mée:f D ee
ne aggrieur,melesues pr


Greve: £ The place of Execution,in Pari,
ge de Gene. 4 Porter, or burthen-bearer ; alfo,
one that hangs on a Gibbet, - Et
me Cardinal en Gteve. One thats bebeaded at the

‘eve,

Greve: f Sand, or Grauell; and, a fandie Strand, or

Shore; alfo, the fhanke, fhinne, or ( fore-part of the)
leg,

La eve des su (&, si rt artis

en greve.). The fhedding, or ing of the baire;

the eat bt ow the forebead (after the old
i. ) ;


Grevé: m. ée: f,. Griewed, aggrieued, pained vexed,
burt ; molefled, annoyed ; wronged , opprefféd, ouer-
charged, ouerburthened ; alfo, burfi, or whofe bowels
are fallen into his cods.
Grevelure. The mayle of a Hawke,
3rever. To grieue,aggrieue, paine,vex burt; afflitjan-
nop, trouble, difquiet,molef;wrong itiure oucrcharge,
ouerburthen,oppreffe; alfo,to dig into, or make bollow,
with the nayles. ;
Greves: f, Bootes ; alfo, greaues, or armour for the
legs. :
Greveure: £ Aninward ruptare, or burfling (of the
| lower part of the bellie) or an extraordinarie {welling
- of the cods, by the bowels falling into them ; a burfting,
or being burf.
Grevolable: com. Deféruing the Rope; for whom the
Po sage groane, benajlen 4?
reux. Les greux: m. The nayles, Pic.
Grez:m. À greetie, bed thiazed, hard, and
long-lafling feefone, good to paue with ; and(/mall-
| pees ) to fcowre braftn , or pewter veffell '; See


Frais,
Grezillé.wrigled ; crumpled ; crackled ; curled,fiizled,
twirled |


Greziller. To wrigle,or flirre as a line fifhon a hat grid-
~~ arom ; to crumple together, as leather, or parchment
in the fire ; alfo, to crackle, as a Shell in fire,or fal-
ted flefh on coates ; alo, to curle, twirle, frixlé baire
&


Ce.
Grezillons. Hawkes bells; alfo,as Grillons; ai, little
|  gobbets of fat,or fait meat broyled ; alfocrumplings or
twirles,as of haire curled.
Griache. a: Griefche, qRab. -


Griaibe. A /ea-Mew. Savoyard.
Gris :m. À ke of iced end Partridge; or as
| Perdrix griefche. ;
| Griais. Gray; or,of the colour of a Starling.
Griblettes: £ Cokops. ;
Gribouiller. To rumble, or croake (as the guts doe
through windineffe ‘Oh Do nites
Gribouillis:m. The rumbli ror nt ed
_ the guts ; alfo,a fained name for a din HS
Gribouri: m. 4 Goblin,Robinzood fellow, walking fpirit
that rumbles in boufes a nights, i
| Grief: m. Anaggreuance, wrong, iniurie ; oppreffion
vexation,mole(tation,trouble. -


Bailler griefs en plaidoirie. An Appealant to al.
ledge 28 well and points of ini be done vn
| 40 bim by the fentence , from which be bath appea-
Grief, ieve: € Griewous;offenfives xoyfome; trou
blefome; beauie,.wrong = mal D
iefche : com. Gray; or peckledas a Stares alfofharp,
ickling whence; n # À :
: grielche, The e, Romane or Greeke neitle ;
|: fe ranger in England ;) fome alfa call fo the fmalt,


Z x ee. 0 a. à was à.
bed > 7 - a4 : hg
:
GR I |
” red, flinging nettle. À
Sy ix griefche. ‘The ordinarie, or gray, Par- ‘
tridge ¥


idee,

Pie griefche. The wariangle ; (a rauenous bird.)
: m. 4 villaine theeftarafeall (v.m.)

Grifes. See Grittes, ;

Griffade: £ 4 clawing ; a feratch, or gripe with the
clawes; a ranche,or clinch with a beafls paw.

Griffesm. Akind of big Tumbler, or dog thats bodied
(but not deepe-bung) ike the Talbot.

Griffe: £4 = nayle,tallon.

i atte. By booke or by crooke, [quimble fquam-
ble, 7 catch that se may, : :
On cognoift le Diable fes griffes; Prov. The di-
uellis knovene by his clawes,

Griffé :m.ée : f. clawed, or baning clawes ; alfo, gri-
ped, or grafped with clawes.

Griffer. To gripe, grafpe, feize, catch, lay hold on with ;
clawes;érc; alfo, to feize, or catch at violently, grec. +
dily,and wrong filly. :

Griffon: m. A Gripe,or Griffon.

Pied de griffon. 4 Griffins foot ; an infirument
(made like the foot of a Griffon) wherewith Surgeons
draw moles,or the parts of a dead child out of womens
wombes; alfo,as Pommelaye,or Pomelce.

Griffonner. To write faf, and ill ; to fevible > 10
fcrall it,

CoB. m. tie: f. Having great clawes, or Jharpe tal-

ns.


Grigne{ com, wrinkled. i 4

Grigner. To grinne. 3

Grignette. Perdrix g. The ordinarie Partsidge, :

Grigneur. Greater buger larger mightier. i

Grignon de pain. 4 craflie peece of bread,or corner of
a lo


Grignoté: m. €: f. Grawed, knapled, or nibled a- ee M
wa |


1).
Grignoter.To mumble,or eat ike a Conny or Squirrel; “a
also,to gnaw,knaple,or nible array. “4
Gril: m. 4 Gridiron.
Grillant. Broyline on à Gridiron ; alfo, grating vp;
a » gliding , fliding, glib-running , trickling, a-
72:


ong.

Grille: f. An tron grate.

Grille de bois. 4n Engine made of flickes , or

peeces of wood, bound together , and applyed unto

Sra wry necke of a beafl, thereby to force it vato
aitne(fe. |

Les grilles d'une feneftre. The grating, or barres

of a window.

Grillé: m.ée: f. Broyled on a Gridiron; hence, alfo,
parched, withered, or dryed vp with extreame beat;
alfa, slid, or flipped along ; alfo, grated, or clofe bar-
r


Up.
Grillement: m. 4 broyling on a Gridiron ; alfo, a
parching with extreame beat ; alfa, a gli or
iding along ; alfo, a grating, or fhutting up with
grates, :
Griller, To broyle on a Gridiron; alfo, to {eoreh, parch,
ord pi exreane beat ; Rae Sate; feta
grate before, (hut vp with grates ; alfa, to glide,
fide, fieale, trickle, runne, glib along: alfo, ne


fer; alfo, to fit rumpled, or in plaits, asa garment
thats to dés hed alfo, to ruffleser fnarle, as ouer=
twifled thread.


Grillet: m. 4 Hawkes bell; alfo,as Grillén: à
i A Cricket-catcher ; alfo, a maker of


etier : m.
Hawkes bells, ve"
Vu ) Gril.


om | GR I ; ?:
Grinches. Guiles noires; A kindof blacke feet
4 Cee | ye a.
Grimeur. for, Plus grand; Greater. (v.m.) :
Gringalet: m. A mervie grig, pleafant rogue, Hortfill


knaue, conceited efon.
Cringette. See Grignettes


GR I
Grilletté: m. ef. Fwrifhed with bells, a6 4

Hawkee ‘ ore
Grilleux: m.eufe: £ Gratie; full of grates ; made like


a rate, ve
Gillon des champs; 4 Grafhopper; de cheminée ;


cher. : ;
; ‘Ila beaucoup de grillons en la tefte. He is in bis Gringoriane. Eau Gringoriane . Hob-water ;
dumpes; bis vead 5 much troubled, fill of crachets; or - tearmed fo, becaufe firfi innented by a Pope Grego-


Lef Proclamations. .
Les grillons gaftent'la fefte : Prov. Loud bablers
are eucr offenjine at feafis ; a Prouerbe taxing Buf-
. foones, and Sycophants, who with their idle chat are
troublefome to all that beare them.
Grillons. 4 kind of manacles, or torment for the fin«


rie, '

Gringotement: m. 4 quauering, or fhaking with the
voice. û

Gringoter. To warble, quauer, Jhake with the
voice.

Gringotis : m. A quauering, warbling, diuifion,

Gringuenaudes: f.7he filth which,efter purging flicks
to the tayle,

Gringuenotant. warbling, quauering, Shaking of the
voice.

Gringuenoter. as Gringoter. ;
Gringuenoteur: m. 4 warbler, faker, quauerer ;
one that in finging vfeth to diuide much, ;

Gringuenotis: m. 4 Gringotis. -
Grinon. as Grillon ; 4 Cricket. :
Grinfon : m. 4 Spinke,Sheldaple,Chaffinch.
Grinfler. as Grincers aifato crackle, or clafh.
rio: m. New Barlie fleeped in water, then dry-
ed by a fire, and then fiyed, and kept for (pbificall)


Ufese 7 )
Griote: f. A kind of tart,or foure Cherrie,
Griote feiche. as Grio.
Grioter, To gather thofe Cherries.
Grioteux: m, eule : f Grauellie ; alfo,light.
Griotier: m. À foure Cherrie-tree..
Griotier à rofes. À certaine great tree that refimbles
the double-flowred Cherrie tree, +
Griotte: f.Grauell; al/o,the meale,or floure of parched,
or fiyed Barlie ; or,as Grio. 5
Grip: m. Ropine violence ; or, a violent catching, fré |
ble taking, of other mens things.
Allons au i de grip. Let's abroad. fora prize, |
‘a


ee ee oe


|


gers.

Grillot: m. (The name of) a certaine apple thats ripe a-
bout Auguft.

Grillotier: m. 4 Gridiron-maker; afo,a maker of Rat

_ tles, Curvalls with Bells, and fuch like toyes for chil-
dven.@Rab.  !

Grillottement:m.A ringing,rickling,ratling,or crack:
ling; alfoya foogging,or togging.


Grillotter. Toring,rickleyatle,crackle 5 alfo,to fhog,or


10€,
Gtitnace : & 4 crabd looke ; a face, wry mouth, il-
fauoured countenance made ; a mowing 5 or Apes


ce.

. Grimacer. To make a face, or a wry mouths 48 |
mowe. ', è

Grimacier: m. 4 caruer, or maker of fech Monkeyes,
or-Antickes, as in fuomptuows buildings feeme to fispport
great arches,pillars,beames. ;

Grimaffeur: m. 4 maker of monthes,or facess 1:

Grimau, ou Grimaud. # Grimauld. i

| Grimaude: f. 4 kind of Owle; as Cheveche;

Grimmauderie: f. 4 feboole, or crue of Petsies, or of
meane Graminer [chollers.

Grimauld:m. 4 grim-faced fellow; a crabbed, way-
ward, froward,vapleafing perfin; alfoyas Grimaude; |.
alfo,a Grammar-{choole,boy. »


Grimbetilolletée. + Befongnée. @Rab 2117 "3 or purchace; (a phrase of Pirates, when they would
Gritneict : m. 2s Grimouche; or, a finatterer in mat- to fea. :

ters of learning. Ss ne. The bearbe Motherwort, —
Grimoire. 4 booke of coniuring,or exorcifing, much in riphe. as Griffe.


ufe among Popilh Piefls. * +.

Mots de la Grimoire. Coniurations, EXorcifnes;

coniuring ov exorcifing tearmes. :
Grimouche: m. À palirie Pedant, meane Gramma-

rian. ‘ are 27.1
Grimpement: m.4 climbing crawling,creeping,vam-

ping,cunningvpwards, "1 1 0
Grimpe-mur. 4 climbe-wall, one that ferambles up a


sripher. asGriffere ©. | |

Gri Le ph m:.4 Gripe-money, or Catch-coyne ;
ws je, or couetous Judge, Magifirate, Officer,
Lawyer.

Grippé:m. grippée: f. Seifed, grafped,caught at gree-
dily, griped, or taken violently, cs
Grippement: m, A griping, feiximg, grafping. >
Grippeminaud. 4 griping,catching, greedie,coustons,
cruell fellow, ny
Ga reba To gripe, grafbe, feife greedily, cruelly,
coueton|ly. , ey
Gripper.To feife, gripe, grafpe clinch,catch,or faatcb,
at; by. violent bold,or conetons bands,on, =
Pouldre à grippet. 4” lafciniows, or lufi-begetting,


Powder, © + afi
Grippets: m. The rumples of an ouer-long,pr ill-made
L 0 hai the rufflings, or fnarles ‘oner-twifted

thread.

Grippeur: m, 4 ; catcher, fuateber, greedieta-

her, violent (eixer. aspen oa) s
Gm: at Fone Spl of a bluifh ¢o-
ur; alfo,graynelesor the colour gray 34 graye ©

makes Malle 3c


wall.
Grimnper. To climbe, crawle, crepe , feramble,vp ;
= torampe,or runne upwards, as plants that are fet a-

gainf a wall,

au: m. The tittle climbing, and refileffe bird

called a wood-pecker. ;
Grimpeur : m. A climber; crawler, creeper, [tram
> bler upwards. SF seri à
Grim Grimpereau.

1 : as Grimpement a ths, Soe

Grincé m. ée : f Gnafhed, or crafbed together.
Grincement : m, A grafhing, grinding,or grating of
~ the teeth together. LA
Grincer les dents: gnafl nts. grind, grate, or crafh the


-~ teethtogether forangers Gris de ©
Grinceur:m. An angrie gnafher of theteetb. Gris pommelé. 4 daple gray. oe Gr;
* reyes PEL TIS :
hf Cc | - re = 7» -
ER, ~ Digitized™by, Gi : / Original from
Pies | O gle | THE-ORIO STATE UNIVERSITY


D # 4 <


>.


GRILL


Gris violant, Mallow-flomer colour, |
Gris: m. ile: Gray, light-rnlfet, grixle, afh-co
herent 2 i EU
ihil gris. Looke Nih A 5 3 0 SE)
. Per Fete The ordederte a) POE ee ‘4
Le pied gris. The Hob,Clovene ,Boore Hind; fo called,
of bis ewer-duflie,or durtie fhoves. NET uty
Grifard:m. 4 Badger ,Boafon, Brocke, or Gray; alfo, à
(ea-Cob,or fea-Gull, ST susie >
€: com. Grayifh,boarie,whitifh, © ~ *
Grifer, To gromgray-baired,to wax boare-beaded. —
Grifle. as Grille, ys nn
Griflemnent:m. 4 crackling aoyfe, as of meat in the
broyling. : . PT NS à Dr ri as
Grifon. Pierre de prifon. Akind of free flone, wbich
% but fofi when it is taken out of the Quarrey, but af.
terward growes verié bard. = EC
Grifon:m.onne:f. Gray with age ; whitifh, boarie,
gr izle; oldifh,or fomewhat old ; and bence; à:
-_ Oyfon verd bon, arifon guercbon : Pro.


14


ti


Grisonné : m, ée:f. Growne gray, hoarie, whitifh,
x)


Grisonnement: m.Grayne(fe,boarine[fe swhitifhin
4 growing whitifh. J
tisonner. as Grifer,

Grifonneure:f. Grayneffe;hoarinefe wbitifhnefft ; or,
the growing hoarie,érc. . orn

Grisser. To crackle,or(like a fhoe)to creake. <
Elles grifloient d’ardeur de le voir. They langed ex-
treamely to fee it; or, their defires were on fire Untill


ow


they fawit. ly
Grive:f The great Thrufh called a Fieldfare, or Feldi-
fare; alfo,the Throfile. ; FA TS -
Grive fifalle. Looke Sifalle. eo RAS ae
Grivelé: m. ée: £, Peckled, fpeckled ; meneld,miayled,
(blacke and white,or dunne and white.) + *
iveléc: f. 4 Bill, Scroll, or Scedule; (becaufe it is
blacke,and white.) 235 Je dae va


Grivelement: m Peckledneffe ; or,a Speckled colour;
efpecially [ich a one as 15 compofed of black and white,
or dunne and white.

Griveleure: £. A peckledneffe,or fpeckledneffe,

Grivette. 4 Throfile,or Maus, ‘th

Grivolé: m.ée:f. Peckled, (peckled,meneld,black and
white, like the bellie of a Snayle. * s

Sir nent, See Sr Ra DNS
tivoler. To peckle, or (peckle; to (pot w uers co-
lours; or (molt SAS black and white,or dune


_and white, a
Grivolure: £.2sGriveleure, |
ere à GET Ts + hale

to-bec: m.d certaine afh-coloured,and great-beaded
birds (omewbat eff tena Thm
Grobianifme.Grobianifine, flouenlineffesvnmann
parts,or precepts, 1 MED See
Grobis. Faire grobis To be proved,pr furlie to
much flate vpon him, phe cs
ce: f. A great quantitie, or number of ftirring,or
flirred shines whence ;


oe


“Ala groges he bapifhferambling fr nut, de, ap |
a iy


onthe ground; 5 i
cr. To nuzle, or to rootswith the (nowt, >’
i ignon. A kind of Peach, a
Groin de porceau. The nowt,or nofe of me =


Le groin de licvre, A Hares mouth


En


| Groin de Porc, The headyerap et part of the jf
| der-blade, (o tearmed by An tonsifis 3 alfo, the hear
3 : : es Watts © A >


-Grominer. To buffet, or cuffe.


ui 5 €
| terfeited by spantons , with lippes thruft out toge-|- grest.
iber. | ae 8 SS | Legrôsd'un'affaire. The mof difficult,
% | M Le nae Lie and mo im-


“GRO


Dandelion,Priefis Crowne, Piffe-abed.
* Faire le groin. To powt, lowre, frowne,be fullen, or
gris 50. bang the ip,or [el fowce.
. Near e groin a. To caffe foundly  or,t0 pafh


Groifelier: m A Goofeberrie fhrub.
Groifelles. Goofeberries ; Thorn-berries 3 Fea-ber-


Lee ny

© Groifellés noires, Blacke Goofèberries blacke Ribes;
an ill-tafting kind of the beyond-fea Gooféberrie.
Groifelles d'ôutre mer:# Groifelles rouges.

roilelles toliges. ‘Red Gcafeberries, beyond-

Sea Goofeberries ; Garden Currans , ballard Cur-
Trans... ù

Groifellettes tran{-matitis, 4 Groifelles rouges.

Groifle: fé Groflefe, “~~

Groiflelet. as Groifelier ; the Goofeberrie Shab,

Groizil: m. Broken Glaffe,

Grole:f. 4 Rooke,or white billed (row; alfoya Cornifh

_ Chough ; or the red-billd Rooke. ;

Grolle:£., The round citcle in the white, at Butts 3


Grollé: m.¢e: f: Parched, or carled,asPeaft,Beanes, À


oe.
Grollier: m. 4 cobler.
Grollier. Noyer grollier : 4 wallnut-trce thats fo
young or little, as it may yet be fhaken. @Rab.
Gromé:mée: f. Buffetted,cuffed.
Grommeleinent : m. 4 grumbling, muttering, mur-
muring,
Grommeler. To grumble, repine, murmure,mutter be-
tweene the teeth,
ommeleur: m. A grumbler, mutterer, murmu-
PET 6 5s a . 7 :
Grommeleux : m. eufe : £ Grmbling, muttering,
murmuring ; alforugged,rough, curdie, clottie, clutte-
ring, cluflerie. .
© Bruit grommeleux. 4 confi/ed, buxxing,bumming,
or deepenoyfe. :
Grommellement: m, A grumbling, muttering, mur-
muring. -
Grommé: m. ée : f. Buffetted,cuffed.


sronau:: m. 4 Gurnard, @Langued.
Groncer. Toroare,as the fea in a forme:
Grondeller. To rumble; or, to roare, asa tempefiuous
water that beats againft rockes,or roots growing to the
bankes thereof. |
Grondement : m. as Gronderie. x
Gronder.Tozwburle wburre,yarre like a dog that is an-
grie; alfo,to grunt groane, grumble (with threatning)
‘againft a commaundement, - oa
Gronderie: f. A grunting, grumbling ; wburling, yar-


ring.
Grondeur: m, 4 granter, or grumbler; a whurrer, ov


Jarrer.


Grondin. 4 Heg. Barr 2,
Grondir.as Gréndeller. à c
Cua m, arde: £ Grusting ; alfd, powting, or

owning, =. |. :
Grongnement: m, 4 granting.


Grongner, To gruat lie a Hog. a

Gros “att Gresmnelt, Digne, or, the great, fumme,

or grofe of ; af, an impofition vpon Wiue,. fold by
eat.


ant. :
Le gros d'une armée. The Batallion which bath |
Vay, the


pre ee
5 Pre
OriGthartrom


THE OHIOSSTATE-UNIVERSIFY =


> - 24 — —_—


dé =. int = Sy CUS
40 PRIOR
GRO


the moft and beft men in it ; or the oh ha greateft
troope in the Grofe,or bodie of an arme. 5
Le pros de la gorge. The t roat-boll ; the Dew-lap.
Le Bros d'uneherbe. The flemme, or falke of an
bearbe. ha ?
Le gros d'une ville. The moft rich,eminent, and able
ie in a towne. |
Vendre en gros, To fell by great ; to vent,or utter bis
commodities by whole-fale.
Gros: m. The coyne called,a Groat ; alfo, a Dramme,or
the eight part of an ounce,of Gold ,or Siler’ of otber
wares,the 32 part of am ounce; or, the 256 part of a


una.
Gros de lacques Cœur. Am old coyne of fine filuer,
weighing three deniers, and firft deuifed at Bourges,
pe of that name, in the yeare 1448.

ros de Lorraine. A coyne worth ij s.viij d, Tour.
Gros de Mets. Is of the Jame value,
Gros de Neefle. 15 worth iij d'flerl.
Gros de Naples. Silke Grogeran. __.
Gros: m. groffe: f. Groff greatsbiatbicke alfo,bea-

a (ad, weigbtie ; alfo,dull,blunt, rude, fottif, bloc-

1


kifh.
Groffe haleine. a groffe haleine. Blowing bard,or
with full breath. _
Eftre à la groffe haleine.To gafpe,or gape for breath;
to be almolt out of breath. bf
Les probe maifons de la ville. The richeft boufes;
ar,the moft power fill and mioft eminent families, in the
Gros mal. The falling ficnefe so, file en
‘os mal. The falling fickneffe ; or, foule euil.
Gros voyers. Such as baue meane,or middle 1urifdic-
tion.
Groffe tefte. Il a vne grofletefte, Hei 4 werie
blockbead, grouthead, ioulthead,
Il n’a pas la tefte fi grofic, He is nat fo wife, or not
fo well feene in matters; be is not of fo deepe à reach,
of fo great an under|tandiag. az
Amende grofle. À fine, or amerciament of vj s.fierl,
or upwards. | !
are} comme le bras. As big as an arme ; as [ure as
a club, :
Filer gros. Looke Filer, 2 |
Regarder d'un gros ocil. To frowne, looke big > or
fore on; to caft a furlie eye at. = ae
Gros-bec. An des and great-beaded bird,
fomewhat leffe then a Thrufh. PEN
Gros-doux. 4 kind of faire eat and fier apple. ,
Grofelier:m. 4 Goofeberriefhrub. =
Grofelier rouge. The fbrub that beares the red
Goofeberrie, beyond-fea Goofeberrie, red Corinthes, or
| _ baftard Corants. ,
Grofelles. as Groifelles. Goofeberries.
Sear TR
:m,ee: f, Tettered,vocked, À
Febves groflées. as Gro’ de " ST)
-Grofler. 70 rocke,totter,or fhake,as a weake building in


Groce Se crcl.


skind Peare. Furth tes
The name of an excellent apple for Cy-


14


Route GO ugle


d


«menil. The name of a certaine hard, and rougb-


_Groffe:f. AGrofe, or twelue dozen ; alfo, as Grol
fefle, Je. * t PQ
a a |


Grafment, Graf, rudely; beau, fay usb,


Groffer. To rattle in the throat, —
Groflerie: £ Great worke, things wrought by great; al-


o,rudene {] e; alfo,Grofferie;wares uttered,
à eat os are re ‘ ‘
Groflefle de femme. A womans groffeneffe, greatneffe,


or being great with child,


eur: £. Groffene fe,bigneffe thickneffe,greatneffe,


G .

off. :m. A Grocer ; or,as Marchant groffier, -
Groflier: m. ere : £ Groffe, rude,unpolifhed; blockifh,

dull, clownifh,lumpifh.

Marchant groffier. That (ells onely by Great,orvt-

ters bis commodities by whole-fale.

Noix groffiere, 4 Wallnut,
Geofheiennt Geen mA ~~

offir. To grow big,to wax fatthicke,or groffe.
Grofiiflement; m. Thick making ; or, a growing big,
fe


croloye ÿ m.ée : f,Ingroffed; written faire,or in great
€


ters, ‘*
Gro’ iso To ingroffe ; to write faire, or in great and
e letters.
Srote: f..A coole roome under-ground for the Summer ;
or,as Grotte.
Grotefque. as Grotte.
Grotefquer. To lurke in canes, dennes, and obfture


places.

Grotefques: f. Pidtures wherein (as pleafe the Pain-
ter) all kind of odde things are reprefented with-
out anie peculiar fence, or meaning, but nel to feed
the eye. '

Groton: m. A little grot,canerne,or bole; alfd, as Cro-


ton.

Grotte: £ A grot, caue, denne, cauerne, bole, (under
the ground.)

Groiiée. La groüée des fruidts; That fruit which falls

“in the night ; wind-falls, night-falls, or night-wind-


Groueteux,asGrouetteux.
gun £, Grauell ; or,a grauellie foyle.
rouetteux : m, eufe:f. Gravellie ; flonie.
‘Grougnaut: m. 4 Gurnard.{Langued.
ro . Torumble,or croake,like the guts.
ouiller, To move, flirre, ferall; 10 me ew ,or gine
© fignes, of life by flirring ; to (pring,as a child in bis mo-
evs wombe;al/o, to mer that in a houfè re-
moue beauïe things ; alfo,to fivarme, abound, or breake
outconfifèdly in great numbers. °
Grouillier : m.as Grollier.
Grouillis: m. 4 flirring beape ef wormes,or otber ver-
mine ; alfo,tbe fpringing of a child inthe wombe,
Groulard. The bird called, a Bunting.
Groulé. Febves groulées. Parched, or catled,
Beanes. Pe
uller, as Grouiller. ,
Groumeler. eeene pan ap
FOUpP : £ À certaine loftie manage which mufi be
beaten with aliuelie,and fetled meafure; the twrne be-


ing more wide,and the borfes binder parts more raifed,


le,mnutter.


Gru.


rene teens " : 7 2 > = _


Original*fron
PH EZOHLO: STATE.UNIVERSITY


then in an ordinarie curuet. |
se Groyer, Taboafl,vaunt,cracke ofbis deeds. |
Graage: ftume de gruage. The cufiome order, or
pren pe PA a ing,
in forrefis, dre.
Gruan: m. Ostmeule.
Gruant: m. Oatmeale, Groates.


G R YW:


Gruau, Courfe meale,or,the great of corne ; alfo,a young
Crane ; alfo,as Grio;alfp,a Shittlecocke.
Gruaux d'avoine. Oatmeale,Groates.

Grué: £ 4 Crane; alfo, the Engine fo called ; alfo, a fot,
alfe,goofecapsboydon,lobcocke. NAN
Gruéfranche.Freelading and valading at a wharfe;
(a Priwiledge due vato fome Marchants.)

Becde grué. as Col de gruë; 4/9, a Cranes bill (or
Pinfers fafbioned like a Cranes. bill ) wherewith Sur.
per pull bullets,and arrowheads out of wounded


dies.

Col de grué. The bearbe Cranes-bill, Herons-bill,
Storkes-bill,Pinke-needle ; alfo,the bearbe Doues-foot;
alfo, the hearbe Robert; ( The later two being feucrall
hind $of the firft.) ecb.) ait

Tefte de grué, as Col de grué.

Der gruë, To hop; or daunce vpon (onely) one

eg.


S’entretenir comme font les grucs.Obftinatl) to fal-
low together one fect, fide, or faëti

Grué: com. Simple, fillie ; fottifh, foolifh; and hence;
rs monde n'eft plus grue. Tbe world growes wife a-

2 dayes. ’

1 'Gruétie. as Grurie ; afo, the walke of a Gruycr.

- |. Droié de gruérie, & garenne, A royaltie belong-
| daz vato fome Lords lufticers, who baue thereby the
bunting, broufage, and paronage of their fisbieéts, or
valfalls, woods,

arugeoir: m. A finall Grater ; as Efgrugeoir.
Tugeons. The (imalle/t,or moft writhen fruit ona tree ;
Writings, (Norm. ER

Gruger. To grudge, repine, mutter (vy. m.) alfô, to

crumble , or breake into final peeces ; or as Efgru-


er. .
{ hes : m. as Gruyer ; Part of whofe Office is the kee-
ping of the Hammer wherewith the wood, and timber
thats felled for fale,or for the ufe of Commoner s.jn For-
refts,is marked. 7
ruicrie. as Gruric.
uiner. To gruatle,or grunt like a Hog.
Gruïr. To crunkle,or creake ike a Crane.
irie. #s Grurie.
tum. as Grain. {Langued.
Grume: m. A kuot bunch clufler; clutter; alfoya twinc-
Kling,or fparkling,as of a Dyamond.
ineau de fang: m. A clot, or clutter of congealed
blond.


ieee


athe


| Grumelement: m.4 gruntingyas of Hogs.
Grumeler. as Grommeler..~
‘| Grumeleux: m. eufe :£ Clottie, cluttering, cluffe-
rie. à TN : sey nu
é Bois orumeleux. Roxgh,knottie rugged wood,

% Grumér. To fhite grapes; orto void a dung that fhewes
the —* haue eaten grapes;(a word applyed moft
unto wi Swine.) ; eu

Grumeux. 2s Grumeleux. ree |
Gruo. Barley flower dryed by the fire,erc ; at Griox)
Gruolleux: : À Grauellie, flonie,


_ | Gruotte. whee PRES
2 :m.ee:
Sie neck sea ee Te RE
Gruper. To /2i/é,gripe,grajpe. ears
¢ le yous grup: pautruc.See Truc.) =)
| f, Avi gripesféifure, grafpes catching,


tching at. RE Te, OTSUxZ Dar)
| Ghuvic:€ttarighe ot PNR (ack ren à


. À the woods,and forrets that to-another man;and |
- confifts of the notice takenof, amerciaments


= =i


of the


things quitted , abandoned , fürfaken, left at van

. Be teks ik Or : re ee
| Gualebaut: m. 4 hoyfé-cup,or toffe-pot. … = |
Guaranion, 4 kind of bork; (soon) ye


en ‘3 \ .. 14 d 41

Guari: m. ie: f. Healed, whole, cured, recouered, ofa
Guarigues ne 7 7 shennan fl PRE |
¥ k LA = st a :


GR V


and confifcations raifed by , the offences committed
therein. This right belongs wholly to the King in all
the woods that be inclofed within bis forrefts ; by rea-
fin wobereof, the amerciaments and confifcations are
ener adiudged unto bim,and the reflitutions and dam-
mages unto the Proprietaries : ( And-yet if another
haue fo great a proportion of woods inclofed within, or
ioyning unto, the Kings forrefts, that he muf of necef-
JSitie keepe Officers to looke unto them,and bane witball
(by Prefcription,or Charter) this right,or a lurifdigtion,
within them, he may exercife it by his Officers, without
the impeachment of the Kings;) alfo, the Office, or the
walke,of a Gruyer. f
ie du charbon. Such a like lurifdiétion ouer the
makers of Charcoale ; as alfo,a propertic in part there-
fa belonging to the King, in whofe woods foeuer they
e made.
Grus: m. Gruell; or water wherein any corne is boyled;
Corne-broth ; and hence;
Grus de froment. Furmentie.
d'orge. 45 Orgemondé.
Grufer. To gricue,or to repine,at.
Grufler des pois. To parch Peafe.
au:m. Oat-meale ; or the courfe meale of any o-
ther corne ; the great of corne.

Gruyer: m. A principal forrefter ; a chiefe Warden, or
Verderer ; a maifler Sergeant in a forreft ; for this
name is gencrall, and proper vito all thefe feuerall of-
ficers ; who in the title, and right thereof, belonging to
the King, bane anthoritie,to caufe his Ordinances to
be kept,e> to punifhthe breakers thereof (as well with-
in other Lords woods,as within his) either by fetting a-
merciaments-on their heads, or by confifcating of their
cattell (the whole benefit whereof is, in moft places ad-
iudged unto bim) yet if the fatt committed (in bis fèr-
reffs) require a greater penaltie then 60 s,Lourn, they
er referre it ouer to fs cenfitre of the maifters of the
Forrefis; al{o,as in Gruicr.

Gruyer: m. ere: f Of a Crane;al/o,made(as a Hawke) |
onely for the (rane.

Gruyerie,& Gruyrie. as Gruric.

cape fec, as Grio.

Gryllon: m. 4 Cricket,or Graffe-bopper.

Gryotte. as Griotte.
rypaume: f. The hearbe Motherwort.

+ See Griper, \

Grys. as Gris.

Guaillardet: m. 4 Sire
Ships, oe.

Guainier : m.Thetree.ca


amer, Pennon, 67 Pendant, in |


caked, tree ; (belikebe-

caufe be banged bimfel PET aE
Guaire. 45 Guere; Littles: LE Jove es

Guaive. Chofes. ouaïives. Waifes, or flrayes ; or,


tree


: Em as Garantir ; To watates :
Guarbances: f. Fitches,Vetches. .
uarde-manger. See Garde-manger.


Guardon, as n+ 553 «

cguare. Warswar; take heed,take heed.
Sans dire guare, On a fuddaine,at unawares, before
__ any warning giuen, without bidding beware.
Guarent. See Garent. |


5
f


o>,


u?


x?


ire Bi
cGy


THE GHG Sat
- NUE


Or


VERSER


or
7" L


Guarir. To beale,cureymend, recower, make whole, re-
flore es health.
Bon eft le medicin qui fe {Fair guarir: Prov. He is
a good Phifition that can beale humjelfe.

Garon: f. Healib; curing,healings recouerie,amend-


Oui veut la guarifon du Mire,il luy convient tout
fon mal dire: Proy. He that would cured be muft all
bis ill confeffe,

Guariffable : com. Healeable , cureable , recouera


Guarite: £. as Garite.
uarrot. See Garrot.

Guaftaliens. An Order of religious people, confifting
both of men and women, and inflituted the yeare 1537
by the Counteffe of Guaftala, a Mantuan Ladies

Guaftier : m. One that à bired to tend otber mens
grounds ; or, as Gaftier.

» Guatte : f. The finall,or young Shad, the riner Pilchard,
@Bayonnois,

Guault.The name of an apple,that yeelds very pleafant,
and cleere Cyder.

Guayac. Guacum, Lignum vite, Pockewood,

Guayer. as Guéer.

Guaynier. as Guainier.
uayre. as Guere. {Provençal.

Gueé:m, A Foord; a hallow part of a riuer,where it may
be waded ouer.

‘A grand cheval grand gué: Prov, A great borfe a
great Foord mufl haue.

+ yen com Wadeable; fitylikelie,or eafie, to be wa-

ed ouer.

Guedde,ou Guede: f..as Guefde; : (Courfe) woad,

Guedé: m. ée : £ Stuffed, flrouting, crammed full of,
or filled up with,meat and drinke.

Guedon. Faire de gucdon gucdon.To mince,or fim-
per it; to be nice, quaint, ferpulows of receiuing what
inwardly is longed for ; to fay nay and take it, as men
fey maids doe; whence;

Et apres guedon, (of women sich do do a.thing after

they Hauë mude it fvange'a iwhiles) and afterwards

they fell to it with a better flomacke then they bad re-
ifed it.

ote bate asGadouard.

‘Guedovfle:£ A finall oyle- ‘pation RENE
ly) couered with leather; a gg Burrachoe,

tra or ut f, as Guedoufl

de vinaigres (Corrupt fr Gucdoutie) A

Clos vineger he set i and.
uéé: m Wa 732 d

Guéer, has À
Pinon Mee cheval. To snafl or water à borft inari-


Guéér du fige: "To vince Ganon
Guelphe: com, ¢ fae a Geen fin (in Italie; al-


Ctious,0
4 | Gucmentésm cet Hs ed
| Gu : ed,oringuir heat,


SLANG. €


Guenonnée: £. A moft beafilie wench ; one that ‘bath


Gene f, A little Monkie,or Marmoufit.


Gus, Common tg pafiure for a mans beafis throug bout


Guerdon: m, Guerdon,recompence,meed,remunerati-


Guerdonné: m.ée: f. Guerdoned,rewarded.
Guerdonnement. A guerdoning, recompencing, re-


Guerdonner
Guere. But little, fall, cant, earce,rare; but a while,


GVE


beene riddem by a Monkie. -
enot: m, A Shepheards Familiar; a Spirit, or Hob-
goblin,which (as fome of thofe ignorant Swaynes ma- |
gine Preferues, and defends from wolues, and theenes,
of bim be belongs ta. €Blcfien.


A holie-water-fprinkle.
bilans m.cufe: £ Sprinkling, bedewing,


ig water upon,


all bis neighbours grounds ; (In fome parts of Brit-
tanie .)

Temps de guerb. 1s from mid September to the mid-
dle of Februarie,


on, reward ; 3 alfo, as Gardon,


munerating ,y ewarding.
. To guerdon, remunerate, recompence,
reward.


- not long,but a little, not mach,
Guere fouvent. Rarely, feldome, not often, not many
times.
Ilnes'en faule e. There wants not much ; there
farce wants any; tis like, or verie neere.
ucres, # Guere; and hence;
4  nyAguercs. It was but ‘lately ; it is not long a-


Quand il n’eft gueres de Lune. when it is but yong


eect m. Fallow, or fallow ground ; land well
manured , laboured, tilled ; fitted, and prepared
4 parer ; alfa, mould, or fe les ao, mud, or


soie vieux, Terres deg. Ground which bath tyen
fallow awhole yeare at ee

Guereté: m.ée : £ Layed, or made fallow ; manured ;
laboured ; fitted for feed,crc,

Guereter. To /ay,or make land herr toeare, manure,
till; to labour,or prepare for feed,crc.

G es: £wide Slops,or Gallogaskins great Gaf-
con,or Spanife bo. .

Gueri: m.ie: f. Healed,cured,

Guerir. as Guarir; To beale; to cure.  -
Guetir aulcun de tous fes maulx; To kill one.
uerifon. See Guarifon.

Gueriflable: com. Healeable,cureable.

Gueriffeur: m. A bealer,or curer.

pd pré f. as Garite; or, a place of retreat, or bi-

po bas ( whereof diners were wont to be made)
thicke Rampiers, for the preftruation of thofe that,
ina farprize 5 bad the lucke, or leifure, to get into |
them ; alfo, a Sentrie, or Watch-tower. ied 4
Murs gueritez. Rampiers wit
(AN pees of retreat; or fontaine
Guerle: f. A Sine aide of a skin dryed,and ame fill


les,
Ghent : com, :


Squint-cyed.orgogleeyed,
Giese Rog AE :
a begger
se Guermenter. 7:
“pean nn Pi
fo makes or enquire "5 (an old, and -rafticke


~ Guer- |


narrrom


TE UNIMER SITY


courfe; and reuolutions of times, and Jr 5 Looke

Faire,

Tenir le guet. To watch and ward,

Bon guet chafle malaventure: Prov, Good beed

preuents misfortunes,(or expells them.) -
Guettable.watchable; fubic&t unto watching and war-


Ing:

Guettant. Watching,wardings prying, fpying; beeding,
marking, obferning ; dogging, fiaulking after.

En guettant,& efpiant, Craftily.falflyjon aduantage,
at cnaware 5.

Guette: £. A watchman, warder ; pie, effiall; a fcout-
ech ;alfè,a Sentinell, or watch-tower in a caftle, or

trefle.

Guetté : m.éc : £ watched, warded; alfo, pried, or
[pied into ; narrowly obferued, maliciou|ly dogged.

Guettement:m. 4 watching, warding; prying; bee-
dine,obferuing ; dogeing,lying in wait for.

Guetter. 10 watch,ward, watch and ward; fie, prie,
looke about; mar ke, beed note, obferue narrowly; dog,
flautke afier, lye in wait fe.

Guetteur: m. A watcher warder ; fpie, efpiall ; prier,
bufie obferuer of.

Guetteur de chemins. 4 way-layer, a robber on the
bighway,a pur(e-taker,one of Saint hig e' Clerkes.

Gueu. as Queux ; 4 Cooke.

Gueüant. Begging in the bigbway; or, ikea rogue any


Guever See Gucfver.

Gucüer. #s Gueufer,

Gucüefle : £. as Gueule; À woman begger.

Gueule :f. The mouth; allo, Cand moft properly) the
throat,gullet,pipe or paffage, wherby meat {enr from
the mouth dawne to the flomacke ; alfo, the fase #
(elfé; or the mouth,or Orifice th ere0f.

Gueule droitte. (In Architeéiure) as Naflelle.
Gueule renverfee.. as Cyme.
Harnois de gueule. Meat, villuals, meutbearmou,
throat- barnefe.
Marchandife de gueule, Vitiualls, Kitchen ware.

’ Motde Ne A ieafior merrie word. a.


ten-out; or, thats open attheone

‘Bien fendu de gueule. well moutb-cluen, Haba

a goodlie wide mouth,

Au chat cendreux jamais: nesombe rien en

le: &,à regnard endormi rien ne chet en Ja

le : Prov. Sluggifh, or idle people neuer, ge -
| do purpofé; tele ay à av he


Au chat lefcheur bat on ; #4
G bys dor fi ssi bie m
ucules. G La or fanguine,in
| Gueullard ::m. The muzgle,or mout ne beat salfo,a
DRE fellow ; Er ti like the bead of
a Lyon, auacient buskins. buskins. a
Gueulle :f. See Gueule.


ic aaa idle . "pe a xs lattered


. MM


ee 15


: Sucuze. as Gueufe.
Guen. Soe Capes: see


sa di


Guignade


Tonneau à gueule bée. A Tanne whofe bead is bea-


ait:


GV I


Guichet : m. A wicket ; or batch ofa doore. op


Madame du guichet (4 Midwife.
Guichetier done rs phase gir, ofa git


fon.

Cie. A Pafbert,or writ of fafeconduét.

Guide: £..4 guide, leader conduéior,diveétor ; alfo, a
certain little (ea-fifh that continual fwimmes before


a Whale; alfo,a kind of difeafe,er fore,in a borfes wi- |


Guidé: :m.ée:f, Guided, cenduëted, direéied,
Guideau :m. A kind of. fifo-net.
Guen: To guide,lead,direélycondutl; fet, arketpesin
the way.
Guileymant. The needle of a fea-compafe.
Guidon:m. 4 Standard, Enfigne, or Benner, under
which a troupe of men of Armes doe ferue ; aljo,be that |
beares it.
Guicor. as Guide ; An old word.
Guier. as Guider ; To guide, (v-m.)
uicres. 4s Guere.
Guiges: £ - ieee ofa Targuet,or Shield.
. as Guignement.
it: m, A winking.or aiming at a tbing with
one eye.


Gui ueuë, The little bird called, awagtale, or


Difb-wafber.


Gui er. To winkeor aime at with one ee; toleneliat


re intime : 3alfo,toblinke; to winke and looke a-


Capen eur : m, Awinker ; an aimer withone eye, as a
se taking bis leuel ; alfo, a blinker.
oe ons de roches. The corners,or edges of rockes.
Dern. A Gold-finder a Dung-farmer.
ile: f, A great [hower of raine.
uilhedin: m. 4 gelding.
Culedin: as Gaillard : Rab.
Guillaume. (4 name; ) william; aa se fra
gull,dolt, fop, foale.
Guillaume baillez: moy la Jance..A play(or punifh- |
ment wherein one thats budwinkt rides on anothers
oom and ise thus, bath a um faffe vaught


quill or faucet of a wine veffell ; alfa, the
ee 3 4 ie ; alfo,ouilecraft,deceit.
Ten saps Apecce of butter made of the 4


rE Beguiled,
irdeau :m.A toole or inflrument.

ée. as Guilée,

Guillemine :£ A certaine Edit} againft fome exorbi-
tant priuiledges of the Church; dewféd, and Paie
by Guillaume Pojet,a Chauncellor of Fras D

Guillemins : m. 4n Order of Hermites , aie by
Guillaume, Duke of Guienne,and. zak oictou; |
Seeke Les Blancs Manteaux, in

Guillemot: :m,A certain tinted fol at fme-
what refembles a Plon


Ore te) )


ard: m. af asvomans ec. ps >
Guiller. To coufen,be fleceine, (va) 9c
mette: f, Merrie, ig Helee;
Ro ar 5, a8 one that is cup or
Be apd d.


THE SHIOSSTATE “ONIVERSITY


{i hacer Bee

gé chez Guillot le Songeur. Put into a dump,
mufe dieame, drineninto a fiudie. .

Suilmin: m, A noddie, ninnie, coxe, ideot.

: À A vigge ; a wanton, or wandering, girle.

\ Cee im. Great gobbets of liquid meats, as of

~ oyflers oc.

| Guimauves:f. Marfh Mallowes, moorifh Mallowes,
white Mallowes,
Guimauves fauvages, The wild Mallowes called,
Veruine Mallowes cut Mallowes,e>Simons Mallowes.

Guimaux.prez guim aux. Fe/till medowes which are
wnowed twicea yeare. qRab,

Guimpe, or Guimphe :£. 2s Guimple,

Guimpier :m. Amaker of Crepines.

Guitnple :f. The Crepine of a French-bood.

Guinche :f. 4 fivord,or batchell for a flax-wife.

Guincher. To wrigle, writhe, wrinch a toefide.
uindage:m, A hoifing, or lifting up; or an engine to
Lift vp things with.

Guindal: m. Amengine to lift vp flones,or timber with,

Guindé: m. ée: £ Lift, or boyfed

Guinder, To boy/é, or lift vp on bigh,
Guinder les cieux. To bow dovene the beauens,

“* SeGuinder. To bound, skip, or leap vp ; alfo, ta knit,
or gather bimfelfe together. ‘

Guindereffe. la g.de la mifaine. The mixen halliatds,;
the rope whereby the mixen fayle is boyfèd vp.

Guindol. see Guindal.

Guindoles. as Guindoules,

* Guindoules : £. The fruit cabled, luiubes.

Guindre : . 4 reele, or wheele to winde filke on.

: — See Guifnes. . minis"

uinguois, de guinguois. Slowenly, vneueny, vn-
hereby); ele fing, Prat rinela paf

Guinfon. a Pinfon. '

Guipilon. 4n boliewater fprinkle, = *
Guipure :f. 4 groffe black thread (coneved, or whipt a-
bout mith filke) whereof corded hat-bands be made.
Guipures d'or. Goulden (and wreathed) Aglets, or

Tags.
Guirlande:£. 4 garland,
| Guirlandé:m.ée:£ Begarlanded, wearing a Gar-
_ _ land; bedecked,or (et out, with Garlands.
| Guifarme :£ A kind of (offenfiue) long-bandled, and
|  long-headed, weapon; or gi Spanifh Vifarma) a
| Jafe, that bath within it two long pikes, which with
| a fhoot,or 'thruft forward, fit

| Guife: f. Guif? ; manner, Fbion, cuftome, ufage ; bu-


07, .
Chafcun a fayuife: Pro. Euery one as be likes,
{Tant de villes tant de vides: ER M a,
| befèuerall cuftomes,or fafhians. À x
| Guifhes :£ À hind of lit et ee
\ taut. Don à juyenne;
1. alfo,any ki rries. :

| \Guifer:t MP rer.

| Guiterne; or Guiterte: f. 4 Gitterne,

| Gulpe :f. 4 wound, or bloud-wipe ; (in Blaxon,a.golp ;
ci alia

| Gulpine: € Aqui ‘ : :
| PR ie aad DIM MDN LS
| Gulpir, asGuerpir, To qui maine, |...


Gumenes: £ The tackling ¢ a sel


CE" Fa - ai) . |
G V'I . G V-Y
4 0 Le 2 =
} Guillot:m, 4 name for à man ; and bence linelie, tocond, frolicke ; bis bart leaps for iay,
“ Guillotle Songe. a dreaning elem, a dale: | Guorre: fa Corres Som. hea


yim. A little band-bill, ufed for the cutting, and
Hining of Vines,
dés s: A nickname,or by-word for a beggarlie foul.
ier.


Gurpir. Te quit, forgoe, leaue, abandon,
Gurbiioa: £ Aquuting, forgoing, leauing, abando-


ning.

Gules. The bal of the eye; fo tearmed in blazon; and
muft ever be fanguine.

Gutale, ou Gutrale. Ale,good Ale.

Guttural : m. ale: £ Guttwrall ; belonging to the
throat,

Guy: m. Miffeltoe, er Miffeldine.

deFlandres, A hand of morter wherewith fret-

worke is made.

Guyberges. as Guymberges.

Guÿbourc. The name of a certaine greene, and fiveet


apple. ‘

Guymauves. as Guimauves. _

Guymberges. Floxrifht worke in feeling , or want.
pr Sear


Guiynertes if. Yong Guinnie hennes,
es. 2s, Guifnes.
Guypierre. as Guipure,
Guypure. as Guipure.
Guyron. That which we call Geronne, in blafing of
Armes.
Guyfarme. as Guifarme.
Guÿfarmier. One that fèrues with a Guifarme.
Guÿure :£. 4 fnake,an adder.
zy: m, Plaifler, morter; looke A
Gÿinnafte. Exercifed; or, nimblé at exercife, €Rab.
Gynecocratie: £ Feminine rule, or authoritie, the :
Cite of @ woman.
Gynoois. à gynvois. ar, de Guinguois,
Fe f. The Gouernment of a woman. pave
Gyp, orGyps. Morter, plaifier ; or, a kind of white
fone wher cof plaifter is made,
ypié: m. ée:f. Like morter, or plaifter ; alfo, morte
red, or plaifiered. |
Gyri f sie d, 4 Tadpole,
he: f. The frog tearmed, 4 Ta
Groie : f. A gilloflower. See Giroflée.
Gytoles: a Skirret Lou fi
yron. as Guyron (atearme of blafonrie,
Gyrouét: m. 4 fane ; or weathercocke ym Girou-


étte,
Gyrouëtte : f. as te,

Ehren a Rie Flitting, wauering, incon.
Part, giddie-unfeddieyas a , or weashercack.


1.4


H'


A. (The third perfon of the Préfent tenfe of the |
Fier sv ha: Det, pale
a. An Interieclion, fometimes denoting a wifh;
asha s'il m’ eftoir is | fameties griefe ; as,
quelle res ! Ab, oralas; ee a trouble! fome-
times ‘threatning , or anger ; as. int tu es
Biot Ha vide sat dea FRE ee
à ha. 47 Interiéétionof feare, or of wonder


a. An Intenieltionof feare, or of wender (open à.
fof tiger (reconnais PDO BE à


a & laughter (then ac ith hé)as,
CS Re
à Le coeur y die glioguertehe exercé merre, as Hafler. FAR PARMI


H AC


difpofirion of the bodie. = Pa
Avoir habitude avec, Tacenuerfe, or commerce to
meddle ,deale,or haue much 10 doc,with, LE
bitué: m. A boufhold fernant,or attendant; one that
dwells with, and weares the Linerie of, bim he belongs


10. : Norte 7)
Habitué: m, ée:f. u/ed,enured, accuflomed, framed,
e goes sf sal petite that bib 3

abit in ; alfo, well fhaped,wek likin confit

tution ofbodie, + . get a

ituer, To vfe,accuftome,cnuve make, er frame, vn-
to; tofettle,praëtifè,brecd anbabit,in. -

Hable :m..A‘Port,or Hauen.

Habler. To peake ; whence, : -
=e st) ee 2 Ambrofe hable, leur cas eft
tifte,& pitoyable : Prov.when wings doe fpinneand
basbendsl babble, their cafe is a ta lataconle,

Hableur : m. 4 talhatine perfon , a man full of words,
abordean : m. The fifh Haberdine.

Habrizer. To get into the fhade,or flurowd bimfelfe va-
der a conert ; alfo,to ew: Au?

Hache: £. An axes alfo, a cracked peece of land fome-

. what refembling the bowed beake of an axe ; alfo, the

288 Smallage ; (for which loue Ache} affo; a

Orch, ~

Hached'armés. 4 Battle-axe, or Mafe of Armes.

Hache royalle. The Affadill, or Afphodill flower ; e-

fpecially( the fmall kind thereof called)tbe Speare for a


Hache: m. éc: f. Hacked, fhred, fliced, chopped, tutor
bewed in peeves; allo, batched, as the bilt of a fword.
Hachement : m. A hacking, fhredding, flicing ; bew-
ing,or cutting in peeces.
Par hachemens. In peecemeale, flices,or fhreds ; as
abachee;or,as {mall as meat in a hachee or fle{h to the


HOA BO


Habarre :£ A Lyter ; See Gabarre,

Habatre. as Abbatre.. | An ed
Habeliné : mée: f. Diftem EL fome bane
vnderflood it)all-to-bepifed : (Rab, .
Habile :com. Able; trong, luflie, powerfull, herdie;
quicke, nimble, aëtiue, readse, cunning, experts Sufi;
cient ; fit for, hand/ime in,apt unto, any thing be vh-

derbakes,or is put unto. TOUS

Habilement. 464; frrongly, luflily, bardily ; nimbly,
quickly, readily ; aptly, fitly, with good decorum; cun-
ningly, expertly ; fuffictently. :

Habileté:& Ableneffe, abilisie; firength, luflineffes
quicknefe, lightne(feaclinitie, nimblene(fe ; apineffe,
readine{fe,bandfomene Je, dexteritie ; cunning; fiffi-
ciencie.

[ne tient ia qu’ à vne habileté de main, There
needs no more but one right blow;one blow well fet on
would fèrue the turne. }

Habilité. as Habileté, ; + }

Habilité : m.ée: f. Enabled ; fitted ; confirmed ; anow-
ed,allowed of.

Habiliter. To enable ; confirme,gine firength, er power
unto; to apt, or make fit for ; to auow, or allow of.
Habiliter vn mineur. To enable an infant 10 fue,or
anfwer in lave by appointing bim a Gardian who may
doe it for him.

Habiliter vn proces. C’eft quandles parties droif-
fentleurs procedures, pieces, & productions avec
inventaire,pour en mettre les facs par devers le
Iuge,pour avoir droiét,& iugement : is pe

Habillage de poullailles. The dreffing # eof; as the
pluming drawing, oc. 7

Habillé: m.ée: f. Drejfed clothed arrayed, attired, ap-
pu ; furnifhed ; decked,adorned.

billé comme vn brufleur de maifons. In tatte-
réd,ot defperate,array. .
Habillement : m. Apparel, clothing, array,attire; a
fute of apparel; alfo,a garment,rayment , vefiment,or
vefture; al/o,armour,or harneffe ; and hence;
~ Habillement de tefte. An helmet,or beadpeece. -

Habiller. To cloth,dréf[e,apparell array,attire s to fiur-
nifb; alfa,to decke,trimme,adorne,

Habit: m. A garment raiment,vefliment , or veflures
apparell or a fate of apparell; alfo, an babit ; a As
fetled,a vfe or cuflome gotten, - Ret
In'eft pas fifol qu'il en porte l habit. He is not fo
fond as be feemessor makes few for, “5
L’ habit nefait pas le moine : Prov. Tis not the ba;
bit(but the beart) that makes amanveligiows. =~

Habitable: com. Inbabitable ; which may be dwelt


Habitacle:m. An habitacle,or babitation ; a dwelling,
or abiding place. sinks
Habitant: m. An inbabitamt, or inbabitor ; a dweller,

| sigharane miss Sg der nt bi

tant. I i ing abiding in.

- Habi Tomnsf.An habitation inbabitaton, a dwel-

z jor place of abidin ¢ q


pot.

Hacher. To backe, fhread, flice; bew, chop, cut in pee-
ces (aswitban axe; )-alfo, to cut the aire, as a bird
that flies apace ; al/o,to batch a hilt.

chereau: m.A bttleaxe ; an Addis.

Hachette :f. A hatchet or fall axe. + Fe
achis :m. A hachey, or bachee; a fliced gallimanfrey,

| ‘or minced meat, ;

Hacquebute : f. da Haquebut,or Hargucbuxe,

Hacquebuter. To fhoot mor with or Har euehuxe.

Hacquet : mads Haquer ; Aio,a little Ceflerne,or open

es ants for tha xinfng of glaffes , or cooling of wine in

Mee

Hacquetier. as Hagueticr.

Hadea. (Aa Intericétion of perceining, or [ir prifing) ba
are you there ? : ee

Hadot:m, 4/alt Haddocke, |

Hadou. as Hadot. : j

Haffres : f. Fright affonifoment ; Looke Affres.

eee as ASS + a, i :. rik

ard: m.ardc: { ard, wi ange; foward,
réel x Rad vncomparabl mie


gr aS tible, = Pre
Dwelt, inhabited, lodged,remained,aboad, Faulcon hagard. À Hogard ; a Faulcon that preyed
y ch ll, mbabit, dee, ele ema oe pone for her Self à before foe mas taken, ae #9


à cuflomarie ; continu- ‘ ales : ied peat tt of a
Haglure :£ Thema (or pecklednefe) of the coatof
gr ire pros hahay. To mike à great fire, or


male € Bat du led |


yy eke Pe = | we Otiginal from |
Biertized by ’
Bet Go gle | THEOHIOSTATE UNIVERSITY


ot,


| Qui de fesfub eats eft


fou: cbr feral ae re Lor
his co ig SE 2
errs iicosdifoecoubagueen, as, hai av


ehoe ; aif, of of complayning, as, hai
hat vous me ble tn;


Leoke Hay.
Haias: :m. a fades’ Beech tree.
Haid. Secke Hai, '
Haie:f, A hed desitaake Haye,
Hailler:m. A great thicke 122 or bufbie place; a


- thornie plot, ground fill fon sers 5 thicket of bram-
bles. à


Haillicr.at Hajller.


Haillon: mA clowt,a batter regal an old,jorne,


or tattered garment,


: -Oles beaux haillons. (So fa ay they in fome parts of


France,when they fee a man mo richly attired.)


Haillonné: m.ée :f Cut into rags, or tatters swhereaf


clowts are made.


Difcours haïllonnez. Ragged,ar patched difcourfti.
Haillonner. Te cut into rags, or tatters; t0 clowe ; or


make clowts of.


Haillonneux : m.eufe: £ Ragged torae,tattered ; full


__of clowts,patches ;rags,or tatters.
Haim: m. 4 ( fifbing) booke.


Haine: f. Hate, hatred ; loathing, deteftation ; malice,


rancor,a grudge, ill-will,


Haine de Prince fignifié mort d'hômme: Prov. 4


Princes bate imports the death of man.


Nul bien fans haine : Prov; No bappine(fe without


hatred. :
Haines. les haines:£ The bips; ors Eine,
Haïneur: m. A hater, loather, detefter,abborrer.


Haineufcté: €.Hatefülnefe,odioufüefe; or an extreame


deteflation of.
Haineux : m. cufe: £ Full of bate ; hating, loatbing,de-


relire extreamely ; alfo, batefull, deteflable, moftodi. |
Bais. Tohate; loath deteit,abborve, ight ymalicesrepine


at,beare ill-will unto.


Oncques n’ayma bien qui pour fi peu hait: Prov.


He neuer foundly lowed that bateth for a toy.


Haire: m. Aleane, or il-fauoured curtall ; a carvion


jade ; (bence) alfo, a wretched or miferable fellow ;a


| _ pore fnake.
Haire :£. À Sackeloth;a feat re, made of
tamer)


: affa Temmes Boulter ne Sevainehs al ‘foremd, or


rugged bare andmorne pese AY


villanous pranke ; a Leo
Bailler a haite. ‘Geeke Baller jay saad \o
Faire mille haires à Seca ll
extreamely.

Haireux: im. eufe : f. Bag Ghruggedharfé, sue


clatb.


Hairon: A heron, berne,hernefber. Le

= Hairon marin. The Sword-fifh. H
aironneau: m, A yong heron.

nnier: mere +f Of; belonging to, beren's ale
Sosperon-like ; ye: slender ; peer reset
‘ meager; Ms

’ bn amet Abernerfusleonmade one
y to tbe heron.

Haironniere: f, 4 berons m aries aber,
or {aw of wood, wher breed,


peeve: eo inet b hed


2


Dial Go gle


las, fic, ur 44


. Halebreda:com. 4 eat amelie org mip


oe Lis kb as Halebran.


Halecreté. Armed with “a Corflet. a ee
Haleine: f. Ones breath;or win; briathing,


Halenée : £.
. Pr Poor pas «Pea te fi ye i,
| Halenement: md breathingsor blowing ons aventing,


me 4


Hie To Sunne-burne,or popcorn imthe re |


Det me nes


Hailtre: m, 4 auch tree. €
it: m. Linelineffe,luflineffe, sladnefeheerefilneles €
‘'éage je; readinef[e.
ien à mon hait. That fits uy bumor, plea-


od fes 4 fines forts 10 my wifh, iumpes with my de-


:mée : es lufie, found, blithe, buxome ;


aaa well of, or be well pleafed with ; alfo, to


Haitié. tie ald


Haitoudeau: m. Looke Heftoudeau.


al: m. Anafhie coloured Scate-ffh, whofe skinne is
dered all ouer with browue {pots : €Norm.


Halachieis-f, 4 Sbad-ffh : (§Marfeillois.)
Halainé : m. oi f, as Halenc,
Halbrené:m.ée:f. Befhitien, iff berayed; aif, fad of


À s07,all out ofheart ; as a man diféontsnted, or ti-

pe burt; Jooke Hallebrené.
Fanleabiliglb end: AFaulcon thats ragged, 07 bro-
ken-féathered.
alcion vocal. The Nightingale of the riuer,
Hale: m: Sunne-burning , or th'extreame beat of the-| .
Sunne. j


Hale:f: An open Market honfe,or bail, flanding on pit.


lers; (as that under which meale is fold in Newgate
Market; ov that of the waolt Staple in weflninfler ; )
alfo,a common ball or Towne-boufe.

Les hales: Such a Market houfe, ball, or Shambles ,
wherein flefb,and other vittualls are fold,


Halé: m. ée:f. Sunne-burnt ; as Hallé; alfo; veered, 4
‘as a cable; alfa, hounded,or, fetjasa dog at. $


alebant: 2 Albrent: x


Heberde tf Ambaibert; alfd,a kind of copper good to


Ordnance of.


Hale ardier: m, An balberdeere; onethatferues, or | 3


fights,altogetber with anbalberd. St
al im; ATeale; alfo, aé Albrent (in the two “
nifications thereof, ) A


saa -fafbioned nan, or woman; a luske, a a
ch; a fofe. LS


alecret : m.Acerfler.


Ala grofle haleine. SeelGros. .
Pouffer a toute haleine. Toxbruft svith all bis free


to labour tooth and naile. : À
Halcineux : m.eufe : £ Longisinde cd flop breath a ee
Halené:m. ée : € Breathed ons winded vented; ‘he À

ched ,ox finelt ont; Lise ached difcouered, fe L «ss

humor’s found out} à Le”


Halené de Ja flatterie. Fédiirh tbe breath ie jole
ingup rte nee à SAMS:
cathing,venting, winding exhaling


winding; = Saget fearcbing outs Cory :
aib,or blow yen. ye ie 118 ae

d ; fmellor [e earch out ; eed (by PL LE A UT
dial, 0 fd


or make fwart,a ins Playing twa be ns
alfa.to rise et, adog at,
Hance Toveerea cables to Mis wis


opeice


LEIGY
THE oHtôi a = Ü


Lt GE re


* 0 ‘ 7 vi à WI i V2 vee
ÿ . .” . =
H A L H A N
| ‘4 ei
rb  Haletant. Parfie, fort winded , panting, breathing | — woodcleauers,érc,keepe time to their firoakes. © SE:
5 MES à de Pay chanté à fon han.J base fpokén with bam @Bar- |
5 Haletement : m. A (painfull,or fafl) panting ; atbicke | _ ragouin. 4 ge
| breathing,or letting in and ont of the breath ; alfo, a Hn : m. À drinking cup or goblet. a
4 breathing exhaling, euaporating or venting out. anche :f. The baunch,orbip ; alfo,as Anche. ~ }
or Haleter. To pant,or blow apace ; t0 breath faft, or draw La goutte en la hanche la fille en lapance : Prov.
: the breath verie thicke and painfilly,as one thats rea- The gowt in the baunch , a girle in the paumch ( of a
: die to die; alfo,tobreath, exhale, enaporate, or vent great bellied woman.) e
out. ‘ À Hancher. To gnafpe,or faatchat with the teeth. (viel
* Haleter apres les beautez d’ vne femme, Extream- ; Es.


ly 10 long for or luft after them ; (a metaphor from the


manner of a dogs wooing.)
Haliboron. as Aliboron. |
Haligornes: € Trafh ; old or outcaf finffe.


ET m. A kind of fea Purflane much eaten in Sal-

Ades.

Haliter. 2s Haleter ; AY/o,to excite,or flirre up.
alitre : m, as Hafle.

Hallage. droiét d’ hallage.Hallage; the toll thats due
to the Lord of a Faire,or Market, for fuch commodi-
ties as are vented in the Hale of the place.

Halle. as Hale’: €,

Halle. (4x interieétion,of cheering, or fetting en of @
dog ; ) ba boy,now now.

Hallebatté. €Rab. as Halleborré.

7 Halleboter. To gleane after grape-gatherers ; (bence)

alfo,tovake,or gather together.
\ | Hallebotté: me: £. Flaggie,or i-filled i the;
Hallebottes: f.The prestions and bladder-lige tops,er
flowers, ofa certame weed , containing fome two or
three little red feeds apeece. |

Hallebrené : m. ce : f. Sad,creft-fallen,beauie-looking,

‘ drooping; off the bindges,cleane out of beart(as amoo-
ting ducke; or a ragged hawke; )alfo,befhitten;bedun-


ged,grieuoufly beraied. :

Hallebrent. as Albrent.
allecret. 2s Halecret.

Hallefeffier : m. 4 fcoundrell; a bafe,contemptible, or
fcuruie fellow; (This word is often applied vato,and(as
fome ns Ms for, the ing attendant,
or prying infirument,of a tyrant.)

Halle + Halené,

Hallener. as Halener. es


Haller. To hallow, or incourage dogs with hallowing; al-
foto bound,or fet themat.. : OE
alleron: m. Part of a womans Gc,

Halles. les Halles, as lesHales. :
Halleter. seeke Haleter,  :
en mc Ey

rach: m. Am Admira
Paice: m.as Bruine ; A bot and blafting mi
Halte. faire halte. To flop, ftay,make a fla
Hambour : m. 4 kind of barrelet,or firkin.

vi


gage
. Confe&ionh, A compofition ; tear-
| veel te deatr bros me
| Hamegonné: m.ée: Poehanted ied il of sid


with, fifo-bookes. ‘
neconner, To bebooke,to furnif with fifb-bookes.
5 6 A ; à


mot, :
ps: m, A Pilebard (ffb.)


| Hannon: m. 4 Cockle,tearmed


anchu : m. ué: fBighaunched well bumme-growme,
great bipt. el
on :m. A kind of Dragon, whofe biting isnot ve-


xomous.
Hanebane : €. (The weed) Henbane. ge 1
Hanebane iaulne. Yellow benbane, Englifh Tobac-


+ co. ;
Hanede. whence, Enter à la hanede. as Enter en
perche ; (under the word Enter.)
Hanegue: f. A corñe meafiue containing about fix Pa-
vifian bufhells. ; $33
aneton : m,A Locufl,or buge flie,which bath fix taw-
nié,and folide legs ; and foure wings ; two (the upper,
and larger) tawnie of colour,and fomewbat thicke; tbe
other two yellowifh,and verie flender : Now thenatu=
rall flupiditie of thefe flies, or their violent and rafb
~ manner of flying ; and their ingendering (like filke-
_ wormes) backward and taile to taile; or their holding
each by others taile (as they lie in holes, and hollow} -
Ys = all winter long) baue produced the prouerbs fal- E
ing. ‘4
Eftourdi comme vn Haneton, As dull or beedleffe,'
4s an Haneton,
Parentage d'hanctons. Lecherous alliance; kin->.
dred intertained upon a luftfill proiett,or with a wan-;
ton purpofe: (Tis alfo applied unto fuch , as (like the P


Princes of the bouft of Auftria) match , for. the moft F SE :


part,in their owne families.) :
Hannicroches. as Hannicrochemens. £
Hannebane. as Hanebane. a
Hannicrochemens : m.Swbtilties imtanglements, ca-
uills,troublefome vexations. *
Hanni. Neighed like aborfe.
Hannir. To neigh
Elles ne hanniffoient à autre avoine. They longed
for no other thing ; their minds ran on,their teeth wa-
tered at,nought elfe.
Hanniflement: m. The neighing of a borfe.
hs at Roan, :
Hanfe: £ The Hanfe ; a companie, focietie or corporati-
on (for fo it fignifies in the booke of the Ordonnances
of Paris,and in fome other old books) of Marchants; Or
(as a Cinilian interprets it)a certaine focietie of Mar-
chants combined together for the good vfage, and fafe
pafjage, of Marchandifes ; al/o,anaffociation with, or
the freedom ofthe Han; alfo,the fee, or fines which
is pai fieedome. | cant”
Hanfe Teuthonique. An affociation with the Mar-
chants of the Hanfe ; or,a participation withs.or com-
_ munication ofthe priniledges granted (amp time thefe
300 yeares)by foneraigne Princes wato th
Marchants, trafficking unto London in England, Biue |
oe Flanders, Berges in Norway,e> Nonogrodin
4 oe,”


Hansé :m'éetf. Free of theHanfe; or fworne ofthe:
companie of Hanfe 244’ chants; whence alfosfwarn,cr
À made frenshfien) Companies Corporation. di:


HAR.


Haraflé: m.ée : £ Tired,or toyled out; weakened with À
‘Onertopling; harried,molefted, burried nas


: “He Te ae a Faiielin, Halberd dc.


unedsirubledjurmoiledgormented, |
anté :m. ée:£ Hasmied , frequented, much refarted er. Ta tive,or toyle out; te pend or weaken, wea-
Cats, _ rie or weave out,by owertoyling,or ta taking too much of; |
Chemin fort hanté. 4 way verie much uftd,a fill ao gaces diet import arr urie arme


beaten way.

Hantement : m.4 haunting, frequenting, or frequent
reforting vato; alfo,zs Hantife.

| Hanter.Tobaunt, frequent,refort unto; to be familier
with; to converfe, or commerce with.


Haraffier:m, The owner, or onerfeer of a Race.
Haraud :m.The forme of a Have; alfo, a certaine crie
vfèdin Normandie ; Looke Haro,
Éé:mée:f Openly teuiled reproached, vapled


' antise : € An ordinarie baunt, or baunting ; frequen- at exclaimed açainfi;cricd out upon,

a tation ; commerce, comuerfation 3 familiaritie,or great Harauder: To reuile,reproach,raile at, or {could with,
ory acquaintance, with; much refort unto. ter 3 to exclaime againft.or crie out upon,
iv ‘ Hape. as Happe. tas Haraud,or Haro ; (and bence ; ) “à
‘la Happe: f. 4 clajpe,or, the booke of a clafpe ; or a boôke Le monde luy crie harault. The world lexclaimes |
254 to-clafpe with; alfo, the clowt, ot ba of 'yron thats cries outyor bids fie upon him, LA + CA

‘i nayled upon th arnx,or end of an Axletree, and keeps | Harce. Looke Herce,

Ra it Las being worac byth often turaing of the en < d arcelé : m.ée:f. Vexed,barried, hurried, turmoiled,

ET: - awheele, much troubled pr annoyed; and prouoked  incenfed, or

Say Clou à happe: A clowt-nayle, urged (withall,) :
Va | Happé: m,€e :f, Caught, bapped, fratched, or grafped | Harceler. To vexe , barrie , » térmoyle ; burrie trou ee
1e ble, mole/t, or difquiet, much ; alfa, to prowoke , in- 4


| Hap pee: fA catchja grafbe,a (natch.
; apps d happée. A er of, or entrie in-
à ne cies mans land a forcible eatriesor diffeifin.
opin: m. 4 catch-bit, {pcopbant, fineh~feaft:
ee re: fi.4 thing that makes a faire fer, but
* afnoworth at all; bence, a counterfeit well and


cenfe , or vrge (therewith ; 3) alfa to baggle, buc €, ;
bedge, or paulter long in the buying ofa rh:
\tie,
Harceleur :m. 4 firebrand, make-bate rréfuit :
brabling,litigious,or contentious flow. wide
arcelle : f. Alittle with,


à mm. À cate! sift
Pies ap, or.catch ; to or at.
oupe. A Pate. wate


inwhomthere:is nothing good but an me as A

‘aif, an arrant, and(almoft) apparent lie, a gull, fi, | Hardage. asHardes, à ¥
foift sa faire tale fit onely to catch fioless afin are Erin tf, A beard, flacke,or troupe of wild beats ; alo, ae
ess bebauiour. olameggelaied with a (oft skinor filme (about j it)in lead Sa


of a fhell ; a foft-fheld egee ; a wind egge; allo; a


Havdes,(rbe Pluvall of Harde;al/o) furniture
implement pbegeagesnect[farie oh rire af
PA 7 gen mée: f. Loaden with  uffe, eraecefinie bag- | ’ F
age; alfo,trucked, bartered exchanged, Lacs
ardeau : m. A little with,or figot-band ; ;alfo, a jong t
ma An Le a clownifh fellow that thinkes verie
wello
Hardelle : £ 4 little with,or fagot-band ; alfo, atroupe,
or beard of beafts ; (and)a rout, or crue of men aff, a
ede yong maid,lalfe,or mother.
Hardinent : m, ante boldne fe, audacitie, flont-


Earle Tomate lee fe than

0 ucke, arter, fc:

Hardes. Looke Harde. asi
sl € Fallof or loadlen with, fg, ie
: age. :

Hardi:m.ie:f Har bo t.
eee di, daring, fous, la confident, =


, ae ———


1 Ha |
| Haquebure st. An Haquebüt, or Arquebufe ; ak


Had nacbutier : :m. An Ar vebfer,or inal ot.
— com. da amie Horfe, Gelding, or


Huet: m. Dray, or low,and open Cart,fuch as Lon-
don Brewers vf,

1 Haqueticr : m. 4 Dray-man.

À Har: fs 4 with of greene ickes; the band of a fa-
ot.

aine de la har.Wpom your life, upon paine of the

‘tie, (Malefa abs te old time were ; and at this

day in Jome barbarous countries are , hanged with


ee ang: m. À Herring ; Harenc.
Ha arangefon: €. Herring,


Hacang ierc:f. 4 Herrine-mies «Hate. |


Fanny We: im as en à en

aranguant, Pleading unto,difcour, befires 6!

Vers ge tonal Sea fe
ec


RH?
Harangué nee. f. Pleaded before, vice vat

_ held witha long difcour{e one .
aranguer. To make an Oration; to bold witha
diféourfe ;t0 plead before,to preach. i Brel Pool
leur: m,4# Orator,er Oratiou-maker; 4 Plea-
der ya Preacher, — diement.as Hardiment. ; La!
araniier :m.cre : OR belong eon te Hardiefle:, Hardine[fe,boldne, seni,


| ring, ge von bile ie nce in or afi
| HaranfOr. as Harencfor. dred Herrin : E
+ Aa 5 hor, a buc le, << ie x
ee teem | cine a PE mg


delance: ee ;
hats Prose 3%


Go gle ji


1 oh FRS


ay


a


=I ea CN ©


LA Rt Ba Lo d bé: ll oe es


HAR


| con; ently; €!
Hard un TR time Prov. Loske Sain.
Hardiment Lis à la porte qui bonne nouvelle
ap rte : Pro. He that brings goodnews boldly knocks
e,

Hardoiier: : m, A reforting,or,a repaire, unto.
Hake Oeuf hardré. wind egge,or fo ha ie egge.
Hare-levrier. Hoo boo,loo loo,now now, boe dogs.
Harelle: f. 4 troupe,beard, flocke; alfo,a popular com

motion ; ( for fo was once tearmed one begun, at Roan,

by the oppreffed people.)
Harenc: m. 4 Herring.

Harenc de mar. A great, fat,e> Pera Herring.

Harenc de lanui&t. A red Herri

Harenc faur, ou fauret; & for,ou oret. A red Hers


ring,

Efsimé comme vn harenc foret. Asleane as a rake;

as lanke as a fhotten Herring.

Droi& d'harenc. A certaine number of Herrings,

beretofore due, euerie Lent, unto the Treafurors , and

Officers of the Chamber of Accompts, but at this day
allowed ora, in money.

La caque (ou la poche) fent toufiours I' harenc:

Prov. The pate full di the ne. {mells ; Our nature

will,doe what we can, fis


TS : 64 fifh that ila alittle [had called


fo at


Harengerie: Ë "A Herring celler, fhop, or market ; the


place wherein Herrings are kept, fhewe 2 alé,
a felling of Herring, or the Herring fellers trade,

Harengeson: f. The feafon of Herring fifhing; the
time ben Herrings are in feafon ; Herring feafon,

Harengiere: f. 4 Herring-wift; a woman that cries,
or fells Herrings.

Faire la mouë aux harengieres Tofland on the Pil-
lorie.

Harer vn chien. To bound a dogat, or fet a dog on, a
beaft,crc ; alfo,to incourage bim by fome voyce, or by
wi ing on the backe, when be is fet om.

eur. Signifies as much as, le Contreflus de Ja


no. faulcon hargas. À Sore Faulcon.

Hargneux. Peeuifh, wrangling, dinerous, outrthwart,
croffe, wañward, froward; ill to pleafe,ewer complay-
ning neuer quiet ; bence alfo, verie Girrgreme ;afo, as
Hergneux.

Chien hargneux a toufiours les oteilles defchie
rées : Prov, Abrabling curre is newer without a
eares.

Haricot : m. Matton fod with Little twrneps wine,
and tofis of bread crumbled among; tis if made 0-
therwife, of {mall peeces of mutton : fodden,
then fried infeam , with fliced onions, and lafily boiled
in beefe broath with Par (ley, 1fèp, and Sage: And in
another fa{bion,of liners boyled in a pipkin with ae
onions and lard, verinice, red mic eter
À rh tofis, fall


He oti


H A R
de. A barbarous name for,alitile Bafiliske.
rue f. Harmonie melodie tunablene[fe, afweet
confent of founds ; alfo,a coniunCtion of bones by a fin-
gle line which fits them one to th’ other (and fo are the
bones of the nofe conioyned.
Harmonieux: m, eufe :£ Harmonious ynuficall ynelo~
dious tunably founding, fiveetly refounding.
ue: com, as Harmonieux.
Harnaché: m.ée : f. Harneffed,as a borfe.
5: pay ase m. The barnefle of a borfe.
.@ Harnas.
H arnacher vn cheval. To harneffe, or make readie, a
borfe; to put on bis furniture. :
Harnacheur :m, 4 barneffer of aborfe; a Groome of
a Jiable;alfo,a bungling Armourer,or Harne(|e-maker.
Harnas de cheval. 4 horfes barnefféor furniture,
Vn harnasde Mouton. The bead, and ie of a


epe,
arnas deroture. 4 plough.
Harnois : m. Armour,barne|fe ; afo, a teame, cart, or
carriage rc ; alfo,as Harnas.
Harnois de Meat viétualls acates, moutb-
armor ,bellie-firniture,
Hanois noirs, Reiflers, Rutters, Pifloliers on borfé-


backe.
I s’efchauffe en fon Harnois. He beats himfelfe in
“his armor ; [aid of one that grows in choller,or falls in-
to Pte: fatisfattion of fome other intemperate


eral ne vautrien qui ne fe defend: Prov. De-
+ fend thy fel or elfe all armor’s vaine.
Jaro. ou Harol. Crier Haro fur. To crie out vpon,or
make buy and crie after; (ufèd in Normandie by fuch
as are outraged,or in fome high degree wronged; ther-
by feeming to implore th'aid of thew Duke Rol,who is
reported to baue beene a mof inf Prince; ) In which
cafe thofe that are within the hearing theref muft pare
Sue the malefaëtor,or elfe they pay a fine.
= 2 Haro,ou Haro crié. 4 ns nt
teflation of fuch as are in lan 0-
thers goe about to put fo RAT Ml be made be-
forea Sergeant,or two wimelfés, and then is a fufici-
ent warrant for the holding of the poffeffion,
Haroder. as Harauder.
Harondelle: £.4 Swallow ; Seeke Arondelle.
Ala nouvelle venuë des harondelles. (A deferipti-
on of the Springs approach.)
Harou. as


Harpade: f. Candie fnatching at,a gripingsor {ei-
xing on,with the clawes,

Harpail : m. 4 troupe, fle, beard,erue rout.

La ar Seeke Herpaill

ar va eur:m. Fe sam oueifèer of Deere; alfo,as
Arp

H ter. To furueysor meafure land.

Blaspave: The name of a flepbeards dog.

pore if, 4 eee ; ape jambe ‘ide of a doore,

,07 paw.

ï cn be scam fes barpes. He flirved bis fingers


-


Harpechorde4. Arpficord, 01 Harpficord ; a Dulci-
mer.


Ab Li my mpl :@Dauphinois. |
Se harper! vn + autre. To 5 cate ote,
clafpe jmbrace, SoM clofe RU toftuffie


H dof Hardes: Rab. ces
arpes. in flea of « “Far.


H A R


| Harpeur gm, 4 Harper; one that plaÿes on the Harpe.
Hate lek Gree edie deuourings catching, faatching,

He yen at.
à jc:f. À Harpie ; Looke Harpye,

ar. Haat m. 4 ‘maples apr cit Mafons fatten

wee together, it mord) ;

a m. Poi/on ; (an old wor

En A f.An na ‘pie; one of thofe monfirous and raue-
nous birds which Poets faine to haue had womens fi-
ces,bands armed with talons, and bellies füll of an ot-
dure wherwith they infééled all the meat they touched;
and bercof are the monftrous brood (Moles, or Moone.
calues)of fome women [o tearmed.
aye de cuifine. À moft ravenous, and filthie de-


Har québoiide) £. The fhot of an Arquebufe.
‘ Harqueboute ; ec bet

Nc &, Harquebufé.
Da: Harquebufade f, ae Harqueboufade.
. ph ner i f. An Arquebufe, or Caliner ; Looke At


uebufe,
Har uebufe de chañe. A fowling peece. !
Harquebulé: m.ce: f,Shot,or fhot at with, [laine with
the {hot of,an Arquebufe.
Harquebutér. 7 fhoot, or {hoot at with, to kill with
2, the fhot of,an Arquebufe.
Harquebuñer: m.An Arquebulier or finall foot.
arquebutier. The fame.
1g arry. (A Carterlie voice of exciting) Hay ree,
\ SSN Harry bourriquet. Rudely,clewnifhly, confifedly; or
i braying out in a lowd,and bar{h accent, fuch as the
= French Mikers fe in the drining of their Alfes;Looke
5 à uct.
bs Hars, as Har.
if + Harfe: f. A Harrow.
Harfelle : if, A little with,
t Harfeller.asHarceler.
ne m, A barrowing ; af, a fife, or Susie
landing. *
Harfer. To harrow ; alfo,to fland up freight,or füiffes
eur: m. Abarrower.
Hart:f. 4 with ; alfo,a baulter ; Looke Har.
Les harts. The fhoulder veine, or necke veine of a
page ae moft commonly be is let bloud ; or as les


Hard: :m, Hazard, aduenture , ieopard , fortune,
chance,
Hafardé: m.éc: €. Haxarded,aduentured, ieoparded,
| _ committed unto fortune,or chance.
arder. To hazard, aduenture, ieopard, fet on fixes
_ and feuens,commitied pi to fortune and chance.


Ilfaut hasarder vn petit poifion nan yn
À grand. A little, for a great gaine m ded |
; Hafardeur: pp cae


: pe se mh pere cinema , bab
nab ,bittie miffie,on fixes and (euens.
: Halde meet


iy venturous,aduen-
Halchichfich 4 L of coughing,in Rabelais.
her. az


afe: £. An old female Conie,or Hate.
Biss. im i a
, Halle: Surre buis or bexireame, ad earch
Summer
Hille: ee pont 1 "| rs forced à in sate
: Hafler. To seine ie
Tepes Oy diplapig ict «bat pe


Go gle |


as Harquebufe 3


H AS


:_ alfo;to bound, fet a dog,or turne a dog loofe
€: m. A fitsor Webb, . at
Armes d’ hafte. Looke Ares.

ber : i Haft, (peed, fwiftnelfe quicknelfe,pofting fid-

* denneffe.

* Hafte ne vient feule : Prov.Haff neuer comes alone;
viz: bath euer fome trouble or other t'accompanie it. .
Hafté: mée: € Hafled, fpéeded, quickly got, come, or
done ; J iat on apace; alfd,baftie or (beedie ; alfo,requi-

ring

Haftelé : m. ée: € Bound'op with final (plints.

Haftelettes : f.Litele fblints wherwith Fauleoners bind
up their bawkes broken legs,

eux : m.eulc: f. Haftie, full of halt, quiche, fhce-
die nimble, fivifily cE f he ?
ue: f..A bogs baflet.

Hafter. To haften accelerate, peed quicken, fit forward
apace ; alfo,to bedge,or inclofe with a hedge.
Shafter. 70 baft,make baft,goe faft,mnoue yo
“fpeedily, bie apace,

Qui trop fe hafte en cheminant en beau chemin
fe fourvoye fouvent: Prov. The more bafl the wore
a they that make too much bal miflake the frirelt


Hafteretu: m.The throat-peece or forepart of the neck,


of a bog(belike fro the wallens,by whom a mans throat,
or necke is thus tearmed ; ) alfo, one liner or more of a
_calfe,exc, wrapped up (whole, or fliced, and feafoned


with good, bea es, and fpices) in the call of the beaft,
and afterwards reafted, or fried, and ferued vp bot
with Oranges,or in fome good fauce : (This difb,as allo
another jfuot more)drefjed in another fafhion, is called
Haftereaux.)

Hatterel : <r 307,A bogs baflet,

eur :m. A bedger,or hedge- maker, >

Hañtif:m.Hafie, Cy a a Peedie, forward,
' foone-commin ace.
Poires,ou Does haftives. Hafings; fuchas are
fooneft ripe.

Haftilles:€ Tiimwards of a beaft; as a bogs aff,
calues gather, fheepes plucke. crc.

Hañiveau: m.An bafliesrafh inconfiderate bar shraird
Affe; alfo,a bafling apple,or peare ; and hence ;

ofes d iveau. Verie forward Rofes.

Hattivel. a Haftiveau; or, Afoone-ripe apple called,
the S. Jobns apple. :
aftivement. Haft beadlong, fd denlyrafoly, quick.
by, fifty, [peedily, forwardly; apace,in a moment ie
a (iudden,out of band.

Hattiveré : f Hafineffe ; rafhmeffe ; acceleration, pes
dine quckeneles alba making,

Hatelier. as Arceli

Hattereau. Looke Haftereau.

Hates Aa Interieétion of calling ; Baiosbeare Je me, be


HE. m, as Aubans ; The athena ol
Haubelon: m. Hops.
Haubereau:# Hobreau, |
Haut :m. {The Diminwte of Hub)
mailé; or on wes,and gorget of ma,
<> eonc es The voll wherewith they
beare up their gownes about their hips.
Maillea a he les md Prov.
Linke after linke the coat is made at Aon
ne a tae erfeltion,
aubergeonnier : m. 4 maker of coats of maile
smn) A coat of maile; 54/04 Hauler late
“ol Lori d, is WH
Xx ÿ


Pre


—. Tv


H A V


Droi& d'haubert. 4 certaine priniledge. eur by

diuers Norman Lords ; it conjifis of many parts, and

the moft of them of high Jurifdittion,

Fief d' haubert. 4x inberitance (held immediately,

and in Capite of the King) whofe owner is bound to
Serue,on bor febacke,ia. pe. mpleat armor, & with a coat
of mayle, field, fwor d,and belmet,in the warres.
ave: com. as Havé; and hence, yeux haves, Fadl-
drained, bollow, fad, or funke-in eyes.

Havé : im. ce: f. Soaked, withered, waficd ; alfo,dread.

ua disfigured, wild- “looking ghafilie,ghofi-like,
avée :f. Agripe,or handfull ; al/o, a bootie, or prey;

alfo,a toll exaéted by the executioner of fome towns up-
on-finall wares,and fruit fold on Market dayes.

Havement. Greedily ,rauinouflycouctoufly,

Haver. as Happer; of, To booke , or grapple with a
booke.

Haveron. as Aveneron ; Wild Oats,

Haver: m. A little hooke; alfo,a boat-booke,or pole ba-
uing a hooke at th'end; alfo, a little dandiprat, {hort
hop-on-my-thombe.

Havi: m. ie :f. Par ched,{corched,svithered burnt vp,as
graffe by a bot Sunne.

Havi de froid, Stiffe,clumpfe,benummed,

Havir. To fcorch, parch, wither, burne or drie upjas a
bot Sunne doth graffe,crc.

Haulbert : m. À bigh,or chiefe Lord ; LookeHaubert.

Haulche :f. A raifiag,or out-bidding,ia an Outrope, or
Outcry. Wallon.

Sauter. To raifèor out-bjd,in an Outrope,or Outcry.
qWallon.

Haulchié : m.ée: f. Raifed,out-bid: qWallon.

Haulchier. as Haulcher.

Haullave:m.as Rates . Alfgpride arragancie, fr
quedrie, power full oppr'effion

Haulfaire : com, Loftie, Jiatebe, , arrogant,bigb-
minded (by a prefumption of abilitiesor power.)

Haulfe: f. The under laying of a cee peece of leather
that vnderlayes i it.

Haulfé: me: f. Hoy/ed,eres as Hauñlé,

Haulfe-bec : m, 4 lifting nn chinne in feorne, or
mockerie ; alfo,a blow, or ¢ the chinne.

Bate: -col:m, A Gmngets or, Armour tees the necke,

Haulfe-menton : m prop er
wing to beare vp the “reed ai one thats ler im
treame meakenele 3 alfo, a lowd lye , proud foifl, falfe
or vaine brag.

Haulfe-pied. eine bei ls, Ba


gers, Oxes ec ave Cans br.


ne ou The devin 3 or hui of ar
great Boats gs a riuer by men a
Haulferie: f. PAT
ee pre ae
Haulrai :f. Hautie, Ds ne
hi sailed pire >


UP,


Go gle *


bp
a


Hauffaire: Le ay epee


Faire se = th bis | .
ee ie qu id


Pee ae /. mir ia :, a RASE, ae


mA


ps Ac aod of fome other Artificers ) within the towne


Haultasis. Such Ariificers as are fubieët to the


ete, as Haubert.
Haultbois : m. 4 Hobois,or Hoboy. :
-contre: com. The Countertener part in finging; | |
alfa, (a Countertenor)be that beares it. PR


H . Tapifleric de haulte-lifle. Large, and
rich Tapiftrie.


Haultement. # Hautement.


Hamieeties f, Height,hautineffe; bighnefe, excellencie,
(1 4


Haulteur. as Hauteur.
dr Aen ces $ High-walled ; compaffed, or
anked with high walls ; alfo,tall and
gam, luskifhsloobie. Like. " fale im fl
Vn plat de fouppes haultmurées. 4 difhofbrowes


whofe foppes are beaped roofewife one another,
Hauk-cunee To thee 507 flake’ with high


Haut sie : f. An Omelet. pr Pancake of egges.

rage on for foipping.

Hager igi
al/o, as Haulfage. |


ieee: Hoifing,rai
Haufle: f. 4 feoope to lade,or + Rae p water.
louér à la hauffe qui baiffe. To ie at titter totter or
at totter-arfe , to ride the wild-mare.
uffé : m.ée: f.Hoiféd yaifed aduanced,eleuated, bo-
nt up, lifted bigh, fet aloft.
ffe-bec: m. À difdamfill cafing up of the bead,
war ofthe chinne.
Hausse-col. 2 Haulfe-col.
ufle-cul: ro. A French Vardingale; or (more pro.
perly) the kind of roll u(ed by uch women, as weare(or
ie to weare)no Vardinga
mn cocks f. A Vardingele (tearmead fy citi-


He phé: m. ée:f Furrifhed with à Vardin-


Haufle-quen8: f. The yellow Water-wagtaile.
Elles’en vaa haufle- en See Queuë.
Hauffer. PANIER, « mate, beaue up, lift high ; fet


Hafler Pef Pefpaule, To lift up the fhoulders ; to ufe the
Italian fhrug; an argument of vwillingneffe, or feare
to doe ; or of a forced,and filent contentment of,or con-
ent vato,what is done,


flerlegantelet. To overreach with falfe
nings ; a flopkeeperte put mere in bis booke then
chapman bad of tim.
Hanuffer les re SES Ce fcroit sy fonte) ‘Tuy bas
hauffer les mouftaches. That would fet "+ the
Heat er le raftelier à. See Raftelier.
Hauffer vn foulier. Te underlay a .
a ete To fpend or pa Seine
ge

Boke Fans haussec ‘Looke Hauffe

Haut. (Subftant.) Pr igh place; whence; G: ad
faut ra como. femme ;S'en
| Sur fan age pol per malo


“ Haut:


HER


Franc herbage, Free herbage; is when. the tenants
fizepe g go in grounds held by a free,or noble tenure; for
Bec the Lord hath neither Mort,nor Vik herbage for


Het : m. eufe: f. Graffe,hearbie:füll graffe,
F tu with bearbes.
Hetbaut. The name of a merrie Diuell, or Hobgoblin,
that appearcd molt commonly on horfebacke.. gRab.
erbaux. Certaine dutiesor charges, whereto 1 in-
ur are,by the cuflomes of Poiétou, able
C:f. An hearbe; weeds plant,wort; 4 iIo,gralfe.
Herbed Aloes, Hearbe Abe, fea Honfélecke, fea
Argreene.
He erbe de I Ambafladeur. ‘Nicotian, or French To-
1060.
Herbe d’arondelles. Celandine, Swalloy-mort, Tet-
tarwort.
Herbe aux aulx. Sauce alone, Jacke of the hedge,
Hebe de l’aune. Helicampane, Scabwort, Horfe-
vale,
Herbe de Sainte Barbe. winter Creffes, Saint Bar-
' baraes bearbe.
Herbe de benjoin. Laferwort, Magydare,
obo beurreufe. Cudweed , Chaffweed , Cotton-
wee
~ Herbe aux cailles. Plantaine,waybred,
erbeau cerf. Harts fodder, wild Parfénip, Gratia


Dei.
Habe au chancre. Hdiotropium,Torngôe, Wart-
wort,


Herbe chandeliere. Colewort,or Cabbage hearb; al. |
adle-weeke Hul- ,


(0, Mullein, Higtaper ,Torches ; or,Ca
lein (a sv thereof.)

Hate re Wild Larkes-beele,or Monks-
hood, with the Purple flower, —

Herbe au charpentier. Prunell, Hooke-heale, Selfe-
‘beale, Sickle-wort, Carpenters hearbe ; 3 Some a call
Browne Bugle (d; others (the more properly) Ribwort,
Lambes tongue, fmall Plantaineyend others call Mill-

a fovle,or Yarrow,


Herbe au chat,ou de chat.Nep,Nip, Cati-mint,
érbe aux chats. The fame ; alfo, as Ortie par
ante,
~ Herbe aux chevres, Shrub Trefoile, milke Trefoile,
| Citifies bufh.
= Fret sen The Burre called Dogs Burre ; alfa,
y the
| HerbedeChrift, fe for
1 ar, fo tearmed, fort abot Chr


| | Herbed ce. Love Cign SRE Te CH

|  Herbecavelée, ppm pa pére
… Loue or line in idleneffe, two faces under a hood,

ae Lg 5 46 Withyorind,

ens, <


~ card calls (potted lerufal
: FE us pred RE erufal em, or Cow


be copié Akind of wild Parfenip thats not il |


‘ a The Ger Pee os ae


: ot css qu Ne
- Herbeaux D etre RIRE


a: Herbe à charpentier, pere tis \
» D good for wounds and cuts,


be 5 ar. as Ellebore |


hywind, Bindweed, ede | +
: Herbe de cœur. Hértwort,or Hartmint ; ( The Pics |


HER
| Here d'Encens, Wormewood.
as Encenfiere. The fame;or,Fleabane,Flea-bane


Beebe d'Efcarlate. The Skarlet Oke, or Skarlet
- Holme-Oie.
Herbe des Efcrouëlles. Little pe sb a


Her be pa
erbe d'Efpaigne. Spinage.
Hecrbed'Efparvier. The Haukeweed called yellow
| Cichorie,
L'Herbe defternuër. Sneefingwort, wild Pelitorie


of Spaine,


Herbe de l'eftoille, Cromfoot Plaintain,Harts-horne
Plantaine,Buckborne,bearbe luie, bearbe Eue.
Herbe forte.Sarracens Confound,Comfrey,or Wound-
wort,
Herbed foulon. Fullers hearbe, Sopewort, Mocke-

illouers, Bruifewort.

erbe à vne fueille, The bearbe called One blade,or
One-leafe,
Herbe de S, lacques. S. lames bis wort, o7 flower ;
owe people call it Staggerwort, Stauerwort, and
ort.

fie à iaulnir. D Dyer weed, welde, yellow weed ;

alfo,bafe Broome, W waxen,Greene- weed or Gree-
ning weed,
Herbe de S. lean, Thin-leaued Mugwort ; fome alfa
call Clarie fo. :
Herbe impie. rene impious, wicked Cottonweed,
Chaffweedsor (udweed,
Herbe des. Innocent. Centinodie male Knot-graffe,
Birds tongue, Swines gra(fe.
Herbe ludaique. Jewes hearbe,Tetrabit,Glidewort


"(a kind of Balme.)


erbe aux #5 Speedwell,Ground-beelé, Paisles
he anette Flaellin.
a lié, Spurge, Tithimal,Milke-weedgvolues


mike
Herbe au 118. The fame; alfo, Milke-mort , fea ||
Milkervort, fea Trifolie, blacke Saltwort. |
erbe aux langues.’ Tongue-wort, Tongue-blade,
ip tongue, Double Tongue, Horfe tongue, Lawrell
Alexandria,
Heabe La sede ae
er magon, Me Fotber,s: Claner.
Herbe au loup. See Lou
Herbe à cent po MT leurs hearbe trno- I


| pence, two-pennie graffe..


erbe de Sainéte Marie. Bs Ladies Mint, Spear e- |.
Mint,co mmon garden Mint ; alfo, Coftmarie, and Ale- |
cofl; 3 es al the arb sor yellow Camo- |

; by others, Hogs-bre d, Smives-bread, or Sor
bread, called fo.

rbe maine same


Wrake
Mees à maflessvater sora, Cats iglru at
parle Beetle or Pefile, Dutch Downe. . :
a tous maux, as Nicotiane,
Hebe militaire à millefueilles. Keights Milf
_foldiors For aHomen Ale Yai mea


“ten Yarrow.


Herbe aux mites, Purplesor Mate Modlin. -
Herbe Mithridate. Scordium, water Conner >
va feat of King Mithridates , the Sr finder

hereof)


=a au sn >


moniale 7 aac at Bes?


de “ot eS ee. te * à .
te HER HER
Herbe nervis, No iy ‘more properly, Neris,) ‘Rofé-bay, Herbe tore. Broad-leaued Aconitum, wolves bane,
Eee «+ a wolfewort.


eds € à noftre Dame, as Orvale ; 3 (à called in


He case Centinodie ,Knot-gralfe, Birds-toxgue,

Fh pic e

Herbe de la nui&. Anbearbe,or Arbor plant whofe
fre ,fhut up all day, opens onely anights.

du papier. The Egyptian great rufhPapyrus,
re ef the firft paper was made.

Herbe de paralyfie. The Cow/lip,or Ox-flip,tearmed
otherwise Palfi e-wort and pettie Mullein.

Herbe aux pattes. Fole-foot, Colts-foot, Horfe-foot,
Hall-foot.

Herbe aux perles. Perle-plant,Lich-wall,Grommill,
Gremill,

Herbe de S.Pierre. Sampire,Crefimarin.

etbe à piment.æ Piment.

Herbe aux pouilleux, Lice-bane,Staues-aker,Loufe-
wort,Lou[e-powder.

Herbe aux poulmons, Sage or Cowflip of. Nak ax
Sage of Betblem, [potted Comfrey, Lungwort ; alfo, the
moffe called Lungwort,or Oifter-greene.

Hespe aux poulx, as Herbe aux pouilleux.

erbe poyvrée. Dittander,Dittanie,Pepperwort.
Herbe rf grand Prieur. Tobacco, or the bear be Ni-
cotian,

Herbe puante, A fourth kind of final Flea-bane Co-
Han of a firong [mell,or [linking fauor.

Herbe à pulces. Fleawort; alo, Fleabane, or Flea-
bane Mullet; (The feedes a that are like, the fmell of
this is death, to fleas.)

Herbe à punaifes. Fleabane > Conixa , Fleabane
Mullet,
Herbe Robert. Hearbe Robert ; a kind of Storkes


Herbe de S.Roch, Conixa,Fleabane,

Herbe de la Roine mere, French Tobacco,

Hope FAITS pec om fi
ardonique. Cromfbot of the fallow or

Crowfoot of Hire, oe #


Herbe Savonniere. Sopewort, , Stratbie,
Bruifewort, mocke Gillouer s ihe Rofé Campion,
. Crow-fope. ;
Herbes fauvage. Avweed,orwilding


ed (though
% Seay bad


erbe aux fcorpions.Scorpion war Searyion graffe,
Caterpillers. ~


Herbe aux epee siete Buell Pipers Bugloffe,


fs aw ona os
Herbe de S.S seedy dt DCR Verueine


Mallow,cut M
Herbe folaire. The Marigold, ”
erbe aufoleil, 4 verie pr at Ras and faire
_ yellow flower, which turnes with the Sunne, and ener
Lookes towards i it ; the flalke it groweth (fingle) on, dry-
aoe een |
3 ot a
up ina eae and woodie Aa,
sand fit to ferue for a ue
Marigold; alfo, Heliotropium,


cafe Linerovort (a kind


ede


Herbe de la Trinité,Hearb Trinitie, Paunfie,Harts-
cafe, two faces under a bood; alfo,Harefoot,or Hare-
i Trefoyle.

erbe qui tueles brebis, Moneywort, bearbe twe-
fim ie ,two-penaie graffe.

erbe de tunicis, Frothie or fpatling Poppie, white
Ben; alfo, the hearbe Sweet Williams.

erbe au Turc; &, Herbe du grand Turc, Rup-
turewort, Bur lwort.
Herbe veltié, #5 Herbe à cotton.
Herbe du vent, The wind flower.
Herbe vermineufe. Purple or Motbe Mullein,

erbe aux Viperes, Wild Bugloffe the leffer, Snakes
Bugloffe,Vipers Bugloffe, Vipers bearbe.
Les bonnes herbes, as Herbettes.
Arracher les bonnes herbes, & planter les mauvai-
fes. To/füpplant vertue,and fepport vice ; or,to plucke
ee vertue to fet vp vice.

ouper l'herbe fous les picds à, To fupplant.
Manger fon bled en herbe. To turne bis cattell into
bis corne ; to (bend (the value of) bis reuenne before it
come in.
Mettre toutes les herbes de la S. lean. To imploy all
bis skill on, or meanes in; (Diners imagine, that the
bearbes, which are to be kept ‘for the whole yeares flore,
are better, gathered on Midfummer day, then on any o-
ther; and therefore be Markets extraordinarily für-

. nifbed, on that day, with all forts of new-gathered
bearbes.)
Redui& à l'herbe. Brought te extreame want,in great
neceffitic, fill of pouertie.
Vherbe soy ‘on sme on la doit lier à fortdoigt:
ut Nh Thoft,or that, which a man knowes beft be muft
vUpe molt.
En four chaud ne croift herbe: Prov,Graffe growes
not inhot Ouens. _ .
_ I faut que I’ herbe foit bien courte quand on ne

trouve que repaiftre: Prov. Commons muft necds be

ort where no meat’s to be come by.

ood bebe croift toufiours : Prov. Anill weed


z


growes ap
Herbé: m. : €. Fed with graffe ; layed on the graffe;
Borne into graffe,
illé: m.ée:f. Fed on,orwith,eralfe.
Harbeille: To feed on,or with,graffe~
ette:f. A fimall bearbe ; or finall graffe.
Herber. To graze, or feed on mg to lay on the graff;
to turne iato,or out to
a rgage: m. ye 6
Herberge: f. A bou{t,parbour lodging.
Herbergé: m.ée: f. Inbabited,or dwelt on.
Herberg ement: m. EL ar bonfe lyen
0,4 lodging bar bouring,
er. To barbour,lodge,or rs in aboufe,
bour ; ; boues tenement ,


Hathis
ral crement: m. An


eing, dwelling.
Herbes “The fame


Herberie: & Hearbes ; increafe, he “or Fifore, of |


bearbes; alfo, a birds wealon, or wind-pipe ; a beafis

gullet,or tbroat-bole.

Herbette: f Small grafftsor,a fall bearbe,
Herbettes. Lettuce, Burrage, Purflane, Sorrell, and

like bolefome bearbes ; tearmed fo Ly. the vul-


Hébou:n meufe : f. Graft ere fillef graffe or
Her-


Original fron


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


H A V


Haut :m.haute :£ High,tall; bautie, loftie; great no-
ble, honorable ; chiefe, eminent excellent ; fumptuous,
magnificent moft glorious; alfo,deepe, fecret,profound;
weightie,of importance ; alfo,lewd. |
Haut cofté. 4 Surloine.
Haute cour. The Court of a King,or great Lard.

autes erres,Limier d’hautes erres.A fleet bound,
Haute fuftaye. Bois d’ h :£. Looke Fuftaye,
Haute heure.Late,or farre on the day (from morning
to noone,)
Haute game, See Game,
Haut homme. A great,eminent ynoft noble, right ho.
nourable perfonage,
Haute luftice. High iurifdition ; Looke Tuflice,

Haute lice. as in Haute-lice.
Haute luiête. deh. 1, Violently, forcibly, with extre-
mitie,by maine flrength. .
La Haute main. (Sometimes)the upper band,
Haut mal. The falling fickneffe.

Le haut mal de la corde. Hanging,
Haute mer.enh, m. In the wide,or deepe feas, farre
ia the fea.
Haut nez. Chien d’ h. n, 4 well-fented,or cold-no-
fed dog. FES À
Haut parage. Looke Haut-parage. ju
Haut paflage. 4x impofition of feuen pence in the
pound, vpon woolls, clothes, linnens, canualfes,érc.
La haute piece. 4 Poldron; or the upper part therof.
Chambre haute. 4 dining chamber.
Jour haut. High adayes, late, farre on the day.
ras haute. weightie, important, myflicall, excel.
dent fluffe.
~ Haut d'aureilles. Deafe,or thicke of bearing.
aut à la main. Proud, furlie, flatelie ; a ftrikersone
with whom there is but a word aad a blow. F


poe la bride haute à.To awe,reftraine keepe [hort,


Idin,
Haut. (Adverb.)Highl,aboue,aloft,on bigh; alfo,lowd-
b.oralowd. ~
Haut & bas la cheminée.The crie of Chimney-{wee-


ers.
Haut le pied. s’en aller h. le p. To runne away a-
pace,or, as faft as bis feet can carrie him.
Faire haut le bois. (Pikemen)to make a fland; alfo,
to quaffe, tipple, caroufe for the heanens,


ne trop haut afsis. #bofe flaulkes, or legs are
_ 100 long. Ts
Taillables haut & bas. Taxable at the will and plea-
ote Eat te LE. Ste th ha
ui plus haut monte qu'il ne doit de ut
4 chet qu'ilne routine Pigs that sabe bigh-
_ er then be fhould, falls lower then be would.
Hautaignes:f. vines which(as hops)embracese creep
up on, long poles, sk
Hautain. Secke Haultain, HE
Hautainemént;&, Hautaineté.ss Haultainement;
: &, Hanleaineré, © aaa 2


Haut-bert. À bigh,or cbiefe Lord.
| Haut-cofté. be ng
Taut-d'-ais. A cloth of Eftate.


| CC com. The Countertenor part , in
| Singing, dre ; alfo (a Countertenor,or) be which bears

: 1 that rt. ARE CC CUR PACS TE
| ee = lice; ou hautes li
= Tes. Tapiftrie of rich Auffe, or bigh price;
Sys


the beft, and
 bargeft kind of Tapifiri < ~


gi Gon gle


Ha
Hautefle
H
8
H
H
+s
Ha
H
H
H
H


H A Y


Haute-lifsier : m.4 maker of(richand large)Tapiftrie.
utement Highly,tally;bautily,loftily; grearty; nobly,

bonourably, eminently, excellently ; famptuouflymag-
nificently ; deeply, profoundly ; weightily, importantly.
autefie: f. Looke Haultefle.
auteur: f.Height,length,tallne (fe ; eminence,altitude,
elenation ; al(o,depth,or deepnelfe.

Haut-gourdier: m. 4 defperate bankru
bauing but little to loofé,cares for bimftlf


t; one that

but a little.
autin : m, The Sea-pike,or Spit-fifh.

autins. as Autins.

Haut-licier : m. as Hautelifsier.
aut-mal: m. The falling fickneffe.

Haut-parage. The bighe/t Peeredome; a title,or tenure
whereby the Peeres,¢> Princes of the bloud,of France,
bold their land; or(more generally) a tenureim Capi-
te; for (as that tenure)it moues wholly,and directly of
the (rowne.

Haut-paflage. Looke Haut. <
vs 8 : mn, Penthoufes of cloth bung before fhop-win-

owes.

Hay :m. Haye: f. Hated,dre ; as Hai.
ay. An Intericélion of forwarding, or of incourage-
ment ; Looke Hai,

Fol eft qui eft efperonné & à cheval dit hay : Prov.
Thealfe baning fpurres on, cries On to his horse ; or be
is an affe,who furnifhed with found meanes makes vfe
of fleight ones.
aye :f, Abedge; a fence of {brubs,thornes,c>c.
aye vive. A quick-fet hedge.
Anguille de haye.The blackeft hedge or dunghill Ad.
der; not verie venomous.
Mords à haye. 4 Scatche.
Combatre,ou marcher,en haye. s. By files,
Pendre entre la haye,& le bled: &,entrelahaye,
or To furprifetake unawares, or fet-upon on


a fudden,
Qui fait haye fouvent dit haye : Prov, Looke Haye
Interielt, —* ï ;
Hayé:m. ée : f. Hedged; inclofed with a bedge.
Haye. (An Interieétion of complayning, or crying owt for
paine)Ob,alas,out alas. |
Qui fait haye fouvent dit haye: Prov. He that
makes hedges often prickes bis fingers.
layer. Tobedge; alfo,to bate, Ve
ayefon: f Hedge-making ; alfo,bedging time, or, the
feafon to make bedges in. ; ees.
Hayeur:m. 4 bater loathey,detefter,
Hayneux. 2s Haineux, à
Rosa Ts ow ; i ga 5 .
ayreux : m.cufe : f. Leane, fcraggie; paore; mifera-
Reseensbed, er à fe Hac #9
ayt wi mi eelysbeartily,cheer fully.
Hazard ; &, HazZarder. Looke Hafard ; &,Hafarder.
Haze. as Hafe. ree


Pomme d'Haze, The name of a certaine long yellow |


Hayt. de bon h


apple.
Hé An Interiection of calling. Vien ça hé.Come bither


0€, ÿ |
Heaulme : m. 42 helmet ; the beadpeece of aman of
Armes ; alfo,tbe Helmet cberrie,Heart-cherrie,French
cherrie; Looke Heaume.
caulme doré,& ouvert. 4 gilt, and open helmet ;
which on the top of a coat of Armes denotes , that the
bearer is either a Vicount, Baron, or Chatelain; (Look
hore ag this in yi | ad,
Heaulmerie: f. 4x Armorers flop, or wareboufe; 4
the naine of a fireet in Pavis, aia many a ns
dwell, xx ÿ Mee


Fe ee on ns di:


‘ *


| | H EB | HEN ;

À | - |

et a z
aulmier :m, 47 Armor er , or Helmet-maker ; alfo Hemifp here : mA bemifpbere ; balfe the co ;

> the Heart-cherrie tree. { tag! | the v pe heauen, mele af

| Heaulmiere : £. The Rudder-port of a flip. Hemiftique : com. 4 halfe verfe. Te

) Heaume:m.dn helmet the headpeece of a man of arms; | Hemitrité. la Bebvre hemitritée. 4m Ague compoun-


alfo,the belme,or rudder of a fbips alfo, the Heart~
| cherrie French chervie Spanifh cherrie ; Looke Heaul-
de me,

Heaumé. wearing a belmet, armed with an belmet.

Heautner. To put on an belmet,to arme bis bead with
an belmet.

Hebbe dela mer. Th’ebbe or ebbing of the fea.

Hebene : m. Heben,or Ebonie ; the blacke, and bard
wood of a certaine tree growing im Æithyopia, aad the
Eaft Indies.

Hebené : m.éc: € Blacke,Heben-like; made of Ebonie,
Sourcils hebenez. Blacke, difinall , frowning, low-
ring browes, 4

Hebenin : m.ine: f. Ofor belonging to,Ebonie.

Heberge: f. 4 boufe lodging bar bout.

Hebergé: m, ée :f. Houfed,lodgedparbowred,

‘Hebergement: m. as Heberge.

Heberger.To lodge harbor dwel,abide in; alf?,to lodge,

- harbour boufe,gue houfe-roomelend a dwelling unto.

Hebeté: m.éc:f. Dull, fottifb,witlefeblockifbsblint,
flow, fenceleffe peause beaded 3, alfa, dulled, biyated ;
made blockifh.

Hebeter. To dull, blunt, fot,make blockifh. - 0"...

Hebraïfme : m.Hcbrewifine ; the fpeech, fafhion,or dif
pofition of the Hcbrewes.

Hebrieu : m. An Hebrew,or Few ;alfo,the Hebrav,or
language of the Hebyewes. 5
Ilentendl' Hebrieu.He à drunke,or(as we fay) lear-
ned : ( fromth’ Analogic of the Latine word Ebrius.

Hecatoinbe. 4 pn wherein an buadred bealis
were killed. be AS:

Heétique: com. Sicke of an Hettick,or continuall Fea-
uer;(bence)alfo,meager fes dried vp,in a Confump-


— of « continual Tertian,and an intermittent Ouo.
tidian. ; i
Hemorthagie : £ 42 abundant flux efbloud.
Hemorrhoidal : m.ale :f. Veinehemorrhoïdale.
A finall branch of the fpleene veine comming to the
findament ; alfo,a certaine veine in the necke of a wo-
mans wombe ; (Looke Veine.) EN
Hemotrhoïde : £ Anifque of blond by the veines of the


lament.
Hectonhnée: £ The fame, called ordinarily, the Em-
rods,or Piles, =:
_Hetny. (47 Intericélion of lamenting) Ay me , alas for


me. |
Hen heuhasch. Fained words, wherewith Rabelais
exprefjeth a coughing. |
Hen hen.Oh bi: @Rab.  ” as
Hennir.To neigh,or whinnie like a berfe;Looke Hannir,
Br zm. The neighing, or whinnying of a
ny ORR ey 6
Henouars:m.Salt-Porters, carriers of falt, whereof
onely 24 be allowed,within Paris, to carrie it from the |
Salt-whar fe unto the Garners, & Warehoufés of Mar-


chants.
Henricus. À golden Crowne worth about two French
po era (4 : n
enry :m. er name) Hemie, Harvie; alfo,a coine
Se worth about efter. MS
Bon Henry. Roman Sorrell, round Sorrell, Tours
Sorrell ; aljo,the bearbe which we call, Good Henrie,
and All.good. dot de i
Double Henry. Js worth about 145.fterl.
Ducat Henry.ls ordinarily worth more by 6 d.fter]. |
then the Crowne of the Sunne.


«S


Hilteriforme:com: Fafiomed like Fie, Hear eee bed called Liermer, eu fone
eriforme:com. Fafhioned like Foie. epathique: fe called Liuerwort, lone
Veine hederiforme. 4 cértame veine which pales | - FE» 3 alfo,the bearbe golden Trefiyle,nable Li-
downe along by the fides of tbe wombe, : 7 | ensure, dbree-leaned Liserwa t; noble Agrimonie,
Hedre. as Heftre; 4 Beech trees.) 9 _ bearbe Trinitit.. 5 2: 0
Hedret. Looke Haidroiét. * : Hepatique: £ Thefame. = ass
Hepatique : com. #epaticall ; of or belonging to,the li.


Hee. (42 Interieélion of lamenting) Ay tite

Hei. as Hé. SANT El "AFS

Helaine : m. Elecampane,Scabwort,Horfebeale.

Helas. Alas wellaway,welladay.. : * Mae

Helenites, Aa Order of white Friers , that weare ayel-
low craffe on their breafls, 90 21 7


uer; also, Liner-belping ; comforting a whole, er curing


É os 4 The middle (in goodne) of the |
TRUE) Seuen-fold. PE


Heleofeline: m. Smallage, a ri? tomagene : m. The fèuenth male. el ie
Hele . A great woodden engine wherewith, in old Herage ie An ayrie of bawkes ; and bence, a brood, |. re
rime the tops of rampiers were battered. kind; flocke,linage. sab ater vs
Helefie: & 4 mamy-coloured gardes bearb,in proportion | Herauder. To blaxe; publickly to denounce, manifefi,or | SR
«x fomebat like Beets, 2" commend. eet Sra ag 3
Heliotrope:m. The bearbeTurnefole,Rudswartwort; | Herault: m, An Herauld; aKing of Armes, |
alfa precious flone which, as a burniag glaffé, recei- Heraut. a Herault. 0
~ #eth,and retorteih the Sunne-beames. = | Herbage:m. Herbage Pasture ; or that which 2s paye
Pe) > 49 Fr erbage pai cattell ; alfa, \ 1 of
a re ber mens woods,or farsa sag” =.
erbage mort. Is a penidyor enieTourn.paied | :
by eu ni poore Coitager, or uae tenant unto the | :
Lord that bath - ere i(dittion over bim, | :
for enerie fheepe be bath, if be baue nota tensoifas |
1 ‘ome p p Lx e's ag eg : a
a
* de,
od
oe
i
. ‘yy


Original frora


= REE-@HIO.S TATE UNIVERSITY


H E R HER
Herbi An Herball; alfo,an Herb alfa \ Se Heriffer. wis baire t fixer,
‘Gardener.ov Harb filler, ji ais : _yearne, through fêare. eee ¥


Herbiere: f. An Hearb-wife; alfo,the weafon,or wind-
pipe fi ÿ tig ; and, the throat-boll, throat-pipesor gal-
t 9
Herbis: m. Grafie,or well-growne,Paflures.
| Herbifte: com. 4a Herbift,or Herballift; one that un-
deren the nature,and pe 8 of hearbes. :
Herborifer. To gather bearbes ; to be much among
them; or,to obferue, examine, or r fiudie their jouera
natures ; 0 play the Herballift.
Herborifte: m. as Herbitte.
Herbregé:m. éc:f, Commonly dwelt on,vfually lod-
ged,or lyenin,
erbregement: m. asHerbergement.
Herbreger. To dwellon; commonly to lodge or ly in.
Herbregerie: f, A lod, ner dwelling ; a tenement to
lodge,or boufe to dwe
Herbu: m. ué: f. Greffe heart
Herce: f. 4 Harrow; alfo, a kind of Port-cullis, thats
flucke (as a Harrow) fall of fharpe.ftrong.and out-flan-
ce (Iron) pinnes. fer
erces. PE Iron pines ‘upon gates. ~
Envne herce bien jens n'y faut nulles dents :
|: Prov. A thing well done needs no addition,
Herceler. Seeke Harceler.
Hercement: m. 4 harrowing.
Hercer. To Fret alfo, to ioult, ov iufile one thing a-
gain{t another.
Herceur: m. A barrower ; be that leads,and guides the
Feat a ;
erceure:f. 4 harrowing,
ercher. as Hercer. €Norm,
erculiane, & Pierre Herculienne. À ou ae
‘Herdertifler. The The great,or maifter Deuill.
Hecate, a cee To cleane,or [ticke Fi omes(aowerd)
| Here.asH
: “Hereditable: s cotin Frereditabl inberitable.
creditaire: com. Herediarie, fcce fie; 3 comming by
inberitance,belonging to an inheritance.
Heredital. The durs or,as Herital.
Qu) heredital. See Quint. wag
€:f. Anheritage,inberitance,patrimonie.
| Flee jarche,ou Herefiarque ; ax arch-bereticke.
Herefie:f, Heels obfanate,or wicked error.
Herefié: m.ée: À Grownghereticall,turn'd Hereticke,


Craig berefie ; a obffinate, or impions, ds an


Herefted de ito. as Arete

| Heretique: com. An Hi x

Hergne: f, Burfling ; 0 a arapar itn te col
waywar
py oy ee it trees mi 4 feker
that (brings vp from the root of a tree.

Hergneux. eh sais ages) pre

div mie f. Dew-clawed


Misco £ Dé Lo ne.
crpotcures :f. The ete Purres.
é. as Herupé,
Heres ta cps bi
.ée:f
* ee SA re creature ; | borride;
PA ee :m A feng te rifles spa,
| oy brie le nding op, a bile; at Heri


| Hear op bibi make bu bie tare,


Go gle’


| Herinile. À Gttle round member omnes tor


Heriff iffon: m. An Urchin,a Hedgebog.

Heriffon de mer. Thefea Vrchia ; a fifa whofe ont-
fide fomewhat refembles the land- Vrebin,

Parez l'heriflon il femblera Baron: Prov. Good
clothes bide much deformitie; or, a clowne well cloa-
thed.feemes a Gentleman.

Heriffonné as Herifé.

Heriffonnement: m. 4 fiddaine quiuering, fhinering,
or yearning, by the fence, or apprehenfion of an ping
red thing.

se Heriffonner. as s'Heriffer,

a : com. Inheritable ; ao, held in fee fimple, or


for eu

Herttablement, Inheritably, in fee fimple, for ener.

Bh = «es :f. An Fuberitance ; the foyle inherited.
qWallon.

Heritage: m. 4x Inberitance,Heritage,Patrimonic,
Rentes à heritage. Looke Rente
Mettre les mains à Pheritage. To fall on bis bands to
the ground,

.Deieune Advocatheritage seo Prov. The land
is loft which a young Lawyer pleads for
Vie n'eft pas feur ritag €: Prov. Lif (though itbe
free-bold) is no saberitanc (no fure bold; ) or, life's ad
inheritance to build on.

Herital: msale: £ Of imberitance ; alfa, inberited, or
beld in fee.

Heritance. as Heritage; (an old word.)

Herité: m. An Inberitance,or heritage.

Herité: m. ée: £ Inherited; gotten,or come unto, by
difcent,

Il eft herité en ces marches ; he hath en land,
‘an eftate of inberitance,in thefé
: m. elle: £ Inberitable; or of cherie ances

Her . To inberite; to get or come unto by inberitance,
or difcent ; alfo, to get land of inberitance, or am eftate
of inheritance inland,

Heritier : m. 4x heire,or inberitdr.

Heritier conventionnel.y adopted beire by reafin
of marriage ; as a fonne, or daughter in law made
the father one of bis beires, either in lieu of one of bis
other children,or as one among the reft.

Heritier fimple. Anbeire by difcent.

Heritier : m. ere : £ Ofor sm to,an BE ATdU
tor,or inberitance.

Herle. as Harle. .
ermaire. 4 Armaire,

Hertnandrée. Looke Germandrée:  :

Herme: 5 Sontag Boonen foe à
Feu S. Herme, 4 tem in eae
Ap ag a Looke Furole. ips :

Herme: com. a Ferme, €Galc. de 1 ae de
tilled ; folitarie,unbaunted,onfrequented.


med otherwifé Aftragale. À
Herminer. To favre with Ermines. an
Herminette: f. A little planing Axes ea
Hermitage: m. Aa Hermitage. ip
Herinite: m. 4a Hermit

Hermite marin. as Branchuë 3A = of final red

Crayfifh. (aime. vr. |


Le Regnard eft devenu bernite: Prov. The Fes


Geefe 4
ig haa, 4 sue Ge
er


HER


‘Hermodatte.. Hermodaéiill, Dogs bane, wild Bulbe,
22 or Medow Saffron, the — before the fa-
ther.

Hermole: £ ay haa

Has :m.ée: f. Burfts Sa a rupture about the


Hea f. as Hermole.
ernie. Bur/ling ; or a rupture within the cods.
Heroé: m. 4 worthie; a Demygod; one whom bis valor
hath deified,or immortalized.
eroine: £. À Ladie of admirable beautie or of moft ex-
cellent parts ; a moft worthie Ladie.
eroique: com. Heroicall ; moft wortbie, noble, gal-
lant, high-minded, or valiant.
cron: m. 4 Heron. Looke Hairon.
| Herouët. (The name of) a certaine great, Jekow, and


He te
erpail m. A troope,beard, flocke,a crue,a rowt.
aille: f À knot, or crue of beggarlie, and roguifh
nti, that Line by pilfering,or vpon the fpoile.
Herpailleur: m. A feller of old trinkets of 1ron,érc.
erpé: m.ée:f. Grafhed, Snatched caught at greedi-
Ly; griped booked,violently feifed; alfo,Harpe-like.fha-
ped or fafbioned like a Harpe ; out-breafted, and well
ries. or lanke in the Groine, like a well-made Grey-


bo
Herpelu. A Stiuer or French fhilling. {Barr
Herper.To gratpe, fnatch,catch clinch ple 4 gripe,
4 hooke, feixe violently, lay violent hands on.

Herper contre terre. To creepe,or crawle,
Herpes: f The Shingles Rare agg wild fre.
Herr. Maifter,or Sir. €Aleman,
| Vous faites du herr. (A ruflicall taxation of a faw-

"che yong man,or feruant;) you are verie cockit,or luflie;

you take too much upon you.

Herre : m. A rogue,beggar,vagabond.
Herry: m. The findament,or arfe-gut. ”
. | Hers. (An Intericétion of calling) boe.here bo,
: ay À f. A barrow; alfo, a kind of Fais ns
crce, ea
| Herfelé. seeke Harcelg.
Herfement : m. 4 harrowing,


He To barrow; alfo,to vex, turmoyle, difquiet, bur-
rie,torment,
Here eur:m. A barrower ; alfa, a vexer, or tormentor


Hortoir. Yeflemight.

| Side Eftre : " herte. cons a

rtrin: to you (in SE,

Herupe tn, Ge: 2 vine baie art ser flands an end.
pe RE Hae rough, herride; a tom fed, dif.
cheuelled difordered.


flare,or fla


Be To fet vp thebriflles, as one that growes
cer sa is bic hago se e 307325 SeHerifler
: aft He ae hfe sci 3


Heure: f, An houre ; alfo, time, feafon, fpace ; alfo, the


| He ART RE: va the baire; to |


Heuré: m. ée:£. Seto appointed a bite,


ote. Whe iat of à te fit to a


1 01 F1 Co A 2 ete
lace. ( fort:
Mein (or | à


H EW


ftre:m. A Beech, tree. eerrissir >

efreau : m.A yong,or little, eech tree. ’
etaudeau. as Heftoudeau,
etcroclite: com, Irregular, extraordinarie, not de-
clined as other Nownes.
Refolu comme Pihourt en fes hetcroclites. ins
Refolu,

Hetique: com, as Heétique.
Fy m, 4 (Dutch) Hoy; alfo,a Lighter.

Heu hafch. Fained words for a Cough. @Rab.

dri: m, ie: f. Muflie,corrupted, putrified ; Rained,

or {potted as vn-ayred linnen,

Heudrir. To muft, corrupt, putrific to fpoyle, or marre
by ill keeping or want of ayring.
eulet: m, A Hoult, or little Ifle cutout of the land of
purpofe to.be ouer flowed euerte tyde by the fea; that of
the froth thereof (then left behind, and gathered af-
Het fait may be made,

ant. Yelling,howling.

Heur: m, Hap,lucke,fortune,chaunge.
Le bon heur toft fe pafle qui n'en a foing: Prov,
Good fortune quickly flips from fuch as heed it not.


c

ES A Prager books for certaine boures ; Looke

after Heurclival.

L'heure de complie. Compline-time ; Eucning-fong

tide, the edge of the eueniag.

Heures equinoctiales. The 24 equal parts,or boures,

whereof a naturall day confifis.

Heures d'horologes. The fame ; or, equall, or euen

boures ((uch as clockes make) one injt as long as the o-

ther ; ordinarie boures,

Heures inefgales, The 12 unequal! parts of the ai

ficers day ; which lafis (all the yeare long ) from the tt-

fe to the fettin oof the Sunne. 4
Heures des Planettes. as Heures inefgales ; Vne-
4all houres; fuch asiare fometimes longer ,fametimes

bone then, and fometiones like unto, the ordinarie


boures,
Haute heure. Farre on the day; (the feafon fiom about
eight in the morning untill noone,
“À l'heure, At that boure, at that inflant, than, in the
time
syne whan,whileft that.
‘Ala bonne heure. Happily, luckily, for iti i
: good ‘time,in.a good boure.
‘bonne heure. 12 good time; alfo, early, be-


times.
Pour l'heure. Than,at that inflant, fir that prefent.
Sur l'heure, as Pour l'heure,

Tout à cette heure. Now, exen. now, incouttnensly,


forthwith, prefently at this verie inflant,by and by,
L'heure afonné. it bath frucke eleuen ; 3 (a Lawyers


pale)
outes heures ne font pas meures : Prov. Aline
arenot in fe for all things.


In’eft qu'une mauvaife heure au jour : Pro. There
is but one ill (or vnluckie) boure in the day.


flinted,or tasked by por


Bien heure. as Heur


“oid


profperitie, felicitie, fortunateneffe.  *
Heureufement. Happily, bleffedly,bliffe fully, fortunate-
Ly, profperoufly. ;
Heureufeté: f as Heureté. LL Nea
Heureux: m. eufe: £ Happie,bleffed, bliffefall, profpe-
rows, luckie, fortunate,
bien heureux qui fe mefle de fes affaites :
Prov. He is verie bappte that followes bis owne bufi-
neffe ; (then is the dullard that cannot, the fluggard
that will not,and the vafree that muft not,doe it, vevie
vnhappie.)
Heurlement: m, 4 howling,or yelling. -
Heurler, To bowle ; Serie Hurler.
H À ui MALO EN me pus
eurt: m.-A fhocke; pufh;or dafb; a violent meeting or
confliét, Pup Weve 3 a knocke, or knocking
together of; alfo,a peece of high ground; alfo,the top,or
upper part of a mountaine.
Tout à heurt. Headie,all-ahead. À
Baftir en heutt. To build bigh;or on the upper part,or
Jide,of abil, — :
Gare le heurt. See Gare.
Us ont eutant deheurts. They baue beene fo much


‘| mifchiefes bane affaulted them,
| Heurtade: f 4 fhocke, hnocke, iurre, ioult, pufh,


Heurtant. shocking, pufbing, knocking,inrring joulting;
iolently meeting.

Heurté; £.2s Heureté.

Heurte, à toute heurte. Stiliewer,euerie foot now and


Heurté : m.ée:£ Knockedpufbed,joulted,iurred,vie-
dentlybit againft — de.
Heurtement : m. A knocking ioulting ,pufhing dafhing,
___ frriking,iurving violent hitting againfi. ae
FR: To knocke,pufh,iurre joult, firike, dafh, or bit
violently againfl. We ATK SBE |
' ain des pieds. To flampe, or applaud by often
amping. 4
Se Henieat Avhe pierre. To ftumble at a flone.
eurter la refte contre Phuis. To runne bis bead a-
gaint the doore; to take wax off the doore with bis
ead,


‘ Hardiment heurte à la porte qui bonne nouvelle
apporte: Prov. He that brings good newes boldly
hs at doore, ~~
Hetirtes: f. Small Axnre balls; tearmed (in Heraldrie
hurts on men,and tongue-moles on women. :
Heurtis: m. as Hetrtement.

Heule. Looke Hoult, uns
Heuffe: £. The Linch pinne, whereby the arme of th axle-
‘tree is kept within the naue of a Cartwheele ec.
Se gage Hairon; 4/0, a fea-~Mew. Savoy


Hiacinthe. Looke Hyacinthe. “haino
Hiacinthin: m.ine: f. Light-blue ; Purple, Violets of
* the colour of a laciath (flower ) ; HOM
Hibernal: m. ale: f.wiaterie; of, or belonging to, the
Winter. L AE
Hibou: m. 42 Owle’; the ordinarie great Owle. |
ise cornu. as Moyen duc. Se Duc.
On nepeut faire de hibou efparvier: Prov. One
“azine eke seme ae aie
i :f Dr ror,quakine, feare, (or the cnufé
lideur: f. Dread ,borror,quaking, | ‘salt,


Led:


horrible,
PAT er le
| Hidew


leufement. Hideouly, gh
| {


x ai


PAL VE CAE COM STEP OR DIE CRORE AES UE LUS PES STE pe
TA PE, 7 pi Yes he ies 4°


afflited ; they baue receined fo many ioults ; fo many |


: , grimly, >


HIE


terribly, fearefilly. f | ie
Hideux: m.cute: fHideous,grimme dreadfill,gbafilie,
terribleporrible.
ie: $. A'Rammer or Paniers beetle ; al{o,a Commaun-
dersor water-Pile Sledge, wherewith great flakes are
driuen downe into the ground.

Hié:m, ée: £ Rammed in, driuen;or beaten downe.

Hieble: m.wallwort,dwar fe Elderne,Danewort,

Hieinent: m. 4 ramming ; a drining downe of fiones,
or piles into the ground.

Hier. To ramme; 10 beat,or drine downe flones, or piles
into the ground;al/o,to beat flat, or fadden(as a floore)
with beating,

Hier. Yeflerday.

Devant hier. Two dayes agoe,
Hiervachier huy chevalier: Prov, Looke Vachier.

Hieracite. Pierre h. 4 hind of Bloud-ftone;or fine that
flauncheth bloud.

Hierarchie: f. 4x Hierarchie ; a facred Principalitie,a
holie Gouernment.

Hiere picre. A certaine yelow,and verie bitter compofi-
tion in powder. ; é

Hierobotane: £ Vernine, Junoes teares, bolie bearbe,
Mercuries moift blond.
letre : m, Ivie; Seeke Lierre.

Hierreterreftre. Ground Iie, Alebooft, Cats foot,
Gill-creep-by-the-ground.

ileux : m.cufe : f.Blacke-tayled,or blacke on the tayle,
asa Beane is. ,

Hillots: m. Fellowes ; qGafc. qRab.

Hinard: m, arde : f wry-neckt,wry-beaded.

Hinnellement. seehe Iinellement.

ME : fo 4 fixt; or the proportion of fix , in Mu-

ke.
ie :m. (The compound wine called) Hipocras.
ipocras d'eau. Metheglin; wine,or drinke made of
water. :
pee m, Looke Hypogriphe.

Hines ecaire. Seeke Piegabecec,

Hipechogas: m..ce: f Ingaged, morgaged, layed to
pawne.

Hipothequer. To pawne Reece, or morgage (im-


moueables.


pe ippiatrie: ‘4 Horfephifike.


Hippogiote: ro. Horfé-tongue,Double-tongue,Tongue- :


ar tame: m. 4 water-hor{e (lining in the riner
ilus) that bath fret like an Ox, backe and mane like a
Horfé,tuskes like a Bore, and a winged tayle.
Hirable. as Girafe. 4 2
Hiraudie: £. A paltrie garment (In old French.)
Hircin: m. ine: £ Goat-likes of a Goat.

Branche hircine. Brank-Vrfin,Beares


Hire: £. A Rammer,or Beater. PRESALE
Hireté, as Heredité; (an old word.) : à
Hicondelle sr Hirundelle ; À Swallow; Seeke Aron-
Hirondelle de mers is Arondelle 5 alfo,tbe final
afh-coloured Mew, which; after the departure of the
age {ea-Mew, flyes alone, and in flying fifes a-
Riners. : peter ee,
Hirondelle de rivage. À fea Swallow; a little bird
man vis si rimes, Ni 0


FR heure wa)
Hifteire: Fra


5 Le Tabse LE
21 nude Mir NN Legian


orie,Storie,Chronicle,Relation... $ à


à


‘Hitt jal: m. ale: £ Hireal, or belon ingto,a | Hogner. i
Hifirié, pee % nat. H Bune: im. D mlfedsenacnfilils
Hiftorié: m.ée: £ Flourifbed, wrought,or beautified, je me


with florie-worke ; al(o,contained in Hiflories.

Hiftorien:m. 4 Hiforiographer, Chronicler, Storie-

. writer.

Hiftorier. To write,or compile Hiflories;alfo,to flourifh,
or beautifie Wainfèot, or Tapiftrie with Hifiories, or
Storie-worke, +

Hiftrion: m. À Comedian,Enterluder,Stage:player.

Hiftrionique: com, Player-like; fit for, or belonging

te f toga Stage-player.

| Hiulque: com, Gaping as the earth in drought ; full of

j chaps,or chinkes ; ill couched ,ioyned,or fet together.
O:m. A Groffe, or great troupe of Cauallerie; many
troupes of borfemen together.
obain.#s Aubain.

Hobeine.as Aubaine.

Hober. To fiirre, moue, remoue from elie te place; (a
ee apd ruflicall mord.)

He b TC: m, ke Aubere.
oberger. To fly; or, to faue bimfelfe b é

Hobille £ A lerkin,lacket,or Coat. oem

Hobin: m. A Hobbie; a little Me, and fhorne-

maned) borfe.
Aller le hobin. To amble,or pace like a Hobbie.

ob m, cufe: f, Hobbie-like ; or belonging to a
Habbie

Hobreau: m. (The Hawke tearmed) a Hobbie ; alfo, a
mungrell, or balfé-gentleman ; one gs father, or
mother were of meane parentage,

Hoc: m.4s Croc ; alfo,as Ho, oe

Hoche: f. 4 nicke or notch,ona Tällie, rc.

Hochebos. 4 kind of Boat (an old word.)

Hochebride: m. .4 retcbleffe rakebell, a defperate or

carelcffe companion.

Hocheciie.as Hoche-queuë.

Mochement: m, A rte


Hochepli: m. A Vardingale,


fefling, offendin:
mer . To vex. ouble digues one molelinf,
offen
Hoguines: f. The peeces of Armour which couer the E
armes ,thighes,and legs. past
mt (An  aicriettion of wondering) wbat boc! is it |
poffible ! Fr.
Hoigne: £ 4 grumbling, muttering murmuring, vepie |
ni 3 whyning ; (The Normand Towne Valoignes
beene furnamed La Hoigne,becaufe the inbabi- |
oe thereof are by nature verie litigious.)
er. To grumblemutter murmure; torepines, ale
oo whyne as a child,or dog. nd
Oir: m. An heire,orinberitor ; (18 fome ‘lames À
(wherein the Appennages of the psig:
are treated of ) anbeire male, and-in fome auncient -
enter and Leafes, a direët beire,js vnder flood me |


Hoir de quenouille. An inheritrix, beive female,
daughter and beire.
re f. An heritage, inheritance; beiredome; inbe-


Hola. Un Interieélion) boe there, enough, foft fof, no
ra of that if you loue me; alfo,beare you me,or come


bither.
Pai au hola. Dutifill,obferuant, readie, at a becke; %
_ le hola, To flop, flay, interrupt, bid land; alfo,


part a fray.

Holes ee ite A fhirt of May

Holocaufte : m. 4 Perf kil be aad layed whole on
the Altar.

Holos. for Helas.@Rab. Bote be
olofteon. Haivie (mall Plantaine, flowing joa Blew RE:
taine; alfo, mountaine Plantaine ; alfo, the bearbe |
called Stitchwort,or All-bonie.


Hoguinement 4 vexing, molefling,amoJing, i ine


Hochepot : m. 4 bo sor Gallim 34 confi- olothurie: f. 4 cetaine ting und in the, ayer À :
EN es ‘bes things iumbled, or put tox péter Pie rfittobeeaten. 6: HE
Here Holotte: fA 528 -hewlet,or little Owle.

-Alun-ieefbckersa maniyard. Hom. as Homme; a man, (vieil mot.) À

Hoche uen. É A in Weta. Homage. Looke Hommage.

Hocher. Tofhake,wag,iog ; nob; nod. * ‘+ | Homar: m, 4fea-Crenice,or {mall Lobfier. .
Hochet du nez, Difdainefilly tofnnffé at, © “| — Grand homar. The great,or ordinarie, Lobfier.: ™:


Hocher de la tefte. To nod,or caf) up the bead;as one
a ee eds or deny a egges.
Homenage. as Hommage. @Bearnois.


is enfans. À Raltlor lace wheremith Homenas. A good fillie cokes. Rab. :
Homicide: m, mer on
eae eran Hocqueter. as Hoquet,&Hoqueter. cide,man-killer,murtherer.
_ | Hocqueteur: m. 4 Basket-carrier.(y.ms) Homicidé: m. ée: f. Killed, Ji:
À.  Hocqueton: m. A (fleeneleffe,and fi prt)lacket,Coat, | Homicider, To flay kill, ymurther (a man.)
hae ad lerkin (at Court)a Coat one of the Sam Foie : com. An homicide, mane, mue
queen:

ueton ; and ences

n porte le ait


Homelette.as Aumclette; an Omelet, or Sie


Homme: f. A Virago; « manlie, or f


UE a m. Homage. Pr:
ee Sa de bouche, & des mis, 3 done +
afjall with bead vncouered, bands ioyned , and 43
Pers ‘and bindes bim to j bt for bis a
= aa of the =” pa 5 =.
À
* L 7.


~ Hommage lige, Is aan by the va
?


:_ Les hommes fe


: - Locke Femme.


HO M
lungirt, and
» bare-beaded, ands on the Euange-

Lifls,and a kiffe receined ia the taking of bis oath; and


» binds him to become an ene: all bis Lords ene-
| mies, and to follow bim eh againft all men


(except the King.) ;
ommage plein. Full, or abfülute bomage ; or, as
Hommage lige, (And yet fome Cuflomes make them
differ; Seeke Lige.) igh
ommiage fimple.as Hommage de bouche, & des
mains.


Hommagé: m. ée: £ Held by bomage ; for which bo-


mage is due,or done.


Hommager. To owe,or doe homage unto ; af6,to re


euerence, . :
Hommaffe:f.asHommace, -
Homme: m.4 Man; alfoya tenant ere; (Looke the next
- marginal word.) |


omme de bras, 47 Artificer,or Handicrafts man;


one that gets bis lining by the labour of bis bands.
Homme deCapeline.A refoluteor valiant fellow.
Homune de peine. A laborious, or painefull fellow;
7 extreame toyler,or traueller ; alfo, as Homnmie de
tas, :
Homme de bon crefine. A plaire, hone, fincere,
open-hearted companion.


_ I le despecha comme vn homme de fon pais. He
“fed him rudely, or contemptibly ; be bandled bim like


a clowone as be is; be baffled,or abufed him.


Homme affailli à demy vaincu : Prov. He thats 4f


quel is balfe onercome.

omme chiche iamais riche: Prov. Looke Riche.
Homme endormi corps enfeveli : Prov. fleeping,
is no better then a dead man. f

‘Homme matineux fain, alaigre,8 foigneux: Pro.
Looke Matineux, BER k
. Homme mort ne faitguerre: & Homme mort
ne mord point: Prov. À dead man fights not; we fay;
A dead dog bites not. q S?
Homme mutin, brufque Rouffin, flafcon de vin
prennent toft fin: Prov. A fattious affe, free bor{e,
‘good cup of wine,are quickly jpent. :
ommie rufé tard abufe: Prov. Looke Rufé,

Homme feul eft viande aux loups: Prov. The lone
man is Wolues meat. VA ae
Homme à deux vifages n'agrée en villes, ny villa-


Li ge Prov, Looke Vifage.


hommes donnent aux femmes ce qu’ils n’ont
pas,& ne peuvent avoir: Prov. viz. Mile,
: Mn & sl pas les mon-
- tagnes : Prov, Not men,doe vfe to meet.
Vat homme de paille vaut vne femme d'or: Prov.


Eftre homine de bidh c’eft meftier iuré, il ne Peft


pas ne ie pe pere nd
: (for fome rance, and others by neceffitie,
pop ph ay ; |


Éd eft homme de bien qui eft homme de bi-


% a rich, man (fayes
the worldling.
pont idverre : Prov. Looke Vi


+ “A grand grand: Looke Verre.
Aeeatchine homme bon Roy: Prov. 4 froward
. manmbecomes a good King. : | eS sO 92


#0:


Ni oa ne faut pas enquerir d'ou foie l'hornme mais


Sure.


~ lord is enabled to feize into bis


H
H
: affentser confent unto


H OM
'il foit bon: Prov. No matter whence ont comes à


‘be good. |
Le bœuf par la corne, & l'homme par la parole :


= Prov, 4n Ox (is bound) by the borne, à man by bis
md,


Tanctravaille,& tracafle l'homme qu'il fe rompt,
ou fomme. Looke Travailler.

Tant vaut l'hornme tant vaut fa terre: Prov, 4
man is prifed by bis land ; See Terre.

Vne {erence requiert tout fon homme: Prov.Oze


|» Art requires a whole man;a man that will be per {eG in


an Art mult follow nothing elfe. i


Homme: m. 4 Tenant, Liegeman, Vaffall, Sub.


17:28 ;
Homme de corps. 4 vilaine, or one that bolds by a
éruile tenure,

ommies de la Cour du feigneur, Such as owe fuite
and feruice to his Court. ‘
Homnmie feudal. 1s, in fome Cupflomes, the title of d
Lord but in the moft,of a vaffall
Homme de fief. 4 Vaffall,or Tenaat in frecholdsand


{ometimes the Lord of a Ficf.


Hommes delaloy (de Gand.) The Magiftrats (of
aunt, $ |


Honine fans moyen. That holds immediath{and by À


homage) of the Crowne.
Homme de paix. A va(fall that ought to be at peace
with his Lord; or ought 4, the vertue of bis bomage)
to keepe the peace made by his Lord; or one that hath
fvorne friendfhip, and fellovofhip with a greater then
himfelfe.


Homtne de re 4 vaffall that is, or may be, à |


Bayle, Pledge,or Suretie for bis Lord,
A re a ten Of whom the Lord makes pro-
‘from whom be bath his reuenxe.

omine de fervice. That holds bis land by fealtie,
and certaine manuall, or meane,feruices. +
‘Ho defervitude, Aviaine; or one that bolds
by a feruile tenure.
Homme vivant, mourant, & confifcant, 4 Vicar,
Subllitute, or Deputie for a Clysrch, Colledge, or Com-
minaltie ; at whofe death the Lords of their fiefs are
10 baue fich rights as would haue beene due out of
them at the death of a temporallor fingle tenant.
Droi& d'hommes. 4 Priuiledee which the Kings


Officers baue, in fome places, to qualifie, and lefièn |
the exceffine ‘taxes impofed by Lords on their ve &


nants, whom otherwife they might tax at their plea-
Faute, ou defaut d'homme: wart, or omiffon of
due homage, fealtie, or [éruices ; whereby the Land-
bands the fief ont of
which they be due. ae EE


Hommeau: m. À dwarfe, dandiprat, little man, low


vie little man


mau.


Hominet. as Hommeau. A
Homocentricalement. 17 one Center.


A ené:m, ée: £ Of one kind. Ra. :
Horplogation <t, Arai dlesenct het


ment or approbation of; a. con(ent vato.


of; affented,or conjen


approue ;
' To admit, acceptyallow, approue of; al


pa


Hommeffe : £. A Virago ; 4 manbe, or font wo-


omolootié: m.éc : f. es 4


ry _ Ho-|


Se ee en ON ae ere aS


rs we,
+, nd ut


ee


pre


ee


HON

Homonceau: m,.4 pettiesor rie flow,

Homonyme: £ praia ge ee ma of divert Sige
nifications,

Homonyme: com. Equixocall,

Homonymie: f An equiuocation; or,a ‘double,or dif.
ferent sence inone word,

Homs. as Homme ; a man. (vieil mot.)

Hon hon. (Aa Iaterieétion expreffing wonder, or a
fare full apprebenfion of approaching mifchiefe;) aba,


Fife. hon de la tefte, To feeme loath ; Seeke
Faire.

Hondelée de foing, 4 load of Hay.
Hobdrelponeies m. À drunken,or fwaggering Dutch-

man, €Rab,

Hongner. as “Hoigner,

Hongre: m. An Hungarian ; alfo, a guelded man, or
borse ; an Eunuch,a Guelding,

Honnefte: com. Honeft, good,vertuoua ; inft, upright,
fincere; alfo,gentle cimill,courteous 5 alfo,wortbie, xo-
ble, honorable sof good reputation; alfoscamelie, feeme-
lie shandfome well befitting.

Honneftement, Hone/ily, vertuoufly , fincerely, +
rightly; gently, cinilly, courteaufly; worthily, nobly,
with good credit ; bandfomcly, decently, in a good
ZO,

HÉhneeté: f. Honeflie, vertue, goodne(fe, integritie,
truth, finceritie ; iufinefle, vprightne[fe ; bumanitie,
courtefie, ciuilitie, gentlencffe; worth, or worthine (fe;
freedome of nature, open- heartednelfe, a noble difpafi-
tion; decencie,a Decorum.

: Honneur: f. Honour; venowme., reputation, credit,
praife, glorie, fame, great account, high reckoning,
much EPA worfhip, reuerence dignitie, pro-

motion ; alfo, an Honour ; or, an honourable »)
inberitance, or title, bellowed by a Prince, or great
Lord,

Honneurs funebres. Funcrall folemnities, ritesjer
rights.

Le morceau d'honneur. The laft bit of. adilhef
meat ; Looke Morceau.

Vefve d'honneur. Honours widow; a onan
bad a good sh og À iret loft it.

: Ventes,& h onneurs. Lo

| . Preflé de fon Donne ie
mu} needs goe toit,that muff of neceffitie purge, or un-
trufe; (a maanerlie pbrafe.)

“A tous feigneurs tous hon
Lords all th’ honours due tes oe
Qui d'honneur n’a cure hon
Prov, Shame falls on bim that ca

mowers or be that bis credit doth no it weigh, reproch at-

“tends bim fam’sb Wi pay. a

| Qui n'a honte il n’ mere 1 Proy, Hee
that wants fhame mers neuer much credit winne,

“Honni m. He: f. Reproached, flamed, difcraced,y
un defamed ; curfed, Er outs aged, à in


aor al. ped ened fe |


real.
pesé fr ra


honneurs: Pro. Gine teal |


d, poll ube ta tele


se Hontoyereteveal


at; to mek: al
Hpdandes Awhooping,or “3 .
ie: “cp sin


HON


renowmcdly ; rewerently,worfhipfly; atelysmapnifi-
ceatly, Jumptuoufly ; in a bigh degree, afier a a gallant
manner.

Honoraire : in bonourable Prefent giuen.to a
Sr sor great Officer at his frfl entrie;
alfo, a fee due, by cufiome, or for aduice ginen, paines


taken,or fernice donc ; bence;alfo,a Donatine beftowed
on Souldiors,


Honoraire :
nour.
Chevaliers honoraires. Such as are Knights by the
priuiledge of thew birth,and not inthe right ‘of. any Or-
né (as all Noblemen, from the Duke to the (| heitclahe


He: : m,# Honoraire; (efpecially in the laft
fence. )

Honoré: m. ée:£, Honouredsreuerenced;renowmed, |
praifed, prifed; much refpeéted,greatly eficemed,bigh-
Ly accompted of,

Honorer. To bonour ; renowmes renerence ; praife ex-
cecdinely, prife highly, refpect verie much.

Honora ue: com. Honourable, p hevasr-breedings Ae.
ble, Gone worfhipfill.

Honouars: m. Looke Henouars.

Honte: f. Shame ; hamefullneffe , or Shame fipineff ; 5
alfo, diféredit, infamie, ignommie ; imputation, dif:
races
sa courte honte. With much difgrace unto them,
‘to their exceeding fhame.
Dire Diane: To infame;defme ; renile, reproach, dis-

ue” Shame on,or out upon.
Fermgwqui peo fahonte eft fans eftime,& conte:

Prov. Looke emime."
Il ne va pas du tout à honte qui de demie voyere-
tourne : Prov.) He that tunes backe (bauing beene
balfe wey) goes not at all for fhame.
Quia honte de manger a honte de vivre: Prov.
He that’s afbamed to eat’s afhamed toliue, - .
ES n'a honte: il n'aura Ja honneur: Prov. Looke


r n'a ghey FT eft SasleoiGere:
seed Soames hat weigher ne bis good |


AS Wa
j rie” vit à honte: Prov. He bafe-
eckons all bee Spends ; 3 (yet is there
ce. betweene bim that knoyves! not
s, and bim that {pends he knowes not


On fa honte qui I accroift : Prov.
Some thinking to reuenge;renuestheir fhame.
Vieil peché fait nouvelle honte: Prov.Old finne im
iéts new fhame.
onteux: m. cufe: f. Shamefaft, bafhfüll, belo, mo-
deft, backward, fear e full; + > flame fell, infamous,
ignominious , difbonourable reproachfüll , diam, st


. .alfo, belonging, or feated neere,to the prinie paris;


whence;
Arrere, ; orweine honteule. Looke Artere, &Neine.


La partie hont € he graiat ser er ER e


Pubes growetb,
-Honteux comme vnejtruye qui. emporte: yn le-


As Uibnb.
son sata neem
+ Di bafhfil,


#11:
Lat
sh in


Originalfrom


AAHÉOHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


com. Honourable ; or worthie of be- |


Oe che Dr
me SA | ati
” , '


H OR


Hoqueter. To yex, or clocke; to baue the Hickup, or
Hickock, 0 MG0H

Hoqueton: m. 4 (fafhion of) fhort coat, Caffocke, or
Jacket, without fleeues, and moft in fafbion among the
countrey people, y" crafted
Hoqueton argenté. À (oat for one of the Kings
Gard.

Hoqueton de guerre, À Souldiors Caffocke,a Horfe:
mans coat~rmour. à
Hoquetouorfavrifé. as Hoqueton argenté.
Horaprime.as Oraprime.
orcentric, ou Horcentrique. Out of the Center,
. cleane without the compalfe of; (Mathematicians ap-
ply this word to the Sunne when the Center thereof,be-
ing at the full beight of bis Epicycle, is farthelt from the
centre of the earth.) i

Horche.à horche. Looke à Ourfe.
ord. as Heuït.

Hordeat: m, Barlie water; drinke made of Barlie,

| Hordoux. Slouenlie,greafie paftie,filtbie. }

Hove. de !à en hore. From that time to this,

“ Horée: fe À great fhower of raine,
| Horepole:f. 4 whirlepoole (fifh.) ;
orion: m, À duft, cuffe, rap, knocke, thumpe; alfo, à
luncheon,or big peece. ey

Horizon: m. A Horizon; fo much of the Firmament |

| as wee can behold ; er, a circle diuiding the Firma-
ments balfe-Sphere which we fee,from that balfé which
we (ee not.

Horloge: mn. 4 Clocke,or Dyall.

orloge d'eau. 4 Cleplydra,ar water Dyall; a vef-
Sell out of which water runes continually, and in a
certaine proportion for enerie boure. "eM
Horloge à fablon. 4a Houre-glaffe,
Horloge au foleil. 4 Sunne-dya .
Horloge des ey The Marigold; (fo tearmed
becaufè u {heweth them, by the changes of turning to-
wards the Sunne,bow the day paffeth.)

. In’ eft horloge plus iufte que le ventre: Pro, The
bellie is the befor trueft Clocke, |

Horloger : m. as Horlogeur.

1 Horlogeur: m. 4 Clock-maker, or Dyall-maker.

: Hormale. as Orvale,

Hormin : m, Clarie ; or (as Mathiolus affirmes) fo mif-
taken by divers Herballifis; ( for Clarie beares a Car-
nation flower (fayes be) or a whitifh one (fayes Ge-
tard) and Horminium a purple one ; befides, the feed
of Clavie is round,that of Horminium dong ; notwith-
os a ee may well ynough paf for
à Clarie,

gee Sauing, excepting, befides, onely, but, other-
wife then. :

Horo. 7 (ee him; (a Hunters tearme, or voice, mhere-
by be ita that be bath the fight of the beaft in
chafe.) : tet. st wt

Horologeur.a Horlogeur. As

Horologier, The fame. Hel

Horo{cope: m., The Horoftope, or Afcendant of a

, matinitie; a diligent obferuation of the iuft time where.
in one w.1s borne; alfa, the part of the firmament which
vifeth eucrie boure from the Eaf. ‘

eon = A Mackerell. ¢Mar{eillois. B
Orteur : f. Horror, loathing dete/tation,abberring; al.

fo,dreadyor feare, = hy

Horrible: com. Horrible; terrible; deteftable, execra-

ble,abhominable ; bide les 156K


ou dit


: Horribler. To make borrible,or moft ouglie.


s Hoftel. Langued.…
Hofte:m: An Hofte, Innc-heeper, Inne-bolder ; al, a


Horribleté.. Horribleneffe ; terribleneffe ; bideouf-


nee.
Horripilation: f. A fuddaine quaking, yerning, fhud-
dering, fhinering, or quiuering; alfo, a growing rough
with baire.
Horripiration: £ Smart;o7,a fuddaine quaking, crc:as
Horripilation.
Hors. Out of, without.
Hors d'icy. Hence.
Du cofté hors le montoir. On the wrong, or the 0-
ther, fide of the bore,
utetinen hors. From his verie infancie,euer fince


be fucked,
How  Looke Hormis,
ortailles: £. 47 kind of Gardening Uteafiles; or, as
ttailles,
Horsatt :m. iue: f. Hortaliue,exhorting.
ottie. as Ortie; a Netle,
Hortolages : m. Hearbes, fruits, roots, Garden fuffe;
things growing in Orchards,or Gardens.
ortolan: m. 4 delicate bird (of the bigneffe of a
. Larke) that bath a reddifh beake and thighes; anecke,
and breaft flreaked with yellow and greene; a Scarlet
bellie potted with Afh colour, and the feathers of bis
wings and tayle in fome parts blacke, in fome ved, in
4 fome afh-coloured.
Hory ho, hay & ho. (The ordinarie barfh accent, or
voice, of Carters.)
Hofcher, as Hocher; al/o,to fwyne,
ofeaux. Locke Houfeaux.
Hofpillé, & Hofpiller. Seeke Houfpillé, & Houfpil-


Hofpitable : com. Hofpitable ; af, inbabitable, or fit
to dell in.
Hofpital: m. An Hofpitall, a spittle,
er à Thofpital, le m'en vay à l'h. My fortunes
are in the wane,or at a verie low ebbe; F may goe whe-
ther 1 will for any thing Lhaue.
\ Envoyer i Phofpical. To beg ger, undoe, turne (in a
poore pickle out of doores.
L’Ouvrier gentil à l'hofpital yProv. Seeke Ouvri-


er, net bs à
Hofpitaler. To receiue into, (and) to reliene within,an
(pital, '


Ho,
Hofpitalier : m. The Maifler of an Hospital; alfa, a
Kzight of the religious Order of the Hofpitall. L
Hofpitalier : m. ere: f, Verie bofbitable,vfing bofpita-
litie,that keepeth a good houfe. a
Hofpitalité: f. Ho/pitalitie,good boufe-keeping.
osquet. as Hoquet. =
Hoft: m. Ax Hoft, or Armie; and(more parti ularly
a Troope, Squadron, or Batallion of Souldiors mt
not in file,but clofe together ; a Squadron, or Ba‘ allion
trooping,or in tro0pes. 4 '
Hoft banni. as Ban & Arricreban,
Hoftage:m. 4n Hoftage, Pawne, Suretie, Pledge; Fe
terme of payment being expired, the Debtor mufi de- |
liner Hoflages ; 10 wit, three, or foure, who goetoan
June,and there continue (bauing both wagesyand their |
wae allowed them by him) vntill be baue taken
order. Lit
Hoftager: m.ere: £, Ginen in hoflage,layed in pawne,
HA in pledge for. 5 are
oftarde: fA Bufiard, ‘
Hoftel.


au. as


Suef; alfo,a tenant,or vaffall. | "
Ty ÿ | Compter


je
oS ees NT |


f
y

ff

"4

4
4


TA
"APT


HOS
© Compter fans fon hofte. To reckon without bis bol};
to make bimfelfe fare of things which ave wholly at the
difpofitionof others.
Qui conipte fans fon hofte il faut qu'il compte
deux fois: Prov. Twice mujt be reckon without bis
bof! who reckons.
_ Vine fois faut comptera l'hofte : Prov. Our recko-
ning muft Le made one time orether.
Vhofte & le poiffon,paflé trois iours,puent: Prov.
A quel and fifh after three dayes are füfire. :
Vhofte eft toufiours le plus foulé: Pro, (Applyable
to Goffipping feafts;) The intertainer’ s alwaies troubled


moft. :
Tel hofte tel hoftel : Pro. Like boft like boufe.
De mefchant hofte bon reconduifeur : Pro. A née-
die boft (or guelt) is a friendlie guide.
Il fe peut bien {coir fans contredit qui fe met 13
ou fon hofte luy dit: Prov. Hee that fits where bis
bof? bim bids may lawfully keepe bis place.»
Le fanglier n’eft qu'un hofte: Prov. Becaufe bee
fay continually from wood to wood, from
to forreft. 3
Meftier tees d'hofle à chere cor. “à rs A
foure-fac’t hofi(or gueft)may well enoug .
Hoftel : m. 4a niece nese Lodging ; Hall, Place,
Palace ; (This word is commonly a marke of Great-
neffe; as L'Hoftel de Bourbon; L’ Hoftel de vil
le, &c ; other inferior Houfes being tearmed Maifons,
and Logis.)
Hoftel Dieu, A Spitle or Hofpitall,
Hoftel de ville. 4 Guild-ball, common Hall,Towne-


houle.
Vn corps d'hoftel. See Corps.
_Maiftre d hoftel. 4 Steward, or Clarke of the
Kitchin.
“A Vhoftel prifer , & au marché vendre : Prov.
Prifé goods at home,but fell them in the market.
C’ eft P hoftel du Roy Petaud ou chafcun eft
Maiftre : Prov. Applyable to a difordered boufe-
se oh euerie one commaunds,and does,wbat
lift. :
Il ne fe fourvoit point qui à bon hoftel va :
re He goes not out of bis way that goes toa good
ouf. - F5
La belle chere amende beaucoup l’hoftel: Prov.
Good cheere makes good amends iva bad honfe ; or,a
bad houft by good cheere 1 much amended.
Qui toft vient à fon hoftel mi


mieux luy en eft à fon


home,
Telhofte telhoftel: Prov. The hoff, and the boufe
_ are (commonly) alike, AR RE,
Hoftela de fe alfo,a bed,or nights-lod-
ung (for a gueft.) ola
Drlé d'hoficlage. LookeDroiGe >.

Pains d'hoftelage. A certaine dutie payed (within
= the Seigniorie of Dunois) by vaffalls unto their
Lords, ve ef abe dr a wherein they dwell.
P M. : Lodged. : 4

C . To lodge; to giue;lend.or bire ont lodging vn-


| to ‘ a5
HoñeltiesEe Mes erie i viélualling


Di CCE TETE RTE


à 4

Le -


gle


ellage. Looke Hoftelage, fort
Hoke one gine,or afford lodging vato; alo,
Hofteffe: £ Aa Hoffeffe.»


| Hoftife: f. 45 Oftize. *


fouper: Prov. He fares the better that comes sarlie


HOT |


: 7


to take or baue alodging in.


Belle hofteffe c’eft yn mal pour la bourfe : Prov.
A faire bofteffe is afoule pick-purfe; or, the beautie of
an Hofleffe 1 the purfès bane. xd
office: £ A facrifice,or thing facrificed. x
Hoftiere. Gueux d'hoftiere. Such as beg from doore


to doore.
Hottierie :£ An Hoffitall; alfo, anHofterie, or little,


Inne.

Hoftigement de fief. A declaration in open Court,
to whom a fief belongs after the deceafè of bim
that held it laft ; or for the fecuritie of adebt,

Hoftigié. Heritage hoftigié. whofe true owner is na-
med in Court ; as in Hoftigement. :

Hofiile: com. Hoffileate full, enemie-like, belonging to


an enemie.

Hoftilement. Hoftilely,batefully deadly, mortally, with
deadlie fend.

Hoftilité: £ Hoftilitie, feud, enmitie, deadlie hatred,
mortall hate.


Hot. Looke Hot. ¢
Hottailles: £ (AU kind of) Baskets,Doffers,e>c.
Hotte: f. A Scuttle, Doffer, Basket to carrie on the
+ backe; (The right Hotte is wide at the top, and nar-
_ row at the bottome;) See Buttet.
Hotte de cheminée. The firft part of the funnel of a
\wchimney, reaching from the Mantletree tothe mid-
dle thereof.
Mors à hotte. À flat Cannon; or, a Scatch bit,
Hottée: f. 4 Scuttle-füll of.
per To beare a Scuttle, to carrié a Doffer, on the
acke.
Hottereau: m. A Scuttle ; a finall (wide-mouthed,and
narrow-bottomd) basket.
Hotteur: m. 4 Basket-carrier,or Scutile-carrier ; one |
that carries a Doffer on his backe.
Hottier.as Hotteur. - . ’
Hotton: m. The flanlke of an eare of corne.
Hottons. Broken peeces of eares,or of corne,and 0-
ther fuperfluities, dimided by the winnower from the
‘cleane,and whole corne,and refèrued for Pullein.
How hou hou. Hootings, or whoopings ; voices where- :
— Swine are feared,or infamous old women difera-


Hôüagem.A digging,or turning vp of the ground;an 0- |
peningwt the root, with a Houë, zx
= ler. To yawle, wawle, or cry out aloud. € Ble- |
en.
Hoüay. How now. qParifien.
Houbelande. as Houpelande,
Houbelon: m, Hop,or Hops.
Houbiller vne vache. To. milke a Cow.
Houcle. 4 Surgeons Inflrument, wherewith the mouth
of awound x ftitched,and dr awne together,
Houe: f. An Iafirament of Husbandrie, which bath a À,
© crooked bandle, or belue of wood, fome two foot long,
and a broad,and in-bending bead of Iron. “4
Houé fouréhué: 4 grubbing ax; or forked pickax, |
whofe double inwardas the bead of ibe


tongue bends inw
ordinarie Houë, and is ufed for flonie ground, where-
te ip fic I é
: ,or fetting flicke, |
La pete oué The fee belonging tothe Millers,and
Bakers that grind , and make bread of , pronant


corne;


Original from he


THE OBO STATE-UNIVERSITY FY
1


Li


- HO


H O VY.


corne; viz.tothofe, a cupfüll upon euerie bufbell ; te
thefeyall the branne.

Houé: m. ée:f. Digged up, into,or about ; turned, or
broken v be 1 the earth; opened at the root as a tree


Hongau as Hoyau.

Houëment: m. 4 digging vp,into,or abont;a turning,
or breaking up of the earth; an opening at the root
with a Houë,

Hoïüer. To dig vp, into, or about ; to breake,or turne up
ground; to open a plant at the root with a Houë.
oliet: m.A Tentar booke.

Ho m, A digger; or, one that workes with a


Houille: f. Sedge,or Fenne-graffe; alfo,a kind of Mine-
As (in the countrey of Liege) that makes veriegood

res.

Houifche. (4 Interie tion whereby filence is impofed)
bujbt,whift,ift.not a word for your life,

Houlette de berger. À Sheepe-booke, or Shepheards
Crooke.

Houlette de connil. 4 Rabbits neaft.
oulle. The wanes, or the rolling of the wanes, of the
fea.qRab.

Houpe: £. 4 Houppe.

Houpé: m. ée: f. "Tufted, or taffeHed; fet, or trimmed
wuh tufts,taffels,or pretie lockes; alfo, wheoped at,or
unto.

Fuftaine houpée. Looke Fuftaine.

Houpelande: f. 4 Shepbeards Cloke, Pelt, or Gabar-

kh 3 (hence) af, a hors gowne, or long cloke with


Houpelu: m.ué: f,Lockie,taffellie,tufted;or,as Houpé
(in the firft fence.)

Ho er. To tuft ; to trimme with taf[els,or pretie locks ;

,t0 whoope unto,or call a farre off.

Ho pe d’un Arbre: m, The tufi,thicke top,or topping
of a tree,

Houplande. as Houpelande.

Dore: f. A tuft, or topping ; a taffell, or pretie
locke.

Houppelande. as Houpelande.

Houppier. as PE +

Houquet: m. The Hic


Hp m. A Scaffold. “tric alfo, as Heurt ; and


Oueft meu le hourd. where blowes are walking, |


thumpes giuen, thwackes dealt; or where there is fuch
rude buftling together.

Hourdage: m. 4 fafbion of > Or con
walls, of reeds sang ie rd inn |
with loame,or clay. :

Hourde. as Harde (in the frfifence.) * ie

Hourdé: m. ée: f. Loaded, burthened ; alfo, cauered
with burdles , or with reed. wrought burdle-ifé, and
dawhed oucr with loame.

Hourder. To charge,burthen, load ; alfo, to couer with
 burdles,or withreed wrought hurdle-wife, and daw-
bed oucr with loame,or

Hourdis. #5 Hourd; alo, sor reeds mong like

Ht hurdles,and yee sense
ourque: f AH F

ae A boifterous inconnter, a vialeas confit or


ourteriallie dealt doubs of pred Hare Deere.


Hous. # Houx.


te” by countrey people.


Go gle


Hout: m,ée:£ That bath drawers on ; (hence) alfôs


Tel eft houfé ui n'eft pas preft: Pro. Sayd of one
pu Prato rer and yet wants FA po
pall belpe.

Houfeau:m. A courfé drawer worne ener a Stocking


in A ve a Boot.

Ila Tate les houfeaux. He bath got bim to (bis
laft) bed; be is euen as good as gone ; be is no better
then a dead man.

Houtée: f. as Houfeau ; alfo, an Hipocras-bag, or bofè
to flvaine Hipocras through ; alfoya fhower of raine.
se Houfer. To pull on drawers to draw on bootes.
‘A Pan foixante & douze, temps eft que l’on fe
houfe: Prov. At 72 we bad need to shinke of our laft
eed.
Houfleau: m. The Hollie,Huluer,or Holme tree.
a zm, A Horfè-keeper ; a Groome of, or Lad
mu Stab
illé: m. ée: f. Tugged,towfed, lugged,hurried ;
ru ed,difordered ; ow tattered,
En 7 as Houflepill ée.
illement:m. Aviolent pulling, dragging, lug-
poms tu Mein or ing; tearing of ones garments, or of
one by the garments.
se Houfpiller l’un l’autre. To tug, lug, burrie,teare
- à to fhake, or towfé, as one dog doth ano-


Houtfe: f. A fhort mantle of comfe cloth (and all of a
peece) worne in ill weather by countrey women, abont
their bead and fhoulders; alfo,a foot-cloth for a horfe ;
alfo, a Couerlet, or Counter-point for a bed (in whic b
fence it  moft vfed among Leapers, or in Spitles for
Leapers.)

Houflé: m. ée: f. Couered with a foot-clothas a borfe;
with a Blanket, as a Bed ; or with a fhort, and courfe
Mantle, as a countrey woman ; af, (wept, or made
pos a chimney, or the fei dre, of a duftie


Hout e de pluye. A fhower


Ho uffepaillée: fA rar der whofe gowne


He tail fill of fraw.
ailler. «s Houfpiller.
Hout ailleur. 4s Hefpalier; or Houfpaillier.
mists f. A rag ged fat a tattered b her
fe gowne bath neuer a whole peece abort


Houtlep illement. as Houfpillement., . -

Houffer. To fiveepe, or make cleane a EE or
the upper parts of a duflie roome , with a long bee-:
* fome ; alfo, to coner wile 4a es or put a foot
cloth om: ind r Di CR
Houffer va arbre. To fhake atree. an fae


be m, Wee ti orone abat foeepes with a |


Houflente: f pren that fort dufies, or makes
cleane, a boufe with a Houfloir.


Houffine: £. A Switch, pe à ’


gr rod of Hollie ; a Hollie wand ; 4 crop
\ Hollie,


 Houffiner. To fvindge with a Switch; to bangor beat


with a Hollie-rod..
Houffineux : m. eufe: £. Full of Hollie-wands, o
» Switches. À 3


: Houfloir: m. A rel, or  beefome of Butchers ieee |
Houte: £ A ser et Sania mers bre


sand any br d to the end
gehts
the upper parts of ee nn 0H 15 FEU
T7 iy Hout


2
=
4
‘

‘

4

é
=


Tern, |


“ol ae


—— ttiies


To. oe re d-


H V B HA vil
. Houffon: m. Kneehull,Knecbuluer, Knetbolme, Petti- une: dai on the little Horne-Ovole ; as
gree, Butchers Broome.
Héuflouer. as Houfloir. Huge Hache, uot
Houflu: m.ué: £ Hairie, bighhaived; rugged with | Hugrement, Brauely, gallantly. qRab.
baire. uguenots : m, Huguenots, Caluinifls, Re


Crins houflus. Thicke lockes,or tufts of baire.
pren houflu. 4 fheepe well woolled, or of great


Houle de laine : fA fleese, or great locke of


Horde f. A Buflard.

Houtin. as Autin,

Houx: m. The Hollie;Holme,or Huluer tree.

Petit houx. Kecholme, Kneebuluer, Pettigree, But-
chers Broome,

Houzé. Looke Houfé,

se Houzer. Looke se Houfer.

Hoyau: m. The French Mattocke ; or an Infirument of
Husbandrie, bauing a ftrait and ftrong helue of wood
fome two foot duit an yron bead fome foot and a
hale long,and about three ynches broad,

Hoyé: m.ée: f. Crufhed,tired,ouertoyled; alfo,lame,
or impotent, by naturi “4,

re m.asHuée, 4 Lin England
ua: m. A kind of black Kyte (rare, ata
whofe tayle is nat fark” + zn :
uan. as Hua.

| Huant,ou chat huant. The veugh-leed Ovle ; or, as in
Chat-huant. :


rome Hooting, foowting, crying out, making, bue and


‘ awd, m.A Buxxard-like Eagle that preyes altogether
+ vpom Coots,and ee
Huau: m. a Hua,
Huaume: in. The belme ofa Ship.
Hubi: mic: Ein rame batled peel
| amended in Crt.
Hubir. To rayfe, make thriue,canfe to grow, by bolfime
dyet,and other good vfage,
Is’en faut hubir le mieux qu'on pourra. rh
. Sumake as good fbifiwith it as we can: |
Hubit: m. 4 apr [etting up of the bri
Huchant. Calling for ;


Pire d ff

Juche:f. 4 Hutch, or Bimne; a kneading Tronghsor
Tub; alfo,a Mill-bopper.

Huché : m. éc.21F Whooped , called; 07 batowe


t theme acing lege |


1 ovekss by 7. AABOD ST .


|Hucher. To i nor hallow for; to call unto.


:m. AH mL de
à de as Pot Boyes ft. i
ue; m, €¢ : £. Hooted, or ted after exclai-
3 or cryed ‘ont upon ; db be a

pobin dude d\n DE et


wear : de ur aA eee exanor

FA À booting RS 56, =
ne. are bain fo tn DER TENNT
bins Mic de à duns er ee fo


oben ‘ ahs 4 che ea me Cut

ai et Aa Sail vue
Eros vata, =o a5 at
Yio


- MAT |
uchant en paume, él for calling une by |


— of the Religion in France; (at firft fee Er

im Tours called on, neere unto
which they afembled when they fiirred ff; 3 or of the
beginning of their fir Proteflation , Huc nos ve-


nimus,


Huguenot:m.otte: £ Gent Huguenotte. as ue


guenots.
Huguenotterie: f. Huguenotifine,Caluinifine.
Huguenottique: com. Huguenot-like; of or belonging
toa Huguenot,
Hui. (Adverb,) Te dis dos 3 Looke Huy.
Hui mais. 4s Meshi
Huict. Eight,
Huiétaine: £ Re the number of eight; af, (a
pres of ) eight ages; ; whence ;
e. Eight dayes hence, or within eight


i

Hui@ante. Eigbtie, fourefcore.

Huiétiefme: m.An eighth part; and (more particularly)
the eighth one of the price of retayled Wine, pcr,

‘and other fuch di vy sera King by the
retayler thereof, (This mee Cha begun in, and bath
eset ape raigne of Charles the fixt; Anno


Huile» com. The eighth,


Huile:com.Oyle.
File de Maguelet.Oyle of the Arabian Cherrie Ma-


Huile He Onphesin: Oyle thats made of greenc,or wn-


Huile de d'onétion: The oyle vfèd in Popifh Baptifine,
and Extreame Vnttion.
Huile de pierre, 4 de and fulÿburous mould or
earth, bi al inflamed by any fire thats neere it,
wand onc ro care quenched, efpecially not by
water, whic ce 24 it, make it burne the more ve-
bemently; Looke N
Huile facrée. Oyle of pra 3 called fo of it admira-
ve fêcret vertues.
ile fain. Holie Oyle; the Oyle wherewith children
im oie and others in dying, are among Papifis


uile Sainêe , ou de Sapience. Looke Sapi-
ence,
Huile fambacin. Oyle of Jelfomin flowers; good a-
ainft cold difeafes.
Hoi fambucin. Oyle of Elders.
Huile Sicyonien. Is made of Oyle Omphacin twice
eo with a leffe quantitie of cleere water ina wide=


Fluiled devie. On Viral fe fo of it excelent


He Viral or ins Oyle ; the Oyle sam
men of it felfe,and without preffing.»
Zambach, as HuileSambacin. +


Pour recueillir farine il verfe } huile. To | ein 4
i commoditie be wilfully loofes a great one; Or (be-
 thereisno Such difference betweene Meale,anid

oe to thing be loofés anotber.
mur. To draw Oyle eufawall


to by violent paffion.


far fes To pure plespn fi |


Qui |


‘ +


HV R


or corruption of humors in the bodie,

Flux de ventrehumoral.A ask, or looffemefjewitb-
out inflamation.

Vertu fubftantifique, & humorale. Any firong, or
“fubfantiall iquor,as mans feed,erc.

Hune: f. The Dur of themaf of a fhip.

Hunifque. Efpée Hunifque. A kind of Scimiter vfèd
in old time.

Hupe : € A Little woollen thread pr tnft in the top of a
cap; alfo,the crefl, or cop on the bead of a bird; alfo,the
wi res or dungbill Cocke (a bird that neflles à in mans
ardure.)

Hopes mée:f. Copped, crefied,bigh-crowned ; (hence)

ifo,tall of flature aljo,proud, cocket , loftie, flatelie,
Fa beares bimfelfe high, that thinkes well of bim-
el
Pigeons hupez. Copped,or crefled Pigeons, called a-
bout London, Turne-pats.
Hupée : f. «s Huquée.
s’Huper. To raife,or fet up bis creft againfi ; to become
proud,loftie flatelie,

Li 4 as Hupe.

Huppé. as Hupé,
Hu ie £.4 Huke,or Dutch Mantle or Dutch womans
antl (2

Huquée:f. Il n'y a qu'wne Las (Much like our
Northerne weebit; ) youbawe but a little (fayes the
clowne, when you haue a odie way "pled

Hur le gay. Soundly whitled shromghty tipled, that bath
feene the dinell,

Huraut: m. A great,or ful-grovne wild a
thats (at the leaf) three yeares old,

Hutbec. as Lifet ; The worme called a Vine-fretter or
diuells goldrin

Hure :, The bead po 4 fa Beare gral wild Boare, or any
other [au sant dangerous beafl; (hence) alfo, a fla-
ring hori leunkembd,or ill-kept,pate of baire.
Hure à hure. Face to face; or as in Huze.

Huré: m.ée: f.Staring,rude,unkembd, brifilie, berride
like a wild Boares head.

Hurebais. Vine-fretters, the dinells gold-rings,

Hurgon : m. Blits,red Beets,

Hurlé. velled, bowled.

Hurlement: m. A howling,or yelling,

Hurler, To howle,to yell.

Hurler avec les loups. To howle when others we ;
to follow the bow rude, or poets it


Hurque : f. os

Hurt. as

Hurte-bife. One tht efit ide
Northerne wind

Hurteller. Te oe with the feet.


Hurter. as
[ely me :m. Sinker tee bits.
| Hache


Ider tree.


ame: m. Henbane.
as rents 2 à es |"


Hl ei ed Pe enr
ea Een


ati ot à H


H Y D


mor acclamation; mutinie, contention ; dia.
ation,trouble anmoyance.

Hutin: m.ine:£ Brabling, soute Prtinons com
tentious,unquiet.

Hutinement : m. as Hutin,

Hutiner.To chide euile reproach,brabble vb prante
on, [could at; alfo,tovex, trouble, difqniet, barrie,
annoy.

Hutineux :meufe:f. Clamorous, contentious, wuti-
nous, fill of brabling werie troublefome.

Hutte : £.A cote,or cottage; alfo,the cloth or bufh bebind | -
which men bide themfelues in flaulking for the wolfe,”
Venir de la maifon aux huttes, To fall from wealth
10 beggerie, fom fometbing to little or nothing.

Hutudeau. a Huftaudeau.

io Haut huyelot./p-beaped, well heapedon :


(adverb .) To day,this day ; alfo, the voice where.
Hey. 6 Carters turne their berfes on the right band.
D’ huy. as D’icy : €Rab.
… Hier vachier huy chevalier: Prov. Hee’s now a
K#ight who laft day was but a clone.

Tels font huy qui demain ne verront pas: Prov.
Some that are Y ie 10 day te morrow will be blind:
Huyé: m. ée: f. Hooted at, fhowted afier ; exclaimed

on,cried out upon, followed with buy and crie.
Huyer. To hoot at after,exclaime on, crie out vp-
on, follow with bue and crie.
Hayle + Ople; Secke Huile.
Hg m.ée :f. Oyled; feafoned annoynted, bifmeared,
otted withoyle.


Huy! er. To ople; to feafonanneint ,bifmeare,or (pot with


Hin s :m. À doore ; Looke Huis,

Hu as Huifsier.

Huyltres : £: Oyflers ; Looke Huitres

Huze à huze.Side by fidescheeke by one sfacetoface, |
right ouer againft.

Hyacinthe :m.7he blew,or purple lacint, or Hyacinth


fre à ; we callit alfà,Crow-t0es

yacinthe Oriental, The Orientall blew Jacint(a
beautifull flower.) ;

Hyades : f. The fiue(or feuen}rainie flarres which be in
ue" baie the Signe Taurus.


m. Henbane.
Roam leanne: £ € The Bee (fo tearmed becaufe foe feedes
pe on the dwar fe Elderne.)


pratt: Quiche filuer, liquid filuer.


ydraulique. voix hy. The found of (running)waters;
or Muficke made thereby.
Hydre:f. An Hyder ; a water Adder, |
Hydrie: €. A water pot, or bucket to draw water Pare
Hdroce £. The being burft ; or the fleet
“hei into one of the fiones. é


ge tives rographie: f. A Sea-card. pi
ydr ahtie: PSE the obferuation opm
ter or by (pivits appes

oe ov drinks made dater


: m, Methe,
pe bonie fadden I toge.

hobie :f .4n exireane feare of Pr) of |”
iy (caufèd by melanckolie, or by ibe


+ bike fa es is 1
sie +f The droplie. af
be : m. Dover Eldernts aa


- Hy-


- HV PI


“Hyer. & Hier. : RE CA
Hÿere:f.4 unded of Ales and ather{bit-
er) fimples, | 0%
LE Yeufe. 44 # pe NS
ienique:f. Health-preferuing P NET
Hyhenean :m,annc:f0for belonging 10,a wedding,
Ormattiage.  ; *
yinenée : f. A wedding, or marriage; alfo,a wedding
(dng,or fong of roy at a wedding; alfo,acertaine filme,
or thicke skinne which is broken when a maid is made
pes FENETRE ;
yinne : m. 34 fong of praife.
“an l hymne du Cigne, To fing, or fpeake,bis
alt.
Evo m. A Saker palfenger. ;
yOide. Os hyoide. The forked bone which is at the
root of tbe tongue, t
ypate: f, 4s Hipate, :
Hypenemien:m. enne : f. Windie, barren, frnitleffe,
| __ ke the egges layed by an untroden benne : Rab.
Hyperbole :£ 4a Hiperbole ; an exceffe in deprefing,
or aduancing, 4
Hyperbolic: m.ique: £ Hyperbolicall, exceffine, un-
likelie, paffing all credit, beyond the limits of truth,
without the [cope of beliefe.
Hyperdulie:£ The highe/t worfhip, worfhip that: be-
longs onely to God.
Hypernephelifte: m. A contemplator of bigh matters
! among the clowds.


H Y V

| ‘que generale,ou fpeciale OU par iugemen -

% & i gi hypotheque ; combne oft ladacion
4 ;


Hypotheque: £ 42 ingagement, mortea ;
Hi a immouabl eo MER
Hypothequé; &,Hypothequer. # Hipothequé;
&; Hipothequer. ;
Hyppodrome : m, 4 conife, or running place for bor-
| es Place vebereit horfés are broken, ridmana.
lie ra Seeke Arondelle,
yrundinier : mere: f. Of, or belonging te, a Swal.
ow,
Hyfgin :m, light red,or bright bay : or a hi
pleflaine ep the eke mre.
Hiysee boyfe vp; (A Mariners tearme.)
yflope: f. Hifep.
Hÿfterique. Affection hyfterique. The uffocation of
the matrix. a
Hyver: m. The Winter. .
Celanefai& ny hyver, ny efté. That is Little to the
purpofe,makes litile to the matter, does neither good
nor barme,
En hyver par tout pleut, en efté là ou Dieu veut :
Prov. Looke Plouvoir. "of
Sil hyver eftoit outre la mer, fi viendra il à S.Ni_
colas pagler : Prov.were Winter beyond fea.yet would
it haue a faying to S. Nicholas; (whofe feaft is on the
Jfixt of December.)


fivgeca : m. Aflew, flaue.or bot-boufe. | ‘A Ja S, Pierre P hyver s'en va ou il referre:Proy,
Hpohondres im. The flankes, or foft parts under Looke Referrer.
the fort ribs. forts , Qui pañle vn.iour d’hyver il paffe vn de fes enne-
; ypochondres de tous les diables. By the bellie, mis mortels: Prov. Oze of bis mortall foes b’auoides
… and bowells of all the dinells, that auoides a Winters day.


Hyvernal: m ale: f. winterie, winterlie, Winter-like ;
of the Winter,
yvemé : m.€e :f. Wintered.
Hyvernée : f. rhe winter feafon.
Hyverner- To wiater ; aljo,to dig, or dreffe a vineyard
in Winter, or immediately afier the Vintage,


I


A. (An Aduerbe of time) nigb, welnigh, welneere, al |
| mofi,lacking but à little; alfo, neuer; alfo, aParti-
cle whereby a Negatiue is inforced; as, line vien-:
dra ja ; be will not come at all, 78
Ta foit que. Though aliboush, notwithflanding albeit
t


that. Ç 3

Tables: m. The Croes of a peece of caske ;:the furrow,or
bellow at exter endaf tbe pipe fau mb
head-peeces be enchafed. Ta Ty

Tabler.ito make the (roës of Cashes viz. firrow orbol~
low (at tl’ ends of the pipe-faues ) whereinto the
bead-péecesmay be enchafed; ri

Tabol: m. 4 truckle,or pullie. coil t à

Tabot : m. The craw,crop,or gorge ofabird.

Tacée: f. Hearbe Trinitie Hearts-eafe,

Sp = ewe f. Lying, Tans “ir

ac if, Fallowes, fallow ground, lay-land, plowed

lands; alfo,any pyar 8) es idle, we wie


Hypochondria ue : com. Jn,er of the Hypochandres;
Ts sreabied dub s mad sealestbobe ie shefe
|" parts.
| Hypocifte. Th’excreffence that fhoots up from the root
of the forub Ciftus,or Hollierofe; a/fo,the medicinable
iuyce extracted from it,and hardened by druggifis.
ypocras. as Hipocras, | :
Hypocrifer. Todiffemble,ov counterfeit goodne(fe,to fet
a good face on a bad mind,to play the bypociite.
Hypocrifie : f Hypocrifie,diffembling,counterfèit good-
ne (fe, fained holneffe.
Ocrite: m. Am bypecrite, a diffémbler, a counter-
Sele leer often-twinkli
ild’ hypocrite. 4a inkling eye.
Hypoctiteinent. Hypocritically, diffembler-like.
H: e: m. The lower part of the bellie, from the
___nauell to the Pubes, or baire of the priuities.
[EH sep be Ofor belonging 10 , theHypo-
am, . ; eee Mae was els eke etsy |
Feine hypogaftrique. LookeVeine. +
| Hypogée: md vault,celler or fucb like under-grouiid
_ roame,arched ouer bead. mir.
-Hypogriphe : com. (4 monfier) balfé borfé half
Griffon. ns 4
| Hypopie: £ Béaling,or matter growing, or gatberin
ae Flo besa PE -
farque:£ Akind of dropfie , or fwelling of the
"Todi, bred of he fdoelfeof colt, and flegmattehesbu-


mors. eee Nts ue te ese Jacinthe: m. The pretions flane, called; ints ?
H ve 0 fable 36 refidence in coyine 1 = 7e men *
fi aïds thebatiome thereof. 4 Reeral Couleurde: the. P, lem,or violet ; theco-
hecaire: font celles paneer. ct Foeabiter white Friern. à

| 4 et vn Tacobin, To fpisout a sales opie

; legme, . aco’


«


iginal from
Z


tres Go gle set THEGHIO STATE CNNERSERS.


ov - oS
a : LES à : LE À °


| Talli: m, spurtec


ELVA: C
Tacoit que. Looke Ia. : :
ee perp for a man,and a Dirhinutine of
“ acques, »

Jacotin : m, Another,the Diminutiue of Tacot.
Jacqué: m. ée: £. Jacked, or, thats armed with a iack;


Looke e. ;
Tacquelet: m. 4 Jacke of the Clocke-houfe; or,the little
man that flrikes the quarters in a Clocke.
Jacquemard :m. 4 coat,or fhirt of maile; alfoa great
fatue of wood againft which, in old time, young ouldi-
ors practifed to het
‘Jacquemin. as laquelin.
Tacques : m. lames, lacob.
Jacques bons homs. The fubflantiall men of the Pa-


rin.
Jacques du four. The name ofa verie delicate, and
tender peare.
Fleur de S, Jacques.Staggerwort,Stanerwort Rag-
wort, Saint lames bis bearbe , Saint lames bis flow-
er,
Herbe de S, Jacques. The fame.
Jacquet: m.4 Parafite, claw-backe,beggerlietale-car-
vier; a finell-feaft , or trencher-friend ; Looke Ta-
quet.
Tacquette: f. Looke Iaquette,
Iactance :f, A bragging, boafting, vaunting, cracking,
proud oflentation, ®
JaCtateur:m.A boafter vaunter cracker, bragger,brag-
ard,braggadochio.
Jaëtation: f.as la&ance ; 4/6,afwinging;toffing, fha-
king up and downe, :
Tater. To brag,vauat,boaft,cracke; alfo,to fving,toffe,
tumble,or [hake up and downe, |
Tacture: £ Loffe,dammage,decay,much burt, great hin-
derance ; a cafting away, as of a fhips lading ina tem.
Ff


pelt.

Jadeau : m..4 bowle,or maxer.

Iadis, (Adverb.) Of old, in times paft, before time, for-
merly, beretofere, ‘

Jaet : m. Jet,or Ieat.

Jagayette :f. 4 kind of {hort fpeare bauing a bone ban-
dléjand to be throne, as a dart,onborfebacke, ~


Tagleur. See Glayeul. 5
Jaguette: f. 4 Pie, Pie-annat,Megatapie,
Taiant. Looke Geant.


Taibeau : m. A little pit,or bole full of water to keepe ff
Mi.


Jaict:m. Feat. x

Talaye : £ A wine meafure,or velfell for wine, oc, con-

taining twelue(French)Piates ; alfo,a Soe,or Tub.
Talet, See Iallet. : 4H
‘Tallage : m.es Forage; Aÿ0,a lalaye-full of wine,erc.

Tallay. as lalaye. Ne

| Talle:f. 4 pre PR aredfiwelling that comes of cold;

| (Blefen; ) alfo,as Talaye.

Tallée, as Ialaye ; Aljo,a See-full,or Tub-full,

Tallet: m. A little caflingbowle, _

… Jallet embrafé. 4 fire-ball,
Arcdialle


I A M -


Taloux: m.oufe:f. Iealous ; miftruffill, fufpitions,
Jaloux comme yn Tigre. Looke Tigre.

Jamais. vn iatnais. 4 verie long time,amightie while,
an euer lafling age.

Jamais. (Adverb.) Never. :
‘Afamais.Eternally,euerlaflingly, for ewer; ‘A grand |
jamais: &, ‘A tout jamais. For ener and a day, for-

1 ar ta deg à,

ainbages: f. The iaumbes,or fide-pofls of a doore,erc,

Tanberé The leg,or fhanke (extending frem the knee 10
the ankle ; ) alfo, (in Architeëiure) a Corbellor peere;
and,the iaumbe,or fidepoft of a doore &rc.

Tambe de Dicu, Looke Dieu.”

Jambe de pourceau. A pefile of porke; a gammon.

La grande iambe. The whole thigh,Jeg, and foot ; fo

tearmed by Anatomifls,

Os de Ja jambe. 15 properly, the bigger bene of the

leg ; the fhin-bone.

Pabe deca iambe dela. Stradling with wide-open
POS.

Donner le crocen jambe à. To gine a fall , or file

unto ;to es ey aig '

Faire i devin, Te drinke hard before aiour-


ney.
Teter fe chat aux jambes. Leoke Chat. -
louër del efpéed deuxiambes. To make the moft
ufe he can “rh or, toweld them as nimbly as a
Fencer atwo-band fword ; 10 runne away.
La queué entre les jambes. Much afhamed, or out
of countenance,as one thats taken in tbe manner ; alfo,
fouly diferaced or foamed, with fhame ynougb.
Selon la jambe le coup: felon la iambe le pied:
&,felon Ja iambe la feignée : Prov. Ratably,propor-
tionably, with effort anfwerable to firce, according to
the meafure of bis meanes. ;
Danfe du loup la queuë entre les iambes : Prov.
Lecherie.
Ils ont du cocur,mais les iambes leur faillent. They
bane more fiomackethen firength, more courage then
meanes, : .
Qui n’a coeur aitiambes :Prov. Let him that hath
not a beart baue beeles ; or let him that dares not vfe
his bands beflirre bis beeles. À
Tambette : f A little leg,or fhanke.
Donner Ja iambette. To give a trip,or foile.
Faire la iambette. A borfe to goe on three legs; and
\ gracefilly to fhiftand hold vp, the fourth. *
Iambier:m.cre:£. Of,or belonging to,the leg.
‘Tambier. as Gambier. |
Tambiere : £ 4 greaue,leg-barneffe.er ,armor for a leg;
alfoya leg, leg-peece,or part of the bodie about theleg.
Jambon: m. 4 gammon,
Jambonnier: m. 4 begger(alfoya feller)ef bacon, or of
gammons of bacon.
Tamboyer. To iet,or, wantonly to gee in and out with
the legs ; alfo,to croffe the legs often in dauncing. * !
Jamme :f Pearle, |
Jan, as Jean ; 1obn ; alfo,acuckeld.
Tan le blanc. A Hen-harme, or white Kite; my the
ifbEu-


confecrated bread,or bodie of Chrift in the Po,
oats ( <i by the rs EE à
an gipon, A gull, fot, ninnie, fop,coi
Lance Et Toflirrea Los in the flable till bee
Sweat withall; or (as our) to iaunt ; (an old word)
Jane : f. A certaine velfell,or meafure, for vineger,erc,
Janequin, (4 Diminatine of Jan; ) lenkin,or lacke.


Tanet, Jacke, - re ar
Ian-fermme. An Hermaphrodi i ie an


. Original from


THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY :


— ;
ñ à + 1% Fr
| DES À ot — ”.
’


TAQ. os I AR
and woman ; al/oyan effeminate meacocke, füint-bear-


ted milkefop. )
Tangler. To sangle,prattle,tattle faucily,or Seuruily,


Tarcé: m.ée : f.Cleft, rifl,cbapt,chinkcd chawnéd.
se Jarcer. To cleaue, riue,chap,chawne(as the hands in
* cold weather.)


4 - Janglerie : € 1angling, faucie Pratling, feuruie tatling, | Tarceure: £. Looke larfure,
De  fcuriileieafhing. ~ 4 . | Tard.ælar; 4/0, the fir}! great receptacle, or pond of
‘4 langleur:m. Aiangler,(aucie pratler, feuruie tatler, | falewater whereof Yale is made,
RL: _furrileieafler. x on : | Lardeau: m. A codded weed that windes about corne,
Jannet d'eau. Nenuphar,water Lillie, water Rofé. | and iatangles it.
Jannette: f 146, 1innie ; (a womans name.) °° : | Jardereau. as Tardeau.


Jardin sm. 4 Garden.


Tannin: m. A wittall; one that knowes,and bears with, |
CHE C’eft vne pierretettée en fon jardin, This bone is


or winkes at his wines difhoneffie.


Tanniffaires : m. Lanizaries ; the Turkes principall foot- CafPat bimto gnaw on; in this taxation be is meant
‘ men,and of bis Gard, ” ee in thongbbe be not mentioned. ‘
5 Tannot : m.(4 Diminutiue of Tan) enkim;or lacke. Cette pierre tomboit en fon jardin. This matter
ie Janot. as Iannot. : : ; much concerned,or came neere bin ; turned to bis pre-
es Tans-fernme. LookeTan-femime, indice,touched bis fréchold.
ardin aux faux-bourgs vaut cént folz au rebours :


À" Janspillhommes. Gentlemen : Rab,
ir. Jantes: £. The fellowes of a wheeles the peeces(of wood)
whereof ibe ring,or the rime confifis.
L Janvier : m.Januarie,
z Jappé. Barked ; Jawled;bayed,bawled. ¥
7 Tappement : m. 4 barking ; yawling, baying ; baw-
ling.
Tapper. To barke,or bay like a dog; to yawle,tobawle.
Chien quijappe ne mord pas: Prov, The dog that
~ barkes much bites but little,
Vn vieil chien iamais nei en vain’Prov, Aa
old dog neuer barkes:in vaine; ‘the warning, or aduifé
va of an old man is euer to fome purpofe,
Tappetie : f. Looke lappement.
Sp Tague: m. A barker,bayer ; yawler,bawler,


Prov. Looke Faux-bourgs.

Jardinage : m,4s Tardinement ; Al/o,a Garden.

Tardiné?miée : f Gardencd:made into,or wrought as,
a Garden.

Jardinement: m. A gardening; a working in,or'a kee-
ping ofa Garden.

ardiner, To make a Garden, keepe a Garden, worke,

or labour in Gardens,
Tardiner les oyfeaux fur des billots. To weather
Hawkes, or fèt them out a weathering,vpon blockes in
Gardens rc.

Tardinet: m. A finall Garden.

Tardinier : m. 4 Gardener,

Tare. Aiarre.

largcot. Looke Targot.


aes Taque: m.Iames ;2ifi, a lache, or coat of maile; and
Tatgon:: m. Gibri ge, fiftian language,Pedlers French.


tbence,a lacke for the bodie of an Irifh greyhound, cc,


ate | made conimonly of a wild Boaves tanned skinne, and 4 barbarous iangling. .
ree | put on bim when bee is to coape with that violent largonnement: m, as Jargon ; ar, 4 peaking fa:


tian. ‘
Targonner. To peake ‘fis ian, or gibridges to jangle
Latter abble ren nee a
argonneur:m. Achatterer, gibridgemunger, coun
ler feit vogue that foeakes fifliar, or a language, which
either bimfelfe,or bis hearers vaderfland uot,
Targonhois: m, Fuftian, gibridge, pedlers French,
oe 'm. A kindof coufe garment worne by countrey .
copie.
Teteeniles To warble,chirpe,or chatter,
Targueul:m. The weafon,or windpipe of birds where.
out they warble, ; à


Targnage :m. Afivaggering; or a fwaggerer,


beaft. és
Taquelin: m, & Iaqueline: f. Diminutives of Ta-


à ues,
Taquelot: m. & Jaquelotte :f Other Diminutiues of
_ | thenamelaques.
ie Taqueimin; &, Iaquemine. others, .
36 Taquerie de Beauvoifin. (Thename of) aninfurretti-
on of the people incenjéd againft ak gentlemen, in king
__dobns time; fuppreffed by Charles the wife,and the king
a of Nauarre, while 1obn was ia England, 149$
Taques: m. lames; Loo ues.
| Taquet :m. 4 Pilgrim to Silames of Compoftella; al-
4 - [0,4 Patafite, fjcophant,clawbackepicktbanke, fatte-
ri [mell. Bot. TR 2D. : 2
Mardi cela Taquet. en ye


‘  Tudis vray laquet. ÿ ied, laid by
4 (as the FRS pme TS diferace, of
a lyer, PTT aoa.’

Jaquette : f. (A proper name for a woman; af) a Pi


_annat,0r Megatapie, alfo, a filthie dungeon,
fome hole ina prifon ; alfoya iacket,or ye


> ‘
mous or foule-mouthed by, efauffe. os
Jarnigoi sata À ie for a foot ering,


__ ticall blafphemie.) SR
| Jarre :m, The name of a codded, and corn
À, AUPTELS


T


|. weed, oe es
Jarret: m.Thehamme,or bough, PE eS
L ocuvrefait iarret. Crookes, bends, or gies > in
ward, à Sed Sa
“Roïdirlejarret.To firetch out the hawt sas one that


lefe Mn er à plaine,or (the more
| dy) gathered, skirts, © À :
~ Tourner {a jaquette, Looke Tourner.


x yy oe To pratlebabble atl 3 or to claw, flauer,


ne on ; to play't 31 feeles the pangs of death ; to make'a dit, LE TS
__ | Taquiers: m. The Rebells before mentioned (in Taqu e | Jätretade:f. 4 bougbing, a fla jouer the hammes. **
SaaS Bree lle. ‘wore a faftion of | ck Tarreticr :m. ere: £ Baker-legd > that goes in at the
U _vfe h {ou (iors of times, à ë set | ts à ees, an * > Le ? a a ti
| Tar:m, AGañder. 0 Bi Tab E, “Cheval iarretier. 47 enterfeeringhor[e. : > bie
a Pied de iar. The hearbe eee ne ; Le ES vue rouë. The fellowes of a wheele, :
| En iar. 4 caterwawling,or bunting. °°! Tarro 1 f2 Akind of tares, or fall'veiches
| Tarbe. Looke Gerbe, | TS | Tarrus.aake-robin, Starébwoerr, tee
% "TOR, e ‘ L . ty


4 » te nr 3 7 — " ~


Dana from.
THE OHIO STATEUNIVE


ae dé


Tattiat: mn. 4 ruffian, fwaggerer, ckler ‘blapphe= {


and {wearing foxldior. de;from; Bee
_Tarnigoy. as much as Je renee (an old,and ruf >


I AV


: foot, Cuckoe Pint,
é: m. The Oke tree : (Petigordin,
Te Serre Del ate
Jarfer. Looke larcer.
Jarfure : f. A cleft, rift, flifter, chinke, chap, chavne ;
bence, the neb of a pen ; al/o, a cleaune,riuing, chap-
ing chawning.
se Sarecr. To garter himfelfe; to tie bis garters,
Jartier : m. A garter.
Jartier : m.ere: £. Of, belonging te, or feruing for,agar-
ter ; gartering.
Veinciarticre. The garter veine, or bamme veine ;
the fourth branch of the shigh veine defcending unto
the bought of the bamme , where it gets this name.
Tartiere: £ A garter.
Tafard: m. A prater, pratler, babler, tatler, chatterer,
jangler, idle talker. :
lafarde: f.4 prating goffip,a pratling houfewife ; atittle
tattle ; a wench whofe tongue neuer lies.
Jafement : m. as Iaferie.
Tafer. To prate,prattlebabble,tattle chatter jangle,talk
verie idly, |
Jaferan : m. 4 flagon chaine ; alfo, a bracelet, or necke-
lace of that chain fafbion; alfo,a coat,or fbirt of great,
and clofe-wouen,maile ; alfo, the boope of a fhackle.
Lenya as Jafard, blog; engl ‘
ie: f. A prating,pratling, ba jangling ; titt
tattle, carralitie ble chet ”
Tafeur. as lafard, 4
Tafinin : m. afin, Feffemiine, YeJomine, Felfe ; (an
arbor plant.) ‘> ;
Vnguent Iafmin. Am oyntment made(not of Lelfomine
flowers,as many imagine, bul)of white Violets,
lafpe : m. 4 Ja er flone,
Jaspé : m. ée : f. Of Lafber ; coloured like,or madetore-
mble,the la{per me
Iafper. To paint(or pris to make looke) like a 1af-
per ; to counterfeit the 1afper flone.
‘Tate: f. A Bowle,a Mazer.
Tatte: £ The fame ; 07,2 meafure about Tholofe contai-
ning neere a Parifian pinte. ;
Jau: m. A Cocke ; alfoya Barbell ; or as Dorée, a Dorce,


Tavar : m. as lavard.
lavard: m. A fivelling in the bollow of the paflerne of a
tiene : m. as lavard.
Javelé: m. ée : £ Swathed or made into fi
Javcler.To fwathe,or gauel corn;to make it into fheaues,
Jave : me A fwather, or binder vp of corne into ge
vells, |
lier:m. À corne-pike, or pitchforke, wherewith

ga of corne be Malin cad Unleaded

aveliere: £. The fame.
| Tavelin: m. as laveline.

| Javelin de barde, A barbed borfemans lauelin,


| Javeline: f. 4 Javelin ; a weapon of a ébeswmaennibe
| Pikesand Partifan, fal
LE ve nie: sm One that beareth , vfeth, or ferueth


A gencllo esfeof corte aloe banen 5


mane,
Ichneumon : m. The Indian,or(more properly)the Æ- }


SD ay ae


whence Labourer à jauge.To plough deep,or as deep |
as there is any füyle. 4
Taugé : m. ée: f. Gaged,or meafured as cashe,erc.
Iaugeage: m, The gaging,or meafuring of caske,erc.
Tauger. To gage, or meajure a peece of caske,e>c,
Taugeur: m. 4 gager,or meafurer ofcaske,érc.
Iavioler. To gabble,prate,or pratile.
Tavioleur : m. A gabbler,prater,pratier.
Taule: f. À cage ; a prifen ; or,a place ennironed with an
yrom grate,or woodden lattice, for th'inclofing, er fafe-
keeping, of a ws
sage: aulger. &,laulgeur. as Iauge. lauger. &,
‘cur.


augeur.
Jaulnaftre : com.Yellowifh,
Jaulfe : m. Yellow colour.
Jaulne d'eau. The yellow water Lillie, or water


Rofe.

Le jaulne d' vn oeuf, The yolke of anegge.

Taulne paille. Straw colour. Fes
Taulne : com, Yellow,

Bec jaulne. Looke Bejaune,

Terre jaulne. Gold.

Taulnement. Yellowly; of a yellow bew.

Jaulnet d'eau. The yellow water Lillie, or water Rofe.

Taulnet :m.ette:£ Yelowilh,a little yellow.

Iaulnette: f. Hardway,S.Peters wort, fquare S.lobns
graffe,great S, 1obns wort.

aulni: m.ie: f. Growne yellow.

Jaulnir. To make yellow,

Herbe à jaulnir. Looke Herbe.

tes f. The laundice ; alfo,the Yellewes.

Taulniffure:: f. 4 yelowneffe ; alfo, a yellowing, or ma-
king yellow.

Tay: m. as Gay; À 14) 5 alfo, the Shrinke , or Wariangle
(called fo by fome.)

Tayon :m, The Jay.

Jazer. Looke lafer.

abe a he hg ag repas gli

azerane.à la jaz. Of a flagon-charne fashion.

Ibice : m. Th lbix ; a fifi, anc long born il Got,
or beaft like à Goat,liuing among the fnowie tops of the
Alpes,and other cold monntaines.

Iceluy:m. Icelle: £ He; foe; the fame man, or wo-


gue ca al Moufe ; a mortal Sr bao te
ocodile, fo to all Serpents, and there fire vfua
tamed,and made benjall, by the people of Egypt. di
Ichoreux :m. eufe : £.whayifh,waterifh.
Ichthyomantie :f. Divmation by fifh : &Rab.
Ichthyophagie : f. Fifh-eating.
Ici. (Adverb.) Here; in thisplace,

D'ici. Hence, fiom bence. ©

D'ici pres. Hard by, neere at band. F
Icofaëdre. One of the fine regular bodies in Gecmetrie;

confifis of twentie equiangle triangles.
Icofimité. See Lychnocofimité : Rab, .
T&tere: m, The yellow laundice. ns

ue: com. Sicke of, or troubled with, theyellow


laundice. ‘
Iétide. Belerre Iétide. Seeke Belette.


Icy. æ Id. i
Ideal: m.ale:f, Ideal! ; imaginarie, conceiued in th'i- |


magination; onely in fancie.
Identité : £ Identitie, likene[fe,the being almoft the very
ides tf The ides of a Monetb; the eight day afier the

Nones. . +) I di.


+. Fin de


5 Ésfelin


IVEHAL :


Idiome: m. | 4» Idiom, or proper forme of fpeecb.
Idiot: m. Anideot, or aa foole ; afètfop, doult,


ninnie, fillie cokes; alfo,an idle,or unprofitable per fon; ;


_ enetbat bath no charge, no funélion in a Common-
wealth, | ;

Idiotifine : m, 1deotifine natural folie, fimplicitie, fot-
tifbaelfe; alfo, propriene ind language. "
oine : com, Apt, meet, fit, proper; conuenient, fuffi-
cient; commodious ; durable, fibflantiall, found.

Idoineté: & Aptne(fe, fitneffe, mectnelfi, conuenien-
cie, fufficiencie. :

Idolatre : m. Anddolater, a worfbipper of Idols,

Idolatrer. To Idolatrixe it,to worfbip Idols,

Idolatrie:£ Idolatrie; the worfbip, or worfhipping of


Idols,

Idumois. frui& Idumois, Dates(for they grow in Idu-
mea, on?

Te.(A pnd: 1: fometimes v{ed by the vulgar Pari-

“flans in lead of Nous ; as Te fommes ; Weare, : :

Ten veux. Looke P-en-veux. |

Jean : m. Joba; alfo,a double game at Ticktacke.
Decollation S, lean, The fea/t of the bebeading of S.
Zobn; a boly-day (in forse places) kept the 29 of Au-

hi


Habe deS. [ean, Thin-leaued Mugwort ; alfoscla-
rie.

+ Mal,ou Maladie, de S.Iean, The falling fickneffe,
LaNativité de S. [ean. Midfsmmer day.
Pomme de S. Tean. 4s Haftivel.

- Teme faifois appeller Maiftre Jean en cela. J was
old excellent,1 was beld verie good, at that, ...°’

 Mertre toutes les herbes delaS. lean. To implay all

bis skill, or meanes on; (Thys day being by many ima-

_ gined mof fit for the gathering of fuch ‘bes as are

Teto be vfed the reft of the yeares Looke Herbe.)
an. (An Interieétion) ic le vous nie. By your fauor fir,
1 denie it flatly. d \
Jean-Almy. The name of a fwectapple that yeelds ex:
cellent cyder. e |
Tecoraire : com. Ofer belonging to,the liner.
Veine iecoraire. The liner veine ; Looke Veine. |
im, A couater to caf? withall; alfo, a bemme of 2
"garment.
Le premier iect. The frfl, rude, or faf-penned
draught of a writing.
Faire le ieét.To thvow the lading of a fhip ouerboord.
Teété : m.ée:f. caf, throwne, burled, flung ; darted;
__, violently fent forth; putsor pufbed ont. EL CE
Terre ieétée. TeBticesye ii 1: 371,
Le dé foit ict. Set all on fix: and fèuen; come on’t
what will let’s ses à : wat
Mefchante parole ieétée va par tout à la volée :
_| Prov, Abad word blurtedout (foone) roaueth all a-
bread, , NE RER VO 0
Icétée : f. A cafi,burle fhrow, fling; Looke lerteé,.”-
Ieétement : m, 4 cafling,bur ling, throwing, flinging
> darting sp ingen forth. RARE \
Icéter. Tocaflburlesthrow, fling; dart,or fendout vio-
lently ; put.or pufh, forth, . F2: tn will
IeCter l'ancre facrée: To implore the dinine aff:
tance; to imply or effay his laft belpes, bis chi


’ 7 CSe x \ %
Tales La barre M


Teéter la bourfette, Looke Bo > ; FREE Tefier : m. The gifèrae of birds,
Jecter neue A Cees ungint,and | Tefie fr


EY EC


Teter le chat aux iambes, Looke Chat,
~ Aeéter le feu par lagorge. To pit hire like a diuell,ov
, el to rage,or be mad with ancer; to be ina hor-
e chafe. t
Tecter fleurs. To bloome,or bloffome wits; to yeeld
ar bring forth, fruit, Pema fnts sto pect,
Iecterles gens à pais,
them afbore,
Teter fon lard aux chiens. ‘Tobe latifh, prodizall,
wafifull ; 10 fpend his meanes vawortbaly, or viio-
wardly; to caf bis money away.
Teter le manche apres la coignée, To throm the
belue after the hatchet 3 after one loffé 10 aduenture
for another,
Jeéteria pierre & cacher Je bras. Looke Pierre.
ne pierre à coup perdu. Ie ne iecte cette
Pierre &c, I feake not this in vaine,1 am fire Lbit it
20%.
Jeéter vne pierre an iardin de. Looke Tardin. --
Tecter àfes pieds ce qu'il renoit es mains, Foolifhly
toleaue the certaine for th’uncertaine.
Teéterla plume au vent, To grow carele(fe,to aban-
don bimfelfe unto the blind direétion of hum, to
let the world wag, or goe as it will Sce Vent.
Teter fatefte. A Deere 10 mue his bead,
ae fonvent. To breath bis laft; to give vp the
gbof.
Ilicétera aux autres la pouldre aux yeux, He will
outgoe alt bis competitors, outfirip all bis concnir ents;
a viélorie will fire enough be bis ; Looke Poul.
8: .


To fet the men on land, to pat


Ife laiffe ieCer de la poufsicre aux yeux. He fuf=
frs dufl to be throwne in his eyes 3 Viz: He iwillingly
blinded, befotted,or hindered.
I feie&te furtour cuir. Any thing fèrues his turnesa.
ny fauce bis flomacke | any meat his mouth 3 {0 bungrie
a dog will feed on durtie puddings. —

Icéteur :m. Acafter, burler, thrower, finger, dar-


i 1e.


ter. ;
Icétice, Terre ieétice. Earth newly


caf up out of a #
ditch,or frrow. ‘a
Iectigation des efpaules. Awagging, or flargging of a
the fhoulders, à we
Tedtisse.as leâice. Py ‘#
Teton m4 tec emi rigs ala firme 4
Of Bee 1 TER a
Tectona ieGton. \shute by flute ie totwie, | - iy
one fience after another, is { sem twig te ti ant


NT TE. >


twigs.


=


Ieétonner. To fie, Prigs bred fences, put forth


channe: Joané(a womans RAR i:
Ichannette: f..fug,or Jimmie. .
Tenice :f A Meyfer,or young Com. : 7 | À


Tenin.Cocu ienin, An arrant cuckold...
LR dla. Lafèinioufly; as one that wiltbane a
Iens:m Ambearbe like Rofemarie, much ufed in the
cleanfing of gold oate, VHS |
Tercersaslarcen 2 frs ie]
Teré: m. ée :f. Brought,carried,bornes or,as Géré.
Jervir. hence ; Ie meieryi tant à prendre cette me-
. decine.1 bad fomuchadaetotake ce, :


AA


FT upd : ty oe ee: { à

core 10 gine Up,Or yeeld oucr, ia open Court, tains : m rder of whit
| bis whole efate unto bis creditors,by throwing bisgir, hoods on tit bea ike women, [has ther
| dle tothe ground, ye et € Ly.’


Fred Go gle ;


RL dé déte.


Ce PT,


IDDE:V


Tefuite : m. 4 efüite ; a Prieft of the focietie of lefus.
Vn Efpagnol fans Jefuite eft vn Perdrix fans O-
range, A Spaniard without a lefüite is (like) a Par-
tridge witbout an Orange. >

Tet: m, 1eat:

Tette : f. The fame,

Tetté: m.ée : £. Caft,throwne ; Looke leé.. i

lettée: f. A caft,burle throw, fling; alles iettie,or iut-
tie, a bearing out,or leaning ouer in buildings; alfo,the
banke of a ditch, or th’earth caft out of it when it is
made ; which commonly is amarke of propertie totbe
owner of the land whereon it lyetb.

Jetter. as Ieéter.

Tettien: m.enne : f. Made of let.

Tettonner. See Ieétonner,

leu: m. A play, port, game, paflime, recreation; alfo,
play, fport,coc,mirth, ieaft ; alfo, a leffon.on the Lute,
ec; alfo,the alley wherein they play,at Paille-maille;
alfo,the upper end of a Tennis court(next to the boufe)
or fo much of it as is comprifed within the fireake of
chaulke,drc,dravwne ouerthwart the court. :
Jeux Floraux. A wittie contention (among Rimers,or
Poets) wherein the price for the bef doer 1 an Eglan-
tine, for the fecond a Marigold,of Lact
ne dé Princes. Are fuch as pleafe them that play
them.

Vn ieu de violles, A fet,or cheft of Violls,

‘A icu couvert, Secretly, privately, conertly, under
band, in bugger mugger. 4

Leicu ne vautpasla chandelle, The bufineffe will
not quit coft sit 15 not worth the money thats fhent, or
paines thats taken,about it.

‘A beau ieu bel argent,&*A beau jeu beau retour.
Square play,roundly,throughly,in good earneft; as good
as is broucht ; one good,or bad turne for another.

Hy aura beau ieu fila corde ne rompt.We fhall baue
fbort ynongh if the time,or our intelligence, faile vs net.
Ily a plus de mine que de jeu, Looke Mine.

Faire bonne mine,& mauvais ieu. To beare agreat
misfortune in a cheerefall fafbion ; to looke merrily, or
Set a good face on't,bow much foener be be troubled.
Jouër le gros jeu : &,louér fes jeux. Looke Jouér.
Mettre en ieu. To produce,te bring or Jhew forth ; al-

_ Sesto ftake,in play. 4.

te ne nel nee “ph ¢ of difteuering
is enterprifè,or publifhing bu defignes. :
Trier fon efpingle du ieu. To flip bis necke out of tbe
coller ; to fliach,or withdraw bis flake, when be likes
not the conrfe of the play. Cure
‘A vray dire perd on le jeu : Prov. BY Peaking truth
men(often)loofe their game. =
Apresla fefte & le ieu les poisau fei: Prov. Thofe
x that will make good fhiftynuft after play ufe tbrift.
| In’eftiew qu’ a ioueurs ; Prov. There's no good play


| but among Gamefters ; or the bef playing is with them
he dette bat 2h Sid ratio
| Dfaitbon laiffer le jeu i hed il eft beau: Prov. Tis
ER ee inh eet


we
paroles font le


jon Tr


ot à
Ro nds ind the game


= à eer
die Thurfday, Shere Thinfday,
NI bat young. © r


LAB V


Jeune : com: Yong ; youtblie, youthful; tender; lufiie,
Faire la part au plusjeune. Looke Part.
Teune en fa croiffance a vn Joup en la panfe: Pro.
A youth in growing hath a walfe in bis guis; viz, eats |
rauenoufly, peed x verie much,

Amour fe nougrit de ieune chair: Prov. Yong flefh
à a great nourifhmente loue.

Teunement. Yeng#, yout bfully, youth-like.

Teuner. To faft; to abfiaine fem food. » |
Allez jeune qui povrement vit: ProwHe that lives |"
poorely fafis fuffiienth.

cunesse : f. Youth, yong age; alfo, youthes, yong people;
alfo,a youthful pranke,a tricke of youth.
species vous cela ieu de jcuncfle ? par Dieu ieu
n'eft ce, (An equiuocation) If that be play 1 knew not
whats called paine : Rab.
Teunefle oifeufe vicilleffe difetteufe : Prov, An idle

* youth a needie age.

Fy deieuneffe,& de beauté defgarnie d’humilite:

Prov. Looke Fy.

Si ieunefle {cavoit , & vieillefle potivoit, iamais

povreté n’auroit: Prov. Ifyouth knew what to doe,

and age could doe what it knowes, no man would cuer |
be poore,

Teunet: mette:f. Somewbat young, or verie young.

prettie and tender, ‘
Petitebrebiette roufiours femble ieunette: Prov.
The little Ewe fecmes alwayes young.

Jeuneur: rm. A filer.

— : meule: f Much fafting,abflemious,meat-for-

earin

Teufe. The barven Scarlet Oke, Holme Oke,French Oke.

If: m. An Yew,or Yew tree.

If barbu, Se does th’ Author of Y Hippiatrique (mop
ignorantly)tearme tb’ Italian Taflo barbaflo, which is
no kind of Yew(though Tafo be the Yew tree) but ihe
hearbe Mulleyn,Hig-taper, Lengwort.

Ignave: com. Laxie, bib Mobile Sluggifh; alfe,
cowardlie without fpirit,mettall,vertue,or force,

Igné: m.ée: f. Burning, fierie ; alfo, fred burned.

Ignife : £ À burning,or firing : ENorm.

Ignition :f. A burning, firing, or firineffe; the being
red-bot,as gold is befvre it melt, |

ominie :f Igneminie,infimic , obloquie,difbononr,
difcredit reproach, j
minieusement. lenominion fly, infzmeufly.
eux :m.eufe :f, Ienomimions, infumcus, dif-
benourable, fhamefull difgracefill reproachfill.

Ignoramment. ignorantly, cnskilfilly, valecrnedh,
Simply, vnwittingly,unknowingly.

Ignorance: f. Ignorance unskilfulneffe, want of lear-
ning,lacke of knowledge,

Ignorant. ignorant ; unlearned, vnskilfill, fimple wan-
ting the knowledge of. ;

Tout mefchant eft ignorant: Prov,

Ignoré: m. ée: £. Ignored, notknowne.

Ignorer. To ignore,or be ignorant of, to want skill, not
a


for Icy; Here: Pic,
Hy fede) tl
foes thea ; or the fides ofthe lower part of th
: lankes; or the fides o, of the
belle ( pp Fabre
isheas mon ue mifbiefs befell the
ade de maux :f. As. as be
“Troians , at the flege, and aefiredien of their Ci


te, tt th 9 /
Tliaque : com. Of,or belonging to,leslles,


Tlia.


~~
+


I GL ML i


TMM


Iliaque pation, Th’lliacke paftion: a pain Uwring-
PA He a LA VAE Ay wind;or
Se |


troubled with fharpe biumors. Teele
Artere,ou veines Îljaques.Looke Artere,ou Veine,
Ilias: f. vne Ilias demaux. as Iliade, wet


Ilicine. Looke C clydre, f


allegation that inforceth,

Illec. t

or in,that place... © SA in 145
D'illec. thence ; from that way, [ide €.

Ileygalités.1Uegalirie,lavolefueftgdifore levgunruline|fe;

Illegitime : com, Megitimate;vnlaw fillysor bafe born.

Illegitimement, Juegitimately.. ATs

À Illcteré :m.ée :f. 1diterate,vnlearned,ignorant..
Illicite : com. Iicitous,vnlarwfüll. ms
Illicitement. iicitouy entail.

Illimité : m.ée: £Bouhdleffe, unlimited. t

Illiné: m.ée:f. sr annointed, gently rubbed on.

Illiner. To anoint foftly,gently tarub on. 5

Illiquide : com. Ob/cure,doubtfill ; or which is not eui-
dent or cleere. 3

Jlludé: m.cé :£Deluded illuded mocked, flovted fcor-


ned.
Illuder. To ilude,delude,mocke, flowt,(corne..-
Illuminateur :m. 42 iluminator, inlightner ; illufira-


tor.
Ilumination : £42 illumination, inlightning, illuftva-
tion ; an opening of the eyes.
Iluminé : m.ée : £ Iwmined,ilufirated , inlightened,
brightened; cleared,beautified.
Illuminer. To iluminate, brighten,inlighten, giue light
unto; to beautifie,cleere illufirate. .
Illufion: £. Anillufion ; fantafie, falfe vifions a mocke~
rie,or gullerie ; an ARR aie of frgerie , put
__.. upon dull, or daxeled eyes... at
Illufoire : com. sujorie,iMuding ; alfo,vaine,idle,to no
purpofe at all. eis: +
Illuftrateur : m. 4x iluftrators a brightner, cleerer x
beantifier ; dignifier. .
Illuftration : £. An illafration; explanation, enidence ;
a brightning,or beautifying.
ftre: com. Iufivious excellent, famous renowmed,
honourable muoft worthie; al/o,cleere,bright,light{ome ;


ining,
Illuftré : 4, ée: € uftrated; explained made euident,
cleered,brightened; alfo dignified, bonoured,
Tiluftrer. Toiufirate; explaine,cleere, brighten make e-


uident ; alfo,to dignifie,make bring bonor unto.
Illuvion. 2s Alluvion ; 4/0, fitbineffe, aafline fe, un-
cleanneffe. | CSSS AE tre
Ilz: m. The Yew tree: (Norm, |


Image:f. Añimage, figure counterfeit, f 7
pa à of; alfo,a lewell, or Brooch to 3
the hat, fr ES

Jinagé:m, ée:f, as Imager:mere:E © |

Da A La TES Re es

mager: m.ere: £Ofor belonging to,images ; adorn
or nd sage. ; v LES me


NN 0


Imagette: £ A little Image. or
Imagier: m. An Image-maker,a caruer of Images.
Imaginaire : com, Imaginarie, ined ely im conceit;
een ene i eee WEES “ap
inatif: m.iues f Imaginative , inuentine ; a
cinedied. fal of now AR AE ES


Imagination: f. Imagination, fancie conceit thought;
À 4 Surmiftgr furmifing, LT
Imaginative faclmagination,


we


Illation :f. Anillation,inference,conclufion; areafin,or ‘J;
Adverb.) There,thither that way;on that fides to,


Lu - sai méeif, Imagined,thougbt ,conceited,firmi- ’


In i er, To imagine thinke,deuife conceine, lurmife.
I ille : com. Weake, feeble, frange faint,


‘celeffe.
Imbeci NtWeakly, feebly, faintly, forcel
mberbe ; com. Soh ps ñ | ss


Imbibé: m.ée:f. Imbued; moiflened , bedewed:
tt drunke in. rent ae
Im leffable : com, Vunburtable,unmoundable.
Tebsiego : m, A (mof venomous)kind of the Sea-bare;
alfo,tbe beardleffe Sea-barbell or Sore Mullé.
Imbrocation. # Embrocation,
Imbu: m.ué: f.lmbrued,died,diftained;indaed,tanght,


AJET 3 fill of.
Imbuyable : com./“ndrinkableunfit 10 be druthe of,
Imitable : com, Jmitable, flowable.
Imitatetir: m.4# imitator; counter feiter, follower of.


Imitatif:miue: f. Imitatine, imitating, done by imita-


ton,
Initation:f.imitation,counterféiting, following,
Junitatrice : f. Animiratrix.
Imité: m.ée : f.mitated,counterfeited, followed,
Imiter. To imitate counter feit,follow th'example of.
Immaculé: mée : f. Immaculate, vn{potted , without
blemifh,cleane.pure neat. . ‘
anyeable ‘com. Vneatable,unfit to be fed on,
tmunanité: flmmanitie;inbumanitie,crueliic, felneffes ‘
outragioufnel[e ; bugeneffe,exceffiue greatneffe,
Immarceflible : com, Iacorruptible, unnadeableun-
witherable,
Inmmariable :com, Vnmarriable,paft marriage.
Immateriel : m.elle: f Immateriall ; without matter,
- fluffe; or fifa ; impalpable, vhtouchable.
Immatriculé : m.ée :fMatriculated inrolled, regif-
tred,or entred into.
Immatriculer, To matriculate; to inrollyegiflersenter


into.

Immediat: mate : f. Immediate, next unto; prefeatly
Succeeding, foone following.

Immediatement. Immediately; without interpofition,
rf yy ia ci cada panfing,as faft as may

e,by and by. |.

Immedicable : com. Immedicable vucurable ; not te
be healed,or helped. à

Immemorial: m.ale : £ithent the compaffe, reach;
or feope of memorit.. Né
Poffefsion immemoriale . Pofféfiion held by pres


_feviption,or time out of mind.
mmenfe: com. lmmen{e ja finite, buge, excefsine,un-


: sneafur able, propor tion-excee g,pafsing great. :
Immenfité:f. Immenfitie , Oameafinablene 5 bug
_ neffe,jafinisene{febonndlefe largeneffe, pafiing great


nm + 5 . . { 4
| Immeuble: m. 47 immouable,or thing unmouable;as


land rent crc.
Immeuble : com, Immouable unmouable. =
ImunifCé: m. Intermedled with dealt farre in.
sImmifcer: 10 intermeddle with,to deale farvein,
Iramifericorde :£/mmercifulne(Je,ywant of mercit,in-~
peo LS say
Immilericor mg yat 0
Immifericordieux: m.eufe :€ Vamercifil. |
Iminixte: côm. Simple unmixt without mixture. —
Immobiliaire : com. Pwmouable immouable. +e
Immobile: com. Immowable , firme, fetled , alfured,


ad
red.


3 Se a


ot to be flirved,
aes enent. bg fat Dé “+
Zag 4 Sy ae x!


rh


PP as A


Jo ME eae


at £
ma! Peed


Immobilité: £ stewafafine fe} Fra DATE.


LM M. "1 MP:


Impenettable: com, Inpeerablompercenbe
… vamouablenelle, Jinpenies : f, Cofis charges expences.’
Immoderé: née: € lmniederates ektellue) intempe- [pers m ,Tl'Imperatine moodin Grammar,
rate,outlafbing,difordinate joutragietl. Imperatif mijue :f 7mperatinesimperiout,comanding. |
Immoderément. Immoderately ; exce finely jntenipe- Imperatoire : E.Mailler wort falle Pelitorie of Spaines |
vately,diforder edly ,difordimately,outragiok(ly. AN com. Imperceplhlesunperceiwable:
Iminodeste: com. 2model, waiton, uncbaft, lafei- | Impercepti blement. uaperceinably.
ious ; malapert, faucit, unmianer lie.


Imperer. Tozule, fivay,commiand, CA demi.
Immodeftement, 1mmodefily; wantonly, fhamelefl , ‘hove aie Sime ,
malaper tly, faucily.


Imperfaict : m.cte:f. TF be ec eat,lame,un |
Immodgftie :f. Inimiodefiie; ns ee Led sich ifu ficient: een 7
nee. _ | Imperfection :f. Fmperfettion; lament, infufficien- |

Immolateur : 4 Sacrifice-offerer. “|.” Gie, weakenefie,

Immolation :. 4n immolation, fi eer ge a to : £ A tlfiigsor Sensing op formant of

| Imunolé: m.ée : f Immolated, facrificed offered. * oving,or piercing. .
Immmoler. To offer,to facrifice,to off exfacrificey Imperial: male : £. Jmperiall, Emperor-lîke:
Immonde: com.Vacleane iced: berayed,polluted, Couronne imperiale.Th'Imperiall ilies Crowne
foule, filtbie,nallie, (lutt? Imperial; a great beantifill(but flinking) flower. 4
Qui veut la confciente monde, il doit fuir lemon- | Imperiale :f. The name of an hearbe (miflaken by fome
de immonde : Proy. Looke Monde. moderne Herbarifis for Smyrnium, oF Candie Alexane

Immondice: a uncleanne(fe naftinelfe pollution, ders)that bath many excellent vertues ; ;eloakind of |
Jlutuifbnefc,ordure. bit for à horfe ;alafo, ack

Immondicité: £Vacleanene(fe, filtbine Imperiale de Flanders. À certaine coine worth a

Immortalifation :f. An immertalixalio an imbiorta- | bouts. fterl,
fixing. | Impericon. s.


Immortalifé Am. ée :f. Immortalize ed, | Iinperieufement. Inperionly, Lord}, proudly fit,
Immortalifer. To immortalizé, etérni immo = | Soueraigne-like.
il. | Imperieux: m.eufe: f £ tnperions, Lorde, Raselie of


te,commanding,


proud.
Imperiofité : f, Statelinefse,Lordlinefie ; anfleritie, fe
neritie HR ita gs
com. Vnperifhable, which cannot mif-


carr ae


périffible. The fame.


ta

Immortalité: £1mmortäitie eternitie, ie
fame ay-during ; 4 perpénidl nicmorie Life, a
name,

Imnmortel : mélle : € Imniortall, eternal, enertaftiig, |


euer=lining mener enditg,ay-during.
Immortellement. Jnimortally,eternally, ewer laflingly, |

: | Iinperit. Vnski/fll, unlearned; vnexpert, unexperien-
ced; rude, fimple,ignorant, eafi fly deceined.


perpetually, for ene? and ener.
Immuable: com. Vachangeable, fleadfif, firmie, fet |

| Imperitement. ray valearnedly ; unexpertly,
ui Er ata €.


; led, ear a Sai fi a
inmuablement.Vachangeabhy, fleadfafily conflantly,

, fest a His : m.elle : À Jmperfonall, that bath xo
ré lement. Jmperfonally, without per, erfons.


refalutely,
Immune: com. an free priniledged, difcliar ged ,
Lent com. Not 10 be breathed into,not 10 be
priniledge, franchife. é ced with aire.
Imimyable. 4s Immuable. 2-5" E'Impertinémment. Inipertinently, vnproperb, vf,
: matte: f, Hard ten, Loke Empat, to little or no purpofe.
as Einpaéter,” * Iimpertinence : f, lmpertinencie un fitnefse, umproper-
:com, Le re à se _nef$e; a thing thats to no purpofe.
Impar. Oddeoneita onoydall seal i us tintnt,t Nf vnpropers cleane ie


granite te Immanitie; _— séxemption fibetiie,


Pr To impartor co the matter.
taker of: Rss - a Tipe: f, A ringuvorme tetter,drie itching feab,
Impafhibilité: £ Fmpajfibilitie,e ait afi trable: com.Impetrable,obtarmable vponrequef.


onateme[le; alfo,impa betrans de letters Royaulx. Patentees; or Lich as
mp . Impaffible, sprint baue got the Kings letters Patents.

; Unperturbed ; alfo dep ist a cannot fuffer, or Impetration :f. 47 obtaining by fuit procuring by in-
will = beaie wi treatie,compafsing ly requefi.


nor pete fe pafionatelys iM Impetré :m. ée :f ri à by frit, procured by in-
sae : ge 1 mel.
wpe! f. i ant } i}


Impetrer. To rapt = by fuit, compafie by |
LE : intreatie,procure by requefl


Sa ment Impeat . De: PL si
with a véô cible fw ;


Eh Thnbetiene “i pus, vebe-
Hew a fe ere a-


sf, Impetno ff beifleronfnefie tat vio-
: ee bearing. fie. fu #

: com, icked vngodlie, gracele fie, ¢,Un-
gracious,irreligi ig heitber Cad ner


Go gle ee | TRE Op STATE ee T


,
Lg re «mi


I M ‘TM P
[ Impiement. 1mpios , vingodlily, gracelefly, vngraci-
sae Cae em "Bs é er
| Impieté: & Impictie, vagodlinelfe, vnrighteoufnelfe,
on or se gy vile partan irre-

'RLOUS prankee pi |
Impiteux: meule: £Pitilelfe incompafionate,blondie,

Sauage,cruellvoid of bumanitie without mer cie,
Impitoyable: com. as Impiteux. hs |


da the powad upon all kind of cattel, corne, viduals,
and wares imported,or exported;(but where this impo-
fition is paid, fubfidie is jpared.)
position de nouveaux acquetts. The fre which
_Churchmen pay to the king for purchafes of land in
Mortmaine ; Looke Acqueft.
Dilité : £. 4x impoibilitie,
Impo er. Te make impofible.


Implacable : com, Inplacable;vnpleafable;vnappeafa- | Impoffible: com. impafiblewhich cannot be dose. | ~ é
ble, x Impoft:m, 4» impol},cuflome,impofition. ;
Implantation: £ Aa implantation, or implanting ; à Impolt de francs fiefs. Looke Impofition. ;
fetting or fixing inte, ee Impoft du pied fourchu : The told shats levied upon ;
Im planter. To wmplant,to fix,or fet into, :* Ly each bead of cattell fald in Markets,and Faires. |
Implication :£. An imphcation,infolding intangling,in- 1 de fa perfonne, Vgweldie, vnfit to traue {UN 2
. uolutioniacombrance. iy ‘ otake paines, Pate
Implicité :£. An implicitie imtanglement,incombrance, Inge 2m, The fpringer of amarched gate; the Wout. à
iJ obfcure inuolution, ing that beares tb'arch. 4 pe
à “plus im, de: f. Infolded inuolued,emvrapped; in- Impofteur: m.4n Nés tour. | vil
1 tangled incombered,peftered, . . a iugler,a mountebainke, a- cheating Duackefainer,
a Impliquer. Fo infold,iauolue envwrap ;iutangle,pefler, Impolture : f. impoflure, guile, deceit, faifbood, cou-
5 incomber,bring into the beiers, fining, ingling ; a tricke of legierdemain; alfa, flauit-
f Implorateur : m.An implorer;befeecher,crauer,begger, dering,or a flaunder, 4
| humble and earneft intreater, — : . | Tmpotence:£ impoteacie difabilitie infirmitie, weaks |
Imploration:f. 4 imploring crauing,begeing befeech. ne(fe, debilitje, feebleneffe, |
ing ; an earneft,bumble,or lamentable intreating, Impot potent;vnable, power-wanting , infisme,
Imploré : m, ée: £. Implored,befougbt,begged,craned, ame, weake, à
% bumbly carneftly,or Lamentably intreated. Impourye®. Seeke Improuveu. d
Implorer. Te implore,beftech,craue,beg of, lamentably Imprecation: f. An imprecation, cur{e banning, à
2, to requeft,to intveat with teares, ; Impreciable: com, Vaprifablevaualuable. ARS
4 Implo :comZaflexiblescnbowable;indurate,ob. | Impregnation: f. À bagging, 07 getting with young; a à
Tru, ‘4 ‘ , ns a conceiuing. as “a
Impoli :m. ie: f Fnpolifhed rude out of trimme, Impremedité: m,ée: fUnpgmeditated fudQain, ving 3
it Impollu: mué: f Yapolluted, vatainted, vadefiled, ibought of before, ms
434 without blemifh,or flaine. Imprenable :com, Z#pregable vnexpngnable; which à
eg Im lc: com, Iatollerable, unfupportable, not to will not be forced, 4 “à
nt be borne. | Imprefcriptible: com. without the compalfe of pre- #
$ à! | Importamment. Importantly weightily, forcibly, Seviption; which by no length of time cau bealiened, or “à
or. €’ Importance: f.lmportance, force,weight momet,value, loft.
"| Important. Important, weightie, forcible,of great con- Impreftance : f. Preff,or impreff meney,receined,and to
e Sequence, ; beimployed for another. °
“ha Importer. cela importe moult. That imports much, nprevoyance:f. Improuidence.
v: thats of great cm réence, Imprimé:m,.vn im.A printed worke(a wolllguled when
3 rtueux:m.cufe ; ÉWithout port, baven,or barbor, one will not vouchfafé it the name of a baoke.


Importun :m.une : f. Importunate, urgent, earneft
I with; DAS à av . 2s
| Anportunétnent, Importunately, urgently, earnefily ;
| Aeaablefoneysomoanery oonanehs sla, Dee
pl té: £ itie, urgencie, e ;
tel 1 0
mpofé : mes TRE 68 nier
t taxed,charged with exatted salle accujed of, à
Impofer, To impofe; to put vnto,or lay upon to inioynes
to tax,charge with exalt frome.
Impofer d'aucun quelque cas, To accufe ofa crimes
to caft,or lay am imputation an. … HSE,
Impofition : f. An impost,or impofition ; a tax, exa&ti-
on, charge laid on; alfo, an accufation, or imputation;
an impofing, or laying on; (whence, Impofition de


Apr: m.ce : f, Printed, imprinted ; flambed, [ex
Imprimer. ‘To print, imprint make ue ion to
flampe fete, prb bende es
Imprimerie : f. A print,impreffion; de alfo,a

; qi x Le


printing ; alfa Printing houfes, 3

| Imprimeur: m..4 Primer, "© 27 W Due

Improbable: com. Improbableomprowable, ©

Impropere: m, Aa exprobration, vpbraiding,or twit=
Ling im the teeth; a reproach, or imputation; alfo, a
nickname,or difgracefull title, = ~*~ eat

Japenese exprobrateupbraid yeproach,lay inthe
[LE cd, or twit in the teeth 5 alfo, to nickname, or
miftal, © 451 ;

Lnpropre :com, Vnproper,unapt,vafit, not feat ; uns
Tent roi


.


mains. 3 =. oss} Improprement. Improperly, vnaptly, unfitly vi featly;
; Impo ition defrancs fiefs.4n impofition or fine ims inconueniently. hd one ï ASE
; tea Rouricrson vers Improvifte. ‘AT im,as*‘AP iniprouveu, :


ouveu, = À
Improuveu : m.euë :f. Vnpronided for, valookea for,


ed by way 0, enable aR
man, to bold a purchafed fief, The ra
viz: fx yeres U vabeeded,vnthought vpon.


cer


me ing; and three yeares va | ‘AP improuyeu. seddenly,at unawaret, before it
La: pace eee = ; Of aa ma tek ROLE
and fet dovwne by the Officers equers | Imprudemment. Imprudently,incircum|peety,impro>
+ Impofition foraine, Is Paris but 6 4.) : non eme + a 4
5 y Se + 4 | ZX iy “ Y = : oi


_ within ; alfo,abfolutely, utterly inde finitely. '
Tacogneu: m. euë: À Vakgsowne, vikend, uncouth,
ange ; ere fife ibe
UTILE : f. Facolumitie, fafetie,bealthfullneffe. ©
Incombuftiblé : com. incombuflible,not Kye sk
Incommendable: com, Difcommendable. , ra
Tncommenturable: com. Vnmeafitrable. >
Incommefurable: com. The fame; orsnot tobe meafu-
_ red by one.and the [ame meafure,
icommode: com. Incommodious ; vngainefüll, vn-
profitable; dommageous, hurtfiull, noifome, bindering;
, alfe,unfit unten ,vunfeemelie,vnfeajonable,
In ement. 1rcommodioufly,vngainefully,va-
profitably; noifomely, burt filly, unto oncs binderance;
ef viii, vafeafonably ; vabandfomely, ill fauou-


LA CRE >

Tncommoder. To incommodate, binder, trouble, im.
peach, diflurbe , difeafe ; breed barme, bring fe:
vla.»

Incommodité: £ Incommoditie, hinderance, trouble,
© difturbance; dammage, difpleafüre, lofe, burt; incon--
meniencie ; unaptne|e vnfitne/fe, unfeafonableneffe.
Tcomumuable:com.lmmutablevnalterable,vachange.

able,
Tncomnune : com. Yacommon ; or, not common,
Incommunicable : com. Pacommunicable, inconuer=

Sibleyncompanable ; bar{b,churlifh foward. ;
Incommutable. as Incommuable.
Incomparable: com. incomparablematchleffe,with-
à out peere,

compatibilité: £ Incompatibilitie, iarring difagr ce-


’ Incompatible:gom. Incompatible jarring difugeecing,
not induring one another. ? i;


Inc ¢; £. Incompetencic ; unfifficiencie, un |
ftmelfes Fa: 3 Be


Incompetent: Incompetent ; unfit; unfufficient,

Tneoinprehenhbilice :f. Incomprebenfiblenefe, un-
concemeablenel{e,innumerableneffe. ;

Inconjprehenfible: com, Incomprebenfible, uncon-
ceiueable,vaftin fini :


finite,
Tcongeble: com, Vacongealeable,not to be congea-
led,


‘Inceffamment. Iucefiatly, continually, without any.
"| manner of intermiffion, : AT ER
Inceffible: com. Vaceaffable,unendable vndetermings


(A < ‘ So, = So

Inceffion:f. A pace, gate,or going ; alfo,a bot-batb for
the lower parts of the belly, hee

Iacefte: m. Inceft; cernall copulation with one thats
neere of kinne = >

Inceftuéux: m. cule: € Incefluons ; fall of, begotten

in, polluted withincef, 7 +

Incidemnent. Incidently ; by chaunce, by accafion, by
the way,upon the by. er à

Incident: m. 42 incident, circumfance, or by-matter;
4 thing which comes indirectly into & fait, or queftion;
or (being not properly of the fubflance thereof) a--
ries from it collaterally, or fide-vife ; in Law, a
finall controuerfie- fpringing from, or depending on,
the maine faite (or as originally;) alfo, a chaunce,
accident, cafualtie ; alfo, a fhifi, fleight, emafion, ex:
cafe, F À
Par incident. Vpox occafion ; by meere chance.

Incineration: f. A reducing,or burning vato afhes,
ncircongis. Vacircumcifed.

Incis: m.. A rocke,or bard ground; cut to gine paffage

|, vatoa Spring; (a Law-tearme.) ;

cie ? m, ée:f Cut into; flit, launced; granen, in-
_tayled. ; .

Incifer. To cut into,to make an incifion ; to launce,open,
Siityalfo,to carué, graue,intayle.

Incifif: vx lue: f, Cutting, launcing, opening, incifion.


ng, |
ne 4s iacifion, or in-cutting ; a launcing,ope=
_ ning ; intayling. ae : :
| Incifoires: mm. The Sfonre fore-teeth, wherewith we bite,
or cut,our meat. _ : ee
Tncitant:m. (Subftant.) as Incitateur..
| Incitant. (Particip.) Jeciting urging, flirring up.
Jacitateur: m. An iacitersor flirrer up ; a pronoker,egs
» gér,vrger. KA 4
Incitation : f. Aa incitation, infligation, prowocation ;
| Stirring up; an incenfing, egging, vrging ; iucoura.


ET à aoe gt
| Incitéi m. ée: € Incited, infligated, or firred up; vr-


ged,egged,incen{ed,pronoked ; incouraged,
Tncitement: m. An inciting,or incitement.


Incongruéscom. Incongruouss wmagrécing ; abjird,
: ill-fauoured, unfit, againft forme, agam|t rule.
| Tnciter, Toincite,infligatesor flirve vp ; toege,urge,pro- | Pons +f, Incongrnitie ; vufitne(]e, i fauoured:
hoe ; incenfe ; mcour, gs be nelje; abfuraut ae
ON c:f. Vaciuill; barbarous; uncourteous; \Inconfi Crantes Inconfideré, | De 0 |
ill-nur tlie clovonifh chur li | Inconfderation: £ Inconfideration, indifretion, va-
qe DE rafmele Le an i, oy
low nift : neonfideré:m.ée: devateunaduifed,unr

Ince; barbereefes race, | gard rayindiorecn ee eee

ire conne churlifbnelfe 5 anmannerli- | Inconfideréement, incon fiderabely, emaduifedly, om-
- fefle; alfo,want of a cum caufe,or ebiech, : SE OR eas.
nee 2 qu = barpenelfé, aufie. rs le: com, 12 ple, uncomfortable ; not
itie, feueritie, fellneffe, mercilefnelfe, want of pities ‘to be ap Us) mn CO
Émis ire mange. à e "led 8 sig. ge ent. Vacomfertably, i a defferate tas
Inconftamment.. Inconflantiy emfledfitly, mutably, |


AE rs ee |


0. ea


or leaning towards ; dif


Taconftan ke, flitting, light,
able changeable ge
nfur :com, V7 > eucrlafting,


od: | Tadoncamninkem Beit 7eGitiendtldsmpabenche|
~ walpotted, ES : di). ROLE ri
te ‘janie = a io we + : EE


«7


INC

Inconteftable : com, Not to be contefed,or flood on.

Incontinemmment. Incontinently, unchaflly; diforde-
redly, un{layedly, immoderately, without any gouern-
ment of bimfelfe.

Incontinence: f. Incontinence ation ; an Vn-
spittin appetite unio the fattsfattion of lft, or  luffll
affections,

} Incontinent, 7acontinent,immoderate, vachaf}, of an
vabridled appetite,looffe of life.

Incontinent. (Adverb.) Incontinently,inflantiy,imme-
diatly, prefently, fuddainelp, forthwithsout of band, as
foone as may be,

Inconvenable: com. - fnconwenient, improper unfit.
ting, misbecomming.

Inconvenance: fe À misbecomming;unbandfomencel[e,
wnfitne(fe unfeemelineffeunbefeeming.

Inconvenient: m, Aa inconuenience, or unfit thing;
alfosa mis fortune mifchie femifbap.

Inconvenient. 4s Inconvenable,

Incornififhbuler. To plodor dunce upon s tobeat the
braines about.

Incorporant, Incorporating; ioyning imone bodie.

Incorporé: m.
duced vato,or iayned in,one bodie,

 dnconpana im, elle; f . Uacorporall,bodite(fe,without
a bode,

-Inco To incorporate sto make one of one bo-
die; to ioyne together.

Tncorreét: m, Cte: f. Incorrett, faultie corrupt.

Incorreétement. Jacorrettly, faultily corruptly.

Tncorr n: f. A fault, error,tbing not corrected,

Jucorrigible: com. Incorrigible, En cod vHA-
mendable.

Incorrompable: com. 7’ncorruptable ; not to be cor-
yapted fiduced,or woon,by gifts crc.

Eber com. Incorruptible, ewerlafling, cter-


Some able: com. luculpable,unreproucable, perfect,
faultleffe,blameleffe,
Tncraffer, To imcraffate,thicken,or make thicke.)
Incredible : com. Incredibée unbeleeuable.
ediblement. Incredibly, paft beliefe,
ang : com, Fneredulons; vabelecuing,or | bard |


beliefe mae
Tncredié :f, Fncredulte, onbelning, lacke of be-
4 La es f. An Lo reste pad HU À
Increpé: mé? £ Chi


blamed ; accufed,
Ral dot rere 3 46:


| Ancriflation re Frère
Tics fe
sf ne


sb or cruinefes


ée: f. Inc ti with; ve
orporated,imbodied with ; LE cee


or beaten into; RS repeated, urged often,

Inculquer. T0 inculcate ; to thruft, prefje, or beat
Sircibly into; alfo, to repeat, or urge one thing verie
often,

ogo rsa com. Jncurableunbealeable,in a defperate

ate, .

Incurie: £. Carelefnelfe, retchlefnefe, negligence, im=
prouidence.

Jacwieufement. Vacuriouf}, plainely, soba


Incuriofité: f. Plainenefe, vnaffeétation,bluntnepe,

Incurrir. Toincurre; Looke Encourir,

Incurfion: £. An inewrfion, mrode, forray,inuafit fom,
agateur: m. A diligent fearcber,

Indague : com. Disbonefi, veworthie, a bafe,


vile.
Indalgos. 4 Gentleman. qRab,
amnifé: m. ée:£, Indemnified, faued rares
: er. Lo deneifiss difcharge, or faue harme-
ee. è


Indannifer. ainda
Indar: m. A Turkie Cocke.
Indé: m, Indico; light + HP
the indies.
D'Inde. 4 Turkie Henne.
Coq d'Inde. A Turkie Cocke.
Fourmi d'Inde. The Fndian Ant ; a beaft thats as
\ big as awolfe.
Fucille d'Inde. Looke Fucille. ~
decemment. Vrdecenty;eubandfimel,;zncometily;
unfitly, inconueniently.
Indecent. Vndecent,wnfeemelievncomclic;unfit,incon=
uenient,vnmect,
Indecentement. as Indecemment.
Indecis: m. ife: f. Vndecided;vndetermined not clec~
red, remaining yet in the decke,
Indecifion: & An vndecifions a doubtful, vadetermi-
ned or uncleered fiate of things.
Indecifions. Are,inan orne parties quine
font iugées, & decidées definitivemenr,
crotable: com. Abvaies durtie, cuer dagled ; or,
fo durtie as it will neucr be made cleane.
lefatigable: com. Jndefarigable, vmveariable, va
tirable,not to be toyled ont.
nine ne yi borne, or going within


Tr dete: pee Iaadelibie caefastableyenraxeable
that cannot be a will neuer weare,out.
Indeleble. as Indele
Indemneé: m. ée: f. pre ve à
Deniers indemnez. About which no coft is beflow-
ed, no paines imployed, which come in cleere to the À


aes! : com. Harmelefe;cleered of all domage, ex-
empt from burt,or barme. >

Indemnife :m.ée : f do er nm ad (-

. med barmeleBe; exemptedsor freed from barme.

Indemnifer. To Éxrprasrenk ge faste.


5 to exemplsor free, iz
é:f. 5 idin 5
ndemnite: co. Garton of demmace ef


à ‘De t mnité, The fine due unto
| Landlords for. ance purchafed by, or oa
stir posts fe ce tht
the purchafe, or Loft of ther
wis eee re oa a fr

part: evnio d
at es bat purchafes bis


» freedome Fiber ers alfo,as Droi& de For-


mariage.
Indetermnings :m.€e:f, Vadeterminedsondecided,
Indeu: m. euëf£ Vadue:; wrongfult; cai unfit,
Bev. vatimelie,onfeafonable,
devidable: com. Vinwindable;unreelable,


Intdemseion: f. Lacke of deuotion, want of affection;
yh ne scareleffe regard of.

n On: f. The. Marke wvbereby a Surgeon isdirec-
sted unto the remedie that will beft fit bis Patientsalfo,
a commending,or prizing of falewares.

Indice: m. An fadex, bands marke, fiene; Ps: 3
plaine argument, great prefimption, e
tion,

Indicible: com. Vafpeakablesexpreffeable by words

0 Vajpeakably,umexpreffeablyy. >

ndi
impofed'by authoritie,

Indiéte: m. Ax indiction, impofition, denouncement,,
commaund,appointment.

Indiction: £ A tearme of 5,10, or 15 yeares, vfed by.
the auncient Romanes in their numbring of yearess al»
fo,an impofition,tax,or tallage.

“Indien : m. enne:f. Fadian ; of the Fadies,

© Sel Indien. sugar; Looke Sel.

Indifteremment, indifferently, meanely, tollerably, fa
fo; alfa, agreeably,without any difference.  *

Indifferent. Fadifferentyequall,tolterable, inameane,
betweene both; alfo,agrecing,or not differing,

Indigence: f, Indizence,lacke, penurie,needinelfe #
uertie,want,neceffitie.

Indigent. Indigent, necdie, penurious, necefivon, tac."

I np Prdigeine thas diet nots,

ndigefte: com, ue efleth not ; a
indigelled, onorderlieb-di fol :

Indigeftible: com. Vandi ifeeible ; which che: or
will not be difgelted.

Indigeftion: f, Indifgeftion, want of difeeftion; rude= "


nelle.
Indignation: f. Indignation, wrath, frie, chafing, fa:


Tndigné: m. ée: £. Wroth,wrathful, fuming, much
tonnes , in choler.


vile, bafe.


ment. monde ein aft vile


et merit.


fume ; alfo,tomalice.
Indigneté: €. Indignitie, dira; an Le pu
thie vfage of.
iguer. # Indiquer.


BS : Jadiliverit, Vadiligent,neg Er +
| Hate pre wpe
; clare; alfo,to deteël a 2

Indire. To pablife, denounce declare bi, fmm, pr


ol
dre: m. te: £: Jadirett, not right, finifer, croo-
ked, ane ne — trauers, meaty


| ndifcretement. Yee nee
3 . Prdh, fondly, ref readin. tt


Indevot m. ote: fi Coldly denoted, little affetted. |


m. Cte: f. Denounced,commaundedyappointed, ;


Indivis. Par indivis. By Moats or Individuums, by:


“wapart
| Indocile: com. Indocible,emteacheable, dull, , blockifh,


: com. Vawortbie, vndeferuing, of no mai)


gon ang, ha rin rah put into a |


IND


Vadilercsion, f. Fndifcretion,inconfideration iA,
fe don, & arr acm <

Indifert. Vneloquent ; rude,or ro difcourfe.
difertement. Vaeloquently ; rudely, gropely, harfbly
(in Speech ec.)

Indispos : m, of : f. 2s Indifpofé.

Indispofé:: m. ée: £. Sicklie, Craie, onbealhfil, ill
dispofed,ill at cafe ; alfo, diforderlie, ill-couched, ill-
forted ; sl-fauoured,

Indifpofition : £. Sicklinefe, craxinefe, unbealthfull-
nefse,diftemper ature, indispofition of bodie.
L'indifpofition du temps. Vatemperatenc fe,or un-
Seafènablencfeof weather.

ndiffolu: m.ué: £ HadiBolued.


‘rm oluble: com, Indifoluble,infe perable vdi iPolue-

Indifolublement Indifolubly , infeperably, vndif:
ea

m. te: £ dndifind, vadiftinguifhed, un-


idling:
dinided,confufed, budled.
Indiftinétement. Indifiindtly, confifèd) , budling, on


apes.
Indition: f.4 mumbring,or fhewing of time,or of yeares;
alfo,a marke, figne token,or notice of.
Individu: m. 42 Individuum, or bodie inft perable:
à Moat,
Individu: m. uë : f Vndinideable, infeperable,
Individuité: £. Indiuiduitie, infeperablenepe,
Indivinable: com. Vdiuinable;mo obfcure, not to be
ghefed at.


parts or members undiuidable, *
ao : com: Indinifible,vadinidable, infeperable,


Indviiblement Indinifi bly ondinidably, infeperably,


dunficall, beauie-beaded, grofic-witted’, vmapt to
learne,unfit to be taught.

Indoéte : com. Valearned, vnskilfüull, ignorant.

Indoétement, Valearnedly,igaovantly.

Indoleance: £ No apprebenfion of griefé, no feeling of
Sorrow ; vnfenciblencfse of, or want of fence in, paine.

e: com. VA
ei té: m.ée: f Vatamed, “vnbroken vrrulie,


utr agious..
Indo d' tadon a A Turkic bird, Turkie chickes young
Indubitable: com, Prdoubablesndenbiesf cured,


rtainé.

Radahicablanenns Pade farce,
without all quellion:

Indubicamment eIndubicblemenc.


of foe tna fe ds sis (fon
ees ina (uit) for a cer agreed on by -
pertiey alfi,a Vacation or the feafan wherein a
mee ts not.


Induétion =f. Az induction eatrie,or leading into; alfo,
_ aninducement,allurement,or perfisafion, onto ; alfo, a

BS ew of argument from particularstoummerfalls.
Induétion d'une loy. The application of a Law ; or,

the comparing it with fome other ; alfo, x colletion


made of,or conclufion di avene from,it.
Induément. Vaduely, uniufily , vamectl}, confit,
4 phew rien omen Et proceedings, umwortbie


Induid: ss Induced, led, bronght ins mé,
- perfuaded,allured.


ee PT, ae a PINS


LUN" E JON EL |


Inevitable: com. Inenitable, vnauoidable ; which no
prouidence can put by. sat
Inevitablement. Ineuitably,onauoidably, sobakl) .
Inexcroulable: com. as Inefcroulable. patel À
Inexcufable: com. Vnexcufable.
Inexcufablement. Vnexcufably. ex |

rire m.éc:f. Vnexecuted, vnperformed, un-
one. ;

Tnamoctbles com, Inexorable,vnintreatable,churlifh,
0 ”


ate.

‘plicable: com. Inexplicable, unfouldable, inex-
tricable,vnexpreffable,vndifplayable,vnexpoundabler
Inexpugnable : com. Vnexpugnable impregnable; not À

to be forced,not to be battered. ¢
Inexterminable : com. Vnexterminable ; vabanifha-

ble, not to be caft out ; not to be deftroyed.
Inextinguible: com. Unextinguible, vnquenchable.
Inextricable: com. Inextricable,inexplicable;wbereof
Inf Ble: f nfited ad

:m. Cte: £. Infected ; impoyfoned;corrupted,

mg A eat
Infaicter. To infeét ; impoifon; corrupt.


Infaire.as Infaidter. ,
Infallib ibilité: f. Infallibilitie,or infalliblene(fe;certaine-
tie, affurance.
Infallible; com. Infallible,certaine,affured.
Infalliblement. Infallibly,without faile,. :
Infamé: m.ée : £.Infamed, defamed, difcredited, fha-
meds
Infame:com. Infamous, ignominious, opprobriows, dif-
racefullyreproachfull ; alfoydefamed,detected,tainted,
Loemed.verie il fpoken of. ;
‘Infamément. Jnfimou/ly,ignominien fly opprobrioujy,
reproachfully,di[éraccfully.
Infamer. To infame defame, fhame, traduce, diferedit,
éreproach,difyrace ; to fpeake badly,report vilely,of.
{nfameté : f. A difgrace,difcredit smputation, infamous


veport.
_Infamie: f. Infamie, obloquie,ignominie difbonour adif-
grace,diferedit,reproach; detection: 3 a defamation ; an


imputation.
Infante. L’In. The Title of a daughter of Spaine.
Infanterie: f, The Infanterie,or footmen of an Amie.
Infanticide: com. Child-murthering infant-killing.


Induire. To induce,lead,bring inor vato ; to mone, per-
fuade, allure.
Induire le casd'une loy À vne autre, To Lay,or apply
Law unto Law ; to conferre one Law with another.

Induit. as Induiét.

Indulgemment. 1#du/genthy,t00 mercifully.

Indulgence: f: “Fndulgence tender-bear tedne[fes(ouer-
much) mercic,or gentlenelfe; too mild intreatie, or v-
fage ; too much libertie gimen; hence, a ‘Pardon from
the Pope.

Indulgent. indulgent ; cockering tender-bearted;ouer-
genile, or traëlable; too much libertie-graunting, too
mercifall,too mild. ?

Indulgentieux : m. eufe: £. Full of indulgence.

Indule: m. 4 Pardon of Indulgence ; the Popes Bull,or
Licence, forgiuing or difpenfing with finncs ; remitting
ov permitting offences.

Indult. (Adjeét.) Yong not adultus, not yet of age.
Indultaire : com. One that bath an Indulgence ,or Par-

‘| don.fromthe Pope. - ,

Induftrie: f. 1ndufiries diligence, vigilancie ; attine
carefullne fe ; indeanour ; aptne[fe unto, readineffe in,
any thing. :

s Indutrier. To labour, indeanour, beflirre himfelf ;
make bimfelfe readie in,or apt for,an imployment.

Induftrieufement. Indaftrioufly ; diligently vigilantly,
beedfillyslabniul bit

Induftrieux:m. cule: f Induftrious ; diligent, vigt-
lant 7s jndeauouring ; laborious , païnejul , beedie,
readie, :


3 Œoiétevin.
Inécroulable. as Inefcroulable.
Jneftable: com. Ineffable, unfpeakeable, vnutterable ;,
which no tongue can tell no fhcech deliver, no tearmes


expreffe.
Ineffaçable : com. Vneffaceable,vndefaceable; which
no time nor violence can weare out.
Ineffaceable. The fame.
Incfficace: com, Vaeffettwall, forceleffe, vaine, idle,


weake.
Inefroyable: com. Not to be frighted, feared, appal:


Ineyaleinent. # Inegualement. "1
Inegal: m. ale: £. Vncquall;uneuen; different,ill-mat- |


-_ ching,onlike. Sie Dire . >|, Infantile: com. es Infantin.

In t. Vnequally, vaenenly ; unlikely, on dif. | in: m. ine: f Infantine,childifh; yong,tender,
fearmes, | 1" : Tofatigable : com. as Indefati able.

Ineoualité.as Inequalité. té La éc:f. Gulled,befotted,made foolifh.

Ineloquent. Vneloquent without pis se a Pb fatuer. To gull,befot,make foolifh.

Inenarrable: com. wonderfull, vnfpeakeables unex- | Infaufte: com. Vafertunate, valuchie, unbappie, dif-


cara oy fr fief
nfecond : m. de: f. Vafértill,unfruitfiull. 1
Infecondité: f. Infecunditie, vnfertilne[fe, fruit


© fallneffe.
Infect: m. Cte 1nfeet, infected imfeclions,® . +.
Infecté: m. éc:f. Infééted; poifoned; depraued,cor~


rupted.
Infecter. Toinfeét; poifon, depraue,corrupt. |;
ion: £ Infééhon, contagion. a
Infectionner.as Infe&ter; or,to fill with infection.
Infecundité. Looke Infecondité.
Infeodation: f. 422 6
Infeodé : m. ée +f. ; féifèd'in fees afo,grann~
ted,alienedsor fetled,in fee, oes, $
Difmsinfegdes prion of tythes. *
Rente infeodée. À Rent-charge; a'rent wberewith


land is charged for ener. a.
Inferé: m. ée: f. dnferred, implyed, comet pen
» gs


preffable by any tongue, or tearmes. |" À
Inepte: com. Inept, vnapt; unfeafomables find, idle

valle. — shies ylenr ead 0
Ancpiemenr noi vet alee sc


is
3


I ammable: com.


INF.


I N G


things put;or gathered, together ; fi ed, al-
ledged, since te vade rer > tué ne


Inferer. Toinferr e,imply conclude upon things put,or ge-


pese 5 t0 fignifie, few, alledge, grue to un-


Inferieur:m.re: € nfrior; lower nether; underlings
more bafé,of finaller value, of lee meanes,

Infertile: com. Infértill,onfruit ull.

Infertilité : £. infertilitie,um fruitfillnepe,

Infeftation: f. Fnfeftation,molefation annoyance ,nop-
Somneffe ; alfo,a rauaging,wafting, fpoyline.

pee m.ée:f, nféfled, annoyed, molefied ; raua-


HÉbce To infèfl,annoy, moleft; rauage, wafl, or vex
with frequent,and violent incurfions.


Infeudation: f. Aninfeoffing,


' Tnfeudé: m.ée : f. as Infeodé.


Iufeuder. To inféoffe ; to paffe, or graunt in fee; alfo, to
put,or admit into the poffeffion of an Inheritance.
Inflable: com. Truflleffe,vntrufie, faitbleffe.
Infibulation: € 4 buttoning buckling,or clafping toge-
ther ; alfo,the ringing of the priuie parts.
Inficiation: f. 4 inficiation,di[affirmation denyall.


nfdele: com. Fufidell ; fatblefe, unfaithful, falfe,


difloyall, trecherous.
Infidelité: £ Fnfidelitie, faitblefne(fe, unfaithfillneffe,


difloyaltie,trecherie.


Infiguré: m.ée:f, Infigured, figured ; marked, or no-


ted with a figure.


ni: m. ie: £. Infinite endlefe; innumerable; vnmea-


_ furable,
Infiniement. Infinitely,endlefly.
ité: f. PR sh PR ETS
unmeafurableneffe.
Infinitude: £ as Infiniré.
rmatif: m, iue: £ Jufirmatine; weakening, infee-
bling; difannulling,difallowing,
Infinner, To weaken,infeeble; diffolue; confute ; difan-
null difallow. r Le fick
rinité: f. Fafirmitie, weakenefle, feebleneffe; cra-
xine[fe ; alfo, Er fickne[]e. d ms
nflamable,burneable,
ammation: f Aa inflamation, firing, burning; a
bliflering heat; a kindling,an incenfing.
eye, f. An inflation ; a windie (welling, or puf


, In ec able: com, # Inflexible.


xible: com, Inflexible, vnbowable, vntraëtable,
pee hard-bearted. ?


InfliGtif: m. iue: £ Jnfitine, in fiings or af proper.


nf toinflitt. - sus
uence: f. 4 ping in 3 $ particularly
fluence, or influent courfe, of the Planets; Wp ania
+ tue infufed into, or their courfe working nea Nefttior

creatures, ail
Influer. To flow,yunne enter or finke,into,
Infoliature. Bofeage, or leafe-worke,in caruing eres
Infondre. To infife; to fill im; to putor powre, into;

Inte to fra

ne — c: com, Vaforcible, vnexpugnable, impreg-


ur: m. An Jim, Promooter ; fearcher,


- inquirer, inquifitor.
pe Erin fran Search,


ied


oe seas TE di $
riné: 2 ins sn


rm inquired after;


med, 3


Go gle


Informe: com. Informe,flapele(fe ll-fauoured,fafbion-


FE 3 oughe rude,
« To informe, infirutt, giue notice of; alfo,as ;


S’Informer. To (earch inquire examine,get informa- |
tion of make inquifition after.
nfortiat:m One of the three Volumes of the Pandc&s.

Infortune: f Misfortune, mifaduenture, mifbap, mif-
chance,calamitie ; a difafier.

Infortuné : m be: £. Vnfortunate;vnbappie vnluckie,
fuccefile esdiafr ous.

Infortunéinent. Vafortunately, unbappily, valuckily,
Be: le(ly,difafferoufly.
Infraéteur : m, Az infringer violater,breaker of.

ion: f as Infraéture

ar = e: f An rer ted infringement, violation,
reac

inte com. Infrangible, unbreakable; inuinci-


Infrafqué: m.ée : f. Intricated,peftered,intangled.

Infrafquer. To intricate, pefler, intangle; alfo, to feed
with vaine hopes, to fet in or fetch over.

nti f. Vafiequencie, folitarineffe, a {mall
affemblie. .

Infrequent. Vafrequent, feldome haunting little refor-
ting to,much abfent from; alfo,unfrequented,
uctueufeinent. Fruitle/ly,unfruitfilly.

Infruétueux:m.eufe: f, Fruitleffe vnfiuit full barren,
flerill, unprofitable,

ae + 7 = £, Jufisfed, filled in, powred into,or vpon;


ee
Infulee Pohl fillin, povore upon ; alfo,to flecpe.
Infufion : £. Az infufion; powring, or filling in; and (in
~ Phificke) a conueyance of fome liquid medicine into
the bodie by Clifter, or other inftrument ; alfo, a flee-
ping of drugs, oc, in a conuenient liquor ; alfo, the
liquor wherein they baue beene fo fleeped.
Ingambé: mée: ? right-legd,pimble-beeled fap run
Pile fot.
Ingargouillat: m, The croffe point (in dauncing.)
Ingenier. Tobend bis wits unto, or beat bis braines a-
bout, the deuifing of a thing.
enieur: m. Aa Engiaer,Engine-maker ; Fortifier.
Ingenieufement. Jagenioufly, wittily, with good in-
uention. >
Ingenieux: Sea pe
Ingenieux : m. eufe:f. Ingenious, wittie, inuentine,
ed, nimble-headed. k
Ingeniofité : £. Ingenio, fie ingenionfuelesquicknee of
muention,dexteritie o;
Ingenué : com. à RÉ PER free, liberall, tS
nobly affected.
enuement. Ingenaonly ; uly; frank), freely, iberally,
with an open heart and band.
In enuité: f. Ingenuitie, Fc à s whe “|
Franke ia Lab ie of bumor ; an open, bone
Ingeré: m.ée: f. eae in, paper endear ta- |
ken upon; intruded, infinuated ; put forth,
ge To thruft ia, put on, offer or ce forth, hs


ife(undefired) to ee elfe Ve into take
rates”
ea pret ae £m mss bale, our
atti ake: Pagel bake tb x
Ingrat: m.ate: Ge,vathan
HT of. eae receimed,
wes £. Ingratitude, vagratefülnefse urthank-


de m.ée: ER à ae :


INI)


Ingraver. Toingrane,or intaile. cannot be followed. 2;
Ingredient: m. An fneredient ; a beginning, or en- | Animitié: f, Enmitie, boflltie, batred, find rife a. we
Ÿ france; alfo (in Phificke) a Simple putintoacompound.| cord,variance, i
medicine, or vfed, among otbers, in the making Injonétion : f. An Jnixinétion, or. - ferbidding’s Fm. à
thereof. maund importing an abjolution,imbibitica, or fay of
Ingweestané: m, éc:f. Vguerdoned,unrecompen- | _ proceeding.
ced, ‘ Tnique : com. Vnequall, onindifferent, partial, wrong, :
Ingueriffable: com, Incurable,vnbealable. wniuft; vreafonable ; unvighteons, naugbtie, wicked, |


Inguine: m. The gryne,or groïne. }
Iniquement. Vnequally, uniufily, wrong filly partially;


Ingurgité: m.ée: f. Ingulfed ; sfivilledor fooallomed im;
greedily devoured. rater without caufe ; 3 vumighteen Dorickedh,
impiouf}.


Ingurgiter. To ingulfe ; to fwill, or féélpis ; alfo, to
Iniquité: f. Iniquitie; inequalitie, iminfiice wwrenb,par- |


yauine,or deuoure greedily.
Inhabile: com, Vnable,vnfisfficient ; weakes unfit,un- tialitie ; 5 vareajonablenefie ; vnrighteoufnelfe, naugh-
tng impietegickene,


weet for ; vmweldie, uneafie, unbandfime ; idle ; fot- |
Initié : m. ée: £ Initiated entered into, begun in; ad-


tifh.
Inhabilement. nably, unfufficiently, weakely; on« | - mitted of.
weldily, vneafily, vnbandfomely ; unaptly, unfitly; fot- | Initier. To initiate,enter into,beginin; gine the fuft in


tile. . Sfiruétion, lay a ground or foundation for ; gine orders
Tahsbilitation: f. A difablin * ; for g


unto; licencexor admit of, a focietie. $
Inhabilité : €. Difabilitie jnfuf} iffciencie wéaheneffs vs Injure: f, Fnsurie, wrong mififage, an abufe,or affront
Seach mate, wrmeldinee; fottifonelfe,want of offered’ 34 trekpapleydifpleafiresoffence dcfpight,or ont- ;
braines. rage one.
Inhabilité : m. ée : € Difbled madevnable, Injurié: m. ée : £. Faiured, wronged, mifufed,abu,
Inhabilitement: m. A difabling. outraged , mifcalled,reproached,reniled me fey
Inhabiliter. To difable; to make unable... >


Injurier. To wrong, iniure, mifufe, abufe ; burt, offend;
Inhabitable: com. Vababitable; Mrs e;wbich outrage ; mifeall,reproach,renile,zayle à “mo af
cannot be abid in,or dwelt on; itable.


rieur: m, 42 ininter, a wronger.
‘Inhabité : m. ée: f Vababiteds a , inbabited, Injurieufement, Iniurioufly, wrong filly, fence
Inhabiter. To inhabit refide, or dwell on.


outragioufly, per, reproachfilly contumelion
itué: m.ée: f. Wnaccuflomed, vnenured unto; | Injurieux: m. Iniurious ; 5 wrong fil, pr


IN H


{stein


difufed from. chert muse’ despight, h. contumelious, re- |
Inherence : £ An inberence ; a cleaning, flicking, à iny- oe pe Ps .
ning clofe in;or vato, njurieux en tripiere. Foule-mouthed like a Tripe- ,


nhibé: m. ée: f. Jubibited, forbidden, bindered,
witbbeld.

Inhiber, To imbibit, forbid; “Ray, flop,or witbbold.

Inhibition : £ An inbsbition, firbidding ; counter-


wife.

Jnjufte : com. Vninft, partial, vnequall, iviurious,
wrongfull, vareafonable.

Injuftement.. Vainfily, partial equal nie


maund, (tep, witbbolding, ei he Pare onab
Inhonnelte: com, . Dishoneft , unhoneft» naughtie, Lane Ininflice, partialitie, wrong, bard mea-
Inhonneltement. Dishonfily,unbonsfly, naughtily, RE et com. Innanigable that cannot be fay-


‘Inné: m.ée: Eipondans Wiener bred in:


lewd y
able: Vi bofpitable, barbourlefe ; chur-
Tohofpitable: com. Pa oe ‘Innoceminent, Fanocent ull, faltlefy barmes


Lifh; no lodger of paSengers; no intertaiver of flran- |


ers, no boule eeper. | defiy, filluly,wwithout any offence.
pinnae Haine: £ Job on bpaillaghfenie- I: ens f iniocencie, guiltlefrefe, unguiltinefe,
ousjonciuill 3 beaftliecruell,rude; barbstom, | —. “hat melefneBe,integritie, fillinefe. :
Inhumainement.tabumanely, wteoufly, | — Innocence porte {a defenfe : Pro. Innocence beares
“unciuilly 5 beaflly cruelly, rudely,barb L itowne defence.  ?


Innocent. Innocent Ninmie (a proper name for aman) |
: whence;
Herbe des. Innocent. Centinodie Bloudspertmale
Kyot-graffe,Birds-tongue, Swines-grafe.
Innocent. Innocent, fausltlelfe , guittleffe , barmelefi,
without offence. 4
Le Le ini ses Childermas day in «Chrif-


Parchemin innocent. Parchment made “a an aber- ù
tine skinnñes ï
Donner les Innocens. asInnocenter. ___

Innocenter. 10 ok bg La à (on Childermas,or

Innocents, day ; ; when the Papifis of France bane a

merrie cuflome, to ierke all fuch as they can find in

bed, ov others wobofe breech they may olberife ef


Inhumanité: f. Inhumanitie culte,
mé ma


| humation : f. A beri an
; img: € ee: rhs put inte the
. to burie, interre, lay in a graue, put into the


tr an By S John (a childifh Oatb; sme en
idoin Hesse 0


IN Q


of money,and land ginen onely fo land. \

Innovateur: m. An ianonator ; a bringer in. of new

cuftomes ge. : SE 1 À

| Innovation: & Innouation; alteration, change of old,
for new, fafhions, "Nr

Innové : m.ée: À Ianonated; altered from old unto


new, : pi
Innover. To innonate ; alter changes bring up new
tomes, bring in ape ene
-Innumerable : com. lanumerable,ungumberable.
Jnbumerablement.lzaumerably,enaumberably.
‘| Innumerablete: €. Janumerablenepe, à
Inobedieñce:f Difcbedience, lake of obedience. :
Taches Dijobedient , wnobedient, wanting obe-
tence, : QUI
Inoffencible: com, Inoffencible,not to beburt..
Tnofficieux: m.cufe: € Viofficions, unabferuant,vn-
feruiccable wnrefpett fill enkind,
Inofficiofité: € Vaofficioufnelfe, vnre{pectinencfe, or
want of due refpect ; whence, Querelle d'inoff.. A
fût commenced by Ovpbans, cc; whofe parents bane,
by their wills, ciuen from them all they had, or giuen


was due vnto them ; as where a man bequeathes all or

the mofl part of, his eflate unto bis children by aféecond

era thofe he had by a former wifé though

0 they be as taward,and well-deferning,as the otbers,

| Tnondation: f. An inundation, deluge, ouer flowing,

4. frroundinz. : y

nondé: m.ée : f. Over flowne, furrounded overwhel-

med with water.

|: Inonder: To ouer flow ; overobelme, furround.-
Inopic: f. Lacke, necd, want, {carcitie, penurie, po-

herlie, i \ .

Inopiné: me: € Zathought of fuddaine,vnawares.

Inopinement. On a fieddaine at unawares, faoner then


‘he was thought ere it was looked for. :
"0 = Inquaht:m, The place wherein things are fold by Out-
be 00, Ÿ rope,or Outcry. :


Droit @ingquant. Fixe in the hundred due unto the
King (vpon things fold by Outrope) in fome parts of
Provence. 5

Inquanter.To fell, or paffe away at an Outcry.

Inquietation : f. À d'fquieting, diflurbing, difeafing,
vexing molefling, troubling.

Inquieté: m. €e: fo Difquieted, difeafed ; vexed, an-
noyed, moleed ; difturbed, troubled; alfo, bufies reft-

À © defestr (ARENA |

4 Inquietement. Vrquieily, refllefystroublefomely.
Taquievee, To difquiet, diftafe, 23240 diflurbe; vex,

| moleft, annoy ; gine finall eafe,or little refi vrto.

Inquieteur: m. 4 difquieter, troubler; difurber, an-
noper,vexcrmolefter. Cities ET ENERE

Inquictude: f. Difquiet,vngnietneffe, trouble, molefa-
tion,onref?, carke,difeafes ; +


Inquilin ?m.4 Tenant; Lodger; ae ea ae b


or dwells ina houfe(or part of a bonfe)w
he nor bis annceflors were borne. . Se
Inquifiteur:m. Am Inquifitor, firiét ad feucte


examiner ; one of the Holie houfe., or Spanifh: Inqui-

ifition, YE SNR A: |
Inquifition : f. Awinquifition; diligent fearch, or in-

quirie, ftriCt examin i sas seratt)

à Inraciñable : com. which cannot be rooted which will
rotin à:
11, x | Infail: m The R terne of a Ship.qRab. : ;:
» , .*  FInflubre:com. Dhs Pr ; infedline, |

4 k corrupt poyfome, = gaye. |


them lee then by culiome,and the right of their birth, |


INS


Infalubrieé : £ Habeclhfilinefe,cmbolefomene(fescor-


; ruption,in fection,
fatiabilité: f. Fnfatietie, unfatiablenefe,


iable : com. Infètiate,vnfatiable,vnfilable ; raue-


s,glütionous that neuer bath enongh,
Inf ement. Infatiately,vnfatiably,


Infatiableté: f. Infatietic unfatiablenefre ; Sreedineffe,


gluttonierauenoufnefe.


Infceu, à Pinfceu de luy. Vawittingly ro bim ; where.


with he was neuer made acquained.


Infciemment. Vamittingl} jnorantly,unskilfially, vn-


knowingly, for want of knowledge.


Infcience: f Vaskilfiline fe,ignorance,ant of know-


ledge.
Infcophié. Looke Infcrophié,
Infttipt: m. ipt
taued, pourtrayed, printed in.


Infcription : f.4n in/cription, /uperfiription,title,note,


marke (written.or ingrauen.)


Infcri tionen faux, A challenge Of,0r exception a-
gaiaft,che truth of an Euidence; a te/imonie, or vn-


dertaking to proue it falfeentred in Court.

Infcrige. To infcribesintitlestitle,write insor wpon 5 allo,
10 grane, print or pourtray upon.

+ SInferire à faux, ou en faux, contre 5 To enter a
challenge againft ; or,as in Faux,

— asInfcript,

Infcrophic. Cheueux infcrophiez. Haire turned vp
after the neateff manner. qRab.

Infcrutable : com. Jnftrutable, vnfearchable; bot-
tomeleBe; mifticall; not to be founded; no way to be
fought out. .

Infculpé: m. ée: f. Infeulped,iagraued,intayled.

Infculper. To infeulpe,ingiaueintayle,

Infeétable : com. Nor to be’ cut ; not to be dini-


ea. :

Infecte:m. An Infett; à finall flefbleffe, and bloud-
lefe vermine, es cs yo sb
head, bodie, and bellie,as an Ant, Fly, Bec, ec ; vnt=
der which, the Earthworme, Caterpiller, ec, be alfo
comprebended,

Infectible : com. Infeétible ; or,as InfeGable.


Infenfé: m. ée : f. Mad,wood,raging, fivious; unreaft-


nable witlefe,


Infenfible: cont, Infenfible, fenceleffe,vnfeeling ; alfo,


unpalpableunfeelable,


Infenfbilité : € Sencelefnelfe; vnféncibleneffe.
ge :m. com. Infeperablevndiuidable,
Infepera

Inferé: m. ée : f. fnferted; ingraffed ; fet, put, en-


lement. Inféperably,


tred,or brought in; added, or ioyned vnto ; mixed, or
mingled with. eT Lm deca <


Inferer. To infert; ingraffes fet, put, entersor bring ia;


add,or ioyne unto ; mix,or mingle wit


wi
Infidiation: f. Guilestrecherie deceit fullnee; a lying
mers» Loire ef (Here tifing ofwyles, to F


deceine witball.


Infidieux: m, eufe: €. Deceitfull,trecherous,infnaring,


intrapping,lying in wait for.


Infigne: m. asEnfeigne. :
Infigne: com. Notable, notorious ; famous yenowmed;


apparant, goodlieof marke.


Tnfimulé: m, ée: f. Accufed of charged with. — .

Infinuation:f. Aninfinuation ; alfo,a regiftring,or en

ie tig Sem 4 0 Sp

LR en ; isa geen
to; or clofely mcroache : alfo, | ‘into

<a Reeillersar Office book. 5 : Vire,


if
In


efinuated; crept,wound,or ftolae in


: £ Fajcribed, intituled, written on;


i” : 5 a
Pepe a. NF) Oe ee er oe


ctwecne the À


daa) ie}


‘DN: sé


q £ * s
AZ ee
RE ee TT =
tan?
INS


Iffiouer.re enter; to regifler; or, to enter into a Regi-
fler, or Office-baoke, or (as a French Lewpenilefiribes
it) publier, & notifier par Aéte ac le Iuge,

. qui ordonne en eftre faiét Regi
S'Infinueren. To infinuate; Aone, wind, fleale,
conuey, himfelfe into ; gently to intrude lof) Lo =
. . Croachpon,

Infipide : com. Vafauerie, fmackleffe,wallowifh,with-
out relifh; aljo, weake of indgement, or in difcourfe,
fond, undifcreet.

lof ipidité : f. Jafipiditie, wallowifbnel[e, vnfauouri
neffe, dullaeffe in taft, want of fmacke; alfo, fond-
neffe, indiféretion, weakenel]e of indgement, or in dif
courfe.

Infipience: £ Dotage,indiftretion,fottifimelfe ideotifme,
denorance.

Inftpient. Sottifh,doting,witleffe,undifcrect, foolifh,ig~
norant,

+ | Infifter. To injif on; to urge hard, fiand much upon, a
matter; to labour, follicite, purfie eagerly, be earneft
with,or Upon ; alfo, to reft, perfijt, abide faft, continue

rmely,

Infociable: com, Vafiiabl;vncompanable inconerf
bleincompatible,

Infolation: £ 4 Punning ; a fettingor laying open, in
the Sunne.

Infolemment. In/ileatly,malapertly, faweily, prefump-

¥ tuaufly, arrogantly,

| Infolence: £. Jafolencie, Drwinege,malapertefpre-

fs fiunption, arrogance. *

Idfolent: m.te: ‘3 Sefer, malapert, fawcie,presump-
tuous, arvogan


A com, Pale, rnfound loofie, weake, fee.


Le es s Obligations du defuné font infolides contre
tous les héritiers ; viz. All the beires ave not lyable
unto them; (yet may the Creditor addreffe bimfelfe un-


Æ to any one of them.

ee Infolidement. Uafoundly, vuflidely, weakely, feebly ;
ee Erk ull gi the whole.
4 = lite: com. as unufed , vaaccuftomed , Un
% re


ve m. ue: f. Vapayed, ondifeharged , vnde-


rh able: :com. ps tobe payed i,
unaptor unable to


aa ae com. “Gufsluble, indifoluble , snd


InfpeCteur: M, An inipestor, ouer, controller; PA
: “had arr) es or pris i mens beba-
Ines £. An inSpetlion; pprculation oer fecng ;


Fees qe 1g into; viewing, or
nf + € Vnhoped fors Su


I Pergme
I e t line erément. _


sean = :
ieonfieadine à
Da ie pwanering variablen


… faftion, traine ep ;
| orne


le dfafil
wet > inftallation,pr infallings the feting


af an : Officer.
i me m, ée:f Loftalleds fetled,cfablfbed, placed |
un Te inflall ; to fête, chlablifh, place furely


Hamment. Fnfiantly ; earnefily, urgently, import
nately; diligently,incefontly.
Inft ftance: f. Infiance, cérnelnefé,vrsencie;im port.
“tiescontinuall diligence ; alfo (in Law) a canfe,or point
in acaufé,contefied,


a9 ree inftance. At frfi, of the firft Prarte,


: , or in the firft degrec, before all other


Faire ; nant fur. To wge vehemently, to fase
much upon.
Faire l'inftance. C’ef, debatre la chofe,
Toile : :m, An inflant, point, moment.
Inftauration: f. An inflauration ; reficring, renewing,
repairing, reedifying.
uré : m, ée: f. Reflored, renewed, repaired, ve-
edified.
ee To reflore, renew, reforme; reedifie, re


Inftigateut: m, An infligator; firrer,i satis orger, |
- egger es Sani rien forward; In Law, Se prend |
Es ement,& pour celuy qui feulemét fe plaind


ns fe rendre partie ; & pour celuy qui inftruiét P |


accufation,donnant des preuves, & pourfuyvane. I
_ inftruétion du procez.

Inftigation: f. An inffigation, flirring, inciting, vr- |
goes 3 4 pricke, fpurre, prouocation , firong Nr

Infligué: m. ée: f. Infligated,incited,erged, :

Inftiguer. To infligate incite, flinre,urge,cge,/purre on, |
pricke forward.

Inftillation: f. 4a inftillation ; a gentle infifion ; a
letting or falling,in drop by drop: 34 patting parring |
in by little and little,

Inftiller, To drop, will, drizle; _gently to inforce ; toler,
or fall,in drop drop; to put in, or Free on by little |
and little.

Inftin@: m. x inflin®, or inclination ; an in- |
_ Slirring, motion, or perfuafion ; an infra.
ti

Taftinés m.ée: fi Inflituted, enaëted, ordained. deja %

appointed, brought in, fet up
icr, To inflitute, enaél, pea decree, eftablifh, |
appoint ; bring in,begin, fet up. 4
Inftituraire. (4 Title of the FR luftinian,wbo |


yorit the Inflitutes of the Ciuill Law.) 24
Inftitute : m. luftinians Booke of Inflitutes. . ©


\Inftitution: f. An Injlitution; Precept, Ordinance, | — ss


Decree, Statute, Eftabli ment ; an er daining appoin
ting, fetting vp,or bringing im.

nftruétion : f. Aminfiredlion, dirctlion , document, |
precept ; caueat ; memoriall, remembrance 3 alfo,
inflruéiton , teaching , tutoring, ordering, — <


sma £ as Infhu@tion.


ds Inftruire.
Tnftruict: fim gt: à rie taught, tales di


reéled ; ] fornifoed, we AR: ‘allo,
Sib ornea,


bs Prose sib: ACanfe madereedi for bea- |


Infidels To teachstutor, inflrudt 5 ferewarne, dr is
3 farnifh with matter 5 roms


*


.


Qriginél from
fae OHIOSTATE-UNIVERSITY


ae


I NT:


4 Hearing. ,
Inftruifable: com. Fuftructable,teachable,docible.
Jnftgument: m. 42 Infirument ; Implement, Engine,
Toole ; alfd, a Deed, Euidence, Conueyance; an Infor-
oh, ke vuction, in writing; alfo, a meane, aid,


ina matter.
ale: £, Infirumentall, ufed as an In-
flrument, applyéd as a meanes. :

Inftrumenter. Fa dhatpsantd ingrolfe an Inftrument,Con-
ucyance Euidences«*

Inftrumentier: m. 4 certaine Vine-deuouring ver-
mine, fo caked,becaufe it makes the Vine leafe(where-
init vfually wraps it (eife) looke like to a rowle of
Parchement.

Infuave : com, Vnfiveet,vapleafant.

Infubftantiel: m.elle : £ Vafubflantiall; light, idle,
vaine.

Infuffifamment. Infiefficiently.

yoga f. Infiefficiencie difabilitie,weakeneffe,vn-

nelle. pated
Infuffifant. Infufficient,onable; weake,unfit.

À Infulain: m. Aa Iander,or 1land-man.

Infulaire : com. Infislar,land-like ; of, or belonging to,
an Iland,

Tolule: m. 42 affault, affront, branado, open wrong,

ulter. To infilt, crow, vaunt, or triumph ouer 3 to
wrong, reproach, affront; contemne ; alfo, to rebound,
rejoice at,leape for iay.

Infuperable : com. Infuperable, vmvanquifhable, in.


uincible,
Anfiipportable: com, Vnfupportable, intolerable, not
to be borne.
Infurger. To rife up againff, or oppofe bimfelfe vato ;
also, to trauell earnefily, mainely to inforce bim-


Self.
EME RS com. Vnfurmountable,vnexceedable,
unfierpafjable,uavanquifhable.
Infuyvre. To purfue, or follow bard upon.
Intariflable: com. Not to be withered,or dryed up. .
Integralité: f. lategralitie,wholeneffe.
Integré; m. ée : f. Futegrated, perfetied, made
whole.


Tntegrité: £ Integritie, foundneffe ; boneflie, finceritie,
innocencie,uprightne[fe.

Intellect: m. The intelleët ; the vertue, or facul-
tie, of underftanding ; alfo, underftanding , appre-
benfion , capacitie ; indgement , knowledge, diftre-


tion,

Intelle&tuel: m.clle: f. Intellectuall apprebenfineun-
derflanding. °

Intelligence: f. Vnderflanding , apprebenfion, capa-
citie, conceit, fence, diftretion, mdgement ; ai(o,
intelligence ; prisate notice of occurrences ginen,
or gotten, (by) primate inter courfe, or correfbondencie
held with. beet if
Cela eft de fon intelligence. 1s done by his priuate
appointment,or direction, \ ;

ntelligencier: m. An Jutelligencer ; an intelligences


giuer ; a Spy. 3
Intelligent. Vaderfanding, apprehenfine, of good ca-
acitie. ;
Intelligible : com, Intelligible, plaine, per (picuous,ea-
fie to be underfeod. ;


Inteligiblement . Intelligibly, perfpicuenfly, under
flandingly.


Intemperance : f. Intemperance,immoderation,unftay-
canele,cabvidlednefc,ontulinche,putraginfeeff


TT —— enn nk— nk s 2 ———
Inftruire vn procez. To firaifh or make it fit, for | Intemperance de l'air, Vafeafonablenelfe of the


ayre,or weather.


Igtemperature: f, Int , or diflemperatur
of tebe; een o sens of ec


M m.ée: f. Intemperate, immoderate, ve-
3


varulie,
Intemperément . Intemperately, Immoderately, vn-
fayediy, unorderedly, difordinately, outragiou(ly, Un-
rulily, is |
Intempeftif: m. iue:f, iue,vntimelie, abor-
tine vnfeafonable; alfo,difordered,unreafonable; alfo,
valuckie,or ill-prefaging, ay S
Inteinpeftivement. Intempeftinely, vnfeafonably, a-
bortinely; vnreafonably ; out of coufe; alfo, vnluc-
kb. AUS
Intendance: f. An ouerfight ; a gonernment,or charge
ouer. ‘sa k
Intendants des finances. The (foure)


REA


+ ; at
werfeers, or


Controllers of the Exchequer; at fir es in by |


King Francis the firf: (Ont fuperintendance fur
le Threforier de Yefpargne; des parties cafuelles;
de l'ordinaire & extraordinaire des guerres ; del’
artillerie; de la marine; des officiers domeftics ;
& autres qui ne font fous la charge des Threfo-
tiers de France, fur lefquels auffi ils ont inten-
dance, & peuvent reformer leurs eftats par eftima-
tion. Ragueau.)

Intendit: m. 4 principal allegation, prooft,or depofiti-
on; writings, or bookes, wherein the chiefe, or maine
points of a fuit are contained,

Intenté: m.ée : f. Attempted, tryed, efayed, proued;
alfo,intended, meant, purpofed ; alfo, commenced, be-
gun, brought sor moued,as a fuit.

Intenter. To attempt, proue, effay, tries alfo, to intend,
meane, purpofe; alfo,to commence, begin, mou , bring,
or fet on foot (a fuit.) :


Intenteur: m. An intender ; dn attempters alfo,the be- ;


gianer of a füit,


Intention: f. An intention, intent, purpofe, drift, mea


ning, will mind.


Interbafté: m. ée: f. Interbafled ; bafled, or quilted |


betweene,
Intercalaire: com. faterkaced ; put, or fet be.
tweene.
Tour intercalaire. The odd day of a Leape yeare,
which falleth euerie fourth yeare.
Intercalation: f Aninterlacing ; a fétting,or putting of
an odd thing betweene euen ones. ce
Intercaler. To interlace;to put,or fet(as the odd day of
Leape yeare) betweene,
Interceder pour. To intercede, mediate , intreat,
Sue, folicite ; alfo, to vadertake, or giue bis word,


Intercepter. To intercept, foreftall,take vp,or make flay
by the wa


‘ à

Int An interceffor, mediator, intreater,
füitor, er fwretie, for another.

Interceffion: f. Iaterce/fion mediation, intreatie,or [uit
for another,

Interclaire: com. as Intercalaire.

Intercoftal: m. ale: f. Betweene the ribs,
Veine intercoftale. A branch of the hollow veine,
which feeds the fpaces betweene the three higheft ribs.

Interdiét: m. An interdittion, probibition, iniunétion ;


alfo (in Law) a determination, or order in Court, for the |


_ poffeffion of athing in controuerfie. ~~ ‘i
PR Aaay a |


unbridled unorderlie, difordinate, outragious, |


i a


eer


‘


I N


INT


Anterdiét:m.ête: & Futerditted, prohibited inbibited,
forbidden,inioyned to the contravie.

Interdiétion: f.Aninterdittion, probibition,inbibition,
iniunthon, forbidding. ;
Interdire. To interdict, probibit, forbid, iniayne, or gine

charge to the contrarie. ;

Jatereffé: m.ée: £. IntereBed,or touched in; dishonou-
© red, burt, or hindered by; wronged, grieued, pained,

Tntereflé de fa perfonne, Of aweake, faint, crazie,

vor ficklie bodie,

La partie civile,& intereffée. Looke Partie.
Intereft: m. An nterefi in, a right or title unto,a thing;
… alfo, intereft, or ufe for money, rc, lent ; alfo, loffe,

dammage, hurt; binderance,wrong, fisflained in repu-
tation,or eflate; or (as a French Lawyer defcribes it)
the lofse one bath undergone, or profit be bath failed of,
by the default of another ; and ber eof be makes two
kinds ; viz.

L'Intereft conventionnel. Celuy qui eft promis
+ par convention, & contraét fait entre les parties,ou

vient de la nature du contra, & eft appellé viure

au Droit Romain,

Intereft iudiciaire :- Qui vient de l'office du Iuge,

ou eft adiugé par iceluy. Thi és double; viz. celuy

: qui procede de la nature de la caufe; ( & vient
es pourfuittes temeraires, fuites, calomnies, ou
_ tergiverfations de la partie adverfe ; qui ont efté
caufe de faire à celuy qui a obtenu plufieurs frais
vains, & inutiles, lesquels ne viennent en-taxe de
defpens:) Et celuy qui prent origine de la chofe
. mefine qui eft controuerfée, & à efté fouffert à
caufe d'icelle;comme execution,emprifonnement,
trouble, fpoliation, refus de tradition de la chofe,
&c ; Hence,Les dommages, & interefts.
. Iey ay grand intereft. 1: neerely concernes, or tou-
ches the. à
I n'y a pas grand intereft en cela. It greatly boots
mot, it is not a pinne matter,
Interjcét : m, An interpofition; a fpeech put in, a word
cafi betweene.
InterjeCter. To intericél,or interpofe ; to caft, put, (et,
* betweene or among; to bring in,or foift into the middle
of, Looke Interjettcr.
Interje@tion: f. An Juteriection (in Grammar;)alfo,an
_ interpofition; or, the allegation of fome matter, orv-
fing of fome tricke, in the middle of a canfe,thereby to
: crofe,or alter it.
Interjetter. as Interjeer.

Interjetter vn appel. To appeale, not in refpect of

the whole caufe, but for fome finall, or by point there-

of: :
Interieur: m.eure : f, Interior imvard, private, neere

unto. 4
Interieurement. Jmvardly, prinatl, within.
Interiné, as Enteriné.

Interiner. Looke Enteriner. … .
Interlocation : f. 4a interlocation, interplacing,inter-
pofition.
Interlocution : f. An interlocution, interpofition,or in-
erlocu-


= terruption"of {peech ; alfo, as Sentence int
toire. | | ‘
Interlocutoire: com. A flay, prolonging, or deferring


4 bar in) a canfe in re{pect of fome reafons al-


Interlocutoire : com. Faterlocutorie ; interruptin
“Speech mterpofing; pr a word that gjues a top
. tor breeds delay ina caufe.

‘Sentence interlocutoire. Av opinion, or fentence


of Court,which filly ends not the caufe,but determines
fome circumflance thereof; Or (as m the Cufiemes a
Nivernois) Qui ne fait fin au procez, mais reigle |
les Lay à faire quelque chcfe pour parvenirà
cette fin. À ee ©


Interloquer. To imterpofe fome fpeech,on figpété ho.
ther mans per ab» eer can, ew alle-
gation ; or,to flay the whole, for a | ending one
fome part thereof: ot ME a4 sas

Interlunaire: m. The feafon Volbwetine the going ont of
the old,and comming in of the new,Moone,

Intennediat. In the middle, or intermedius ; that is
enka two ; that lyeth, or bappeneth, betweene

th,

Intermettre. To intermit, or put betweene ; alfo,to flac-
ken, difcontinue, giue oner, cealfe, leane, or put off for
a time.

Interminant. Boundlefe, borderlefe, uncertaine ; alo,
as Intermittant.

Interminé : m.ée: f. Vabounded,boundlefe,infinite,
endleBe,undeterminable. ?

Interminer. To prefcribe.

Intermis: m. ife : £ Intermitted,difontinued, pawfed
on,left off for a feafon, let palfe for a while.

Intenniflion: f. An intermiffion,difcontinuance,pawfe;
a ceafing, or breaking off for a feajon; a leauing,or let-
ting pafe for a while,

Intermittant. Intermittant,intermitting,difcontinuing,
pawfing,or ceafing for a time ; comming and going (as
an ague) by fits,

nterne: com. Iaternall,imward,

—— f. An vninerfall flaughter, a generall

illing.

Internément. Internally inwardly within.

Interoffel: m, elle: f. Betweene bones,

Interpellateur : m. An interrupter,difturber,troubler,
incomberer ; alfo,a fuitor ov intercefor. :

Interpellation: f. An interruption, diflurbance; tet,
pv fait. alfo, a Simmons ; icquell, fit, inter-
ceffion. :

Interpellé: m. ée : f. Antervepted it hindered incom-
bered ; alfo,fummoned,or called upon; alfo,yequired,or
moued vnto, by interceffion ; alfo, mtermiffine, or, tbat
comes (as an ague) by fits. ;

Interpeller. To interrupt,letbinder,tronble,incomber ;
alfo,to fummon,or call upon ; alo, to require, or mone
unto,byintercefion. ——

Interpolation: £ 4 polifbing,fcowring. fia bifhingnew
dreffing of things.

Interpofé: m.ce: f. Fnterpofed; fet in, put betweene;
intermingled, or intermedled,

Perfonnes interpofées. Sticklers betweene par-
tie and partie, LAïbitrators , Mediators, Dayes- |
men. ;

Interpofement. as Interpofition. :

Interpofer. To interpofe ; to put,or (et betweene ; toin-
terlace, intermeddle, intermingle; alfo, io intermit,

awfe,delay,drine off. k
nterpofer fon iugement de. To give his indge.
ment, utter ce ba pafe bis allowance of.

Interpofition : f. An interpofition, or putting be-
tweene ; an interlacing, or intermingling ; alfo, an
intermedling im, or flickling of, controuerfies ; alfo,
an intermiffion, paw/ing, delaying, letting paffe, brea-
king off, for a time ; alfo,an approbation, or allowance |.
ginen, 2

Interpofition de temps, A pam/e, refpis, imterme-

Uj D . . + 3


In.


Original from
THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY
r | €


INT


Tnterpretateur: m. Aa interpretor, expofitor.
Interpretation: f. An Interpretation, Comment, Expo-
filon; Tranflition, at
Interprete: m. Az interpretor, trucheman, expounder,
tranflator. RL
JIntersreté: m.ée: f. Interpreted,expounded. |
Interpreter. To interpret, expound ; tranflate, fhew the
meaning, tell the fienificationsof. }
Interpreter à mal. To take is bad part, to conceiue
ill,or indge hardly of; alfo, as; bi thet ge ;
= interpreter. To miftake ymifconfter ; mifirufl,mif
ceme. ) *
Interregne : m. An interraigne, or Interregnum; the
fpace,or gouetnment betweene the death, or depofition
of one Prisce, and’ the entrance, or election of ano-
ther. ;
Interrogant: m. TheInterrogatine point,made thus ?
Incerrogant, Demaunding,asking. |
Interrogat: m. À queflioning, demaunding, exami-
“ing. 1
Interrogateur. A queftioner, demaunder, examiner,
‘Interrogation: f da interrogation, queftion,demaund,
examination,
Interrogatoire:-f. An interrogatorie ; a queflion mini-
fred vato an cxaminant.
Interrogué: m. ée:f. Iaterrogated, queflioned, de-
mannded,examined upon interrogatories. F
Interroguer. Tointerrogate,queflion,demaund of;exa-
mine upon iaterrogatorees. 7
Interrompre.Tointerzupt, flop,difiurbe,oi breake off in
the middeft. :
Interroy: m. 4 Regent, or Proteétor, that gouernes a
State om the death, or depofition of one Prince,to the


entrance or election of another. 1 wi

Interruption: f. 4x interruption,let, fop,diflurbance,
difcontinuance ; In Law, C’ eft vn aéte qui entre-
coupe le cours de la prefcription, & ne fouftve Ic
temps prefini fe continuer,& parfaire. cr

Interfigne:m. 4 fgne,or token of. : I

Intervalle:m. 4a Taterzal,Intermedium,re/pit,panfe,,
or fpace betweene,alfo,the flefh-daies between Chrift-
mas and Afiwednefday, ‘ |
Sans intervalle. Continually,inceffantly.

Intervallé: m. ée: f. Refpited, put in difiances, done by

Intervenir.To iaterpofe bimfelfe to come in the Interim,
to preuent, or come betweene.

Intervenir l’arref. To prevent, or fay fentence in a
caufe.

A EI £ An interuention,or comming between;
an interpofition,a preuention.

Intervenu: m, ue: £ Jaterpofed, preuented, come be-
berne. é

Interverfion : £ 4 wrong fill turning, or conueighing :
away of; à purloyning, deceiuing, beguiling ; alfo, an
ouertbrowing,or turning upfide downe.

Interverti: m.ie: £ Interuerted ; conueyed, or turned
the wrong way ; hénce alfo, purloined; and beguiled,
or deceined; alfo,onerturned. if

Intervertir. To interuert; conuey, or turne the wrong
way; (hence) to purloine ; beguile, deceiue; alfo, to 0-
mer Prowouerturne,or turne vpfide downe.

Iñteflac, Intefate,that dies without a will.

Droi& d'inteftat. À Priuiledge which the next of
kinne vato onc that dyes inteflate hath, to feixe on all |
be left bebind bim.

Inteftin : m. 44 intefline, inward , intrall, gut,

bowel, CRETE


\ ù


INT.


Inteftin affamé. the bungrie gut ; one of the three
Pnall guts that lye toward the right fide of the wpper
part of the nawell; ener kept emptie by the Mefeuterick
veines which paffe fromit unto the Liner, Jet
teftin borgne, The blind gut ; Looke Borgne, 1: =

Inteftin cuillier. 2s Boyau culier,
Inteftin douzedoigtier. 4 fénall gut, or intrall fea-
ted on the right fide ; and which, defcending obliquely

\ towards the back-bone,ends where the circumuolution
of the refl of the Guts begins.
Inteftin droi&t. The ftraight gut, or arfe-gut.
Inteftin entortillé. The wreathed gut; one of the
three finall guts which lye towards the left fide under
the nauell; tis verie ruddie, and makes many windings
which extend unto the Os facrum. :
Inteftins tenués, The (mall guts wherein the meat -
palfeth out of the flomacke.

Inteftin: m. ine: f. Inteftine, inward, priuie, hidden ;
defpightfüll, rancorous,deadlie.

Inteftinal:m. ale: £. Of or belonging to, the Fatef
tines. 5
Veine inteftinale. Séeke Veine. ai]

Intheriner. as Enteriner. .

Inthiné. Looke Intirné,

Inthronization: f 4» iathronization , or inthro-


ning.
Inthronizé : m. ge: f. Jathronized ; placed in a
throne, —~ ;
Inthronizer To iathronize ; to place in a royall
throne. d | :
Intimant. 4x Appeallant ; or, one that cites bis aduer-
: farie vpon an Appeale.
timation: f. 4% intimation, fignification, dennncia-
tion, fhewing, letting to wit,or guing to know; alfo,an
_» Adiournement, Citation; or Summons of a partie in an
Appeale, and in cafes wherein the Fudge proceeds of
courfe to right the plaintifé though the ps rs oi


peare not, \. Ey
—— L'in. An Appeallee; the defendant in an
Appeales — * ye
Intime : com, (Moff} inward, fecret; beartie, efpeciall,
deere, intirely affegted, + oe VE
Intimé: m.ée: €. Jatimated; fignified, fhemed notifieds
denounced ; alfo,adiourned, cited, fummoned, warned
to appeare (in an Appeale.) fact
-Officier intimé, A» Officer chofen by the King, and
confirmed by Parliament, he ni
La partie intimée. as L'Intimé. '
Intimément. Inwardh, fecretly, heartily, deerely, in-
tirely effectually, efpecially. wi
Intimet. To intimate , fignifie, fhew; denounce, pro:
claime ; fet on broach; alfo, to adiourne,cite, (ummon,
bring an Abtion againft; (efpecially in cafes wherein à
Iudge proceeds of courfe to right the plaitife, though
the defendant appeare not.) HAT
Intimer le Seigneur. À Tenant to fue an Appeale
againft bis Lord , for denying to right him in, bis
Court, :
rR À fearing, skaring, affrighting, ter-
rifying, ; i ver
iam m. éc : f. Feared, skared, terrified affrigh=


ted.
Jntimider, To fare, shave, terrific, affrigbt.… :
Intirable: com. Not to sg pth a
Intitulation: f Anintitulation;or intituling; a denomi-
nation,a defeription. ren ont elaigpest
Intitulé: m:ée:£ Jatitled,or intituled,
Tntituler. To intitle; denominate ; defcribe. 5 “le éveil


JAI +


Aaa iy ae


la ,


Original froma j he


THE.OHIO STATE UNIVERSE. 2


i
ie
&
nn
ee
&
oy
=
:


ao


Ae” . 2 4 bee Doe


Pa


j
Fe
i


| verte ofa info isu one
' com. |
| bles abraiesof one bue,euer in one bumar.


‘LOT


ntolerable: com. Jntollerable,infupportable,unfuffe-
. rable.
Intolerablement. Intollerably,unfufferably.
Intolerance: f Impatiencie.  * 1
Intonation: f. À lowd noïfe, tune, found; a rumbling,
or thyndering. 4 ;
Intonation de gare & ferre, See Gare.
Intouchable: com. Vntoucheable, — -
able: com. Intraétable barf, vrgentle, bard ;
wild, hagard, unrulies outragious ; vr{cciable, incon-
uerfible;vncompanable.
Intrade: f. Reuenue, rent, profit comming in.
Intraictable : com. as Intraétable,
Intrans: m. Senior Sophiflers ; fuch as prepare them
Fons to commence Batchelers.
eIntregenter. Looke s'Entregenter. :
Intrication: f.4n intrication,or iniricating ; an intang-
ling in{naring, peflering, fettering; Laturinth, Maze;
imwrapping, inuolution, ‘
Intrinqué: m. ée: f. Intricated,intang \edincombered,
perplexed,in a Laborintb.
Intrinquément. # Intriquément.
Intrinquer. as Intriquer. g
Intrinseque: com. Intrinfecall  imward, fecret, fa-
miliar,
Intrinfequement. intrinfecal}y,invwar dly, on the in-
fide; vérie fumiliary.
Intrique: f. An intricacie, Laborinth, Mazes pefler-
ment,incombrance, perplexitie difficultie.

Intriqué. a Intrinqué.
Intriquément. Intricately, perplexedly, intangledly ;
darkly ; difficultly. |
Intriquer. To intricate,perplex,pefler s'infhare inuoiue,

 intangle; incomber. .
Introduétion : £ An introduélion ; a leading, or bring-
ing in,or nto ; 4 way, entrance, beginning to; an in-
fiitution, ; eo DES "
Introduire. To introduce ; lead, or bring in; to inuent,
begin, broach, bring vp; al(o,to enter,iaftrucl,or trayne
UP it.
Intsoduftss: ite: f. Introduced, brought in, begun,
broached,brought up; entred,or trayued in. $
Introite: m. An entrance, entrie, begianing, or going


into. y
Intronifation: f. An inthronixation, or intbronizing.
Intronifé: m. ée: f. Inthronixed, placed in a throne.
Intronifer. as Inthronifer. ;

Intrus: m. ufe: f.iatraded,thruftinto,

Jntrufion: f, 4x intrufion ; a wrongfull intruding, or
thrufting into the poffeffion of avacant thing.

Intruz: m. Aa intruder ; an-vfierper of the poffeffion of

a vacant thing. ea.
Intuitif: m.iue: £ Intuitine ; which is,or may be feene


into.
Intumefcence: £ 4 /welling, puffing wprifing.
Invadé: m. ée: f. Inuaded. À
Invader, To inuade,affaile,a{fault,enter,er fet vpon in a


cible,or boftile manner.
Pash ué: £ Vavanquifhed,unouercome ; as
yet in beart,or on foot.


‘Tovalide: pu fric inf els fetagieb i,
ae f men dias, infeeble, make force


leffeimpaize b,debafé the worth,difgrace the


Vavariab ,immutablesonebanges-


>


Digitizé My Go: gle


ee aE EE


|
ft
fio
I


INV


Inyafion: f. 4n inuafen ; an bofiile affault, or incur-


Invetive: f. An Inuciine ; a rayling, biting, opprobri-
cus difcowrfesor fpecch. :

Inveétiver. To inneigh,renilerayle vpon.

Inventaire: m, Aa fnuentorie; Lift, Koll ; Memorial,
Record, Regifier of many fenerall things ; In Law,
contient vne brieve defcription des pieces que la
partie produit.

Inventé: m. ée : f. Invented, fiund out ; contrined,de-
uifed ; fained,imagined, furmifid.

Inventer, To inuent ; to find,or (Ly eut; 10 denife.firge; Ÿ
Lontriue ; imagine, faine, furmife.

Jnventerefie: f. Aninuentreffe,er innentrix,

Inventeur:m. An innenter, contriner, denifir, finder
out; an author, framer, firger; faintr, furmifir.

Inventif: m. iue: f. Inuentine, wittie, plotting, fil of
tricks, fraught with deuifes. ;

Invention: f, An inuention; a finding out, or thing
found out; a deuife, forgerie, conceit; alfo, a tricke,

ift ; furmife,imagination.

nvention Sainée Croix. The Invention of tke
bolie Croffe ; a folemne bolyday celebrated by the
Church of Rome on the third of May; alfo, a fifi, or
denife to get money. :
Invention Sain@te Eftienne. Another bolyday kept
the third of Auguft.

Inventorié: m. ée:f, Inuentoried; digeficd into, or
couched in,an Inuentorie. ;

Inventorier. To inuentorie ; to take an Innentorie of; to |
digeft into an Inuentorie. .

Tnventorizer. as Inventorier,

Inventrice, as Inventerefle. |

Invers:m.erfe: f.lnuerted,misplaced,perucrted,verefied
toa contrarie fence,vttered one for ancther; turned in
and out,infide outveard,vpfide downe.

Jnvefti: m. ie: f. Inwefled ; inrobed, indowed; alfà, in-
wrapped,

Inveftir. To inueft; inrobe, inflall, indow, put into pof-
Seffion of; alfo, to imwrap; alfo, to ioyne (a word of
Horfemanfhip.)

Inveftifon: f. An inuefling, or inueflure ; an inrobing,

inftalling, indowing, inflituting, putting into poffef-

in ; ‘


Inveftiture: £. Am inuefliture,or inueflure; an inflituti-
on,inflallment indowment.
Inveteré: m.ée : f. Inueterate,old,auncient,of long vfe,
rooted by cuflome, fetied by continuance.
s’Inveterer. To inueterate, grow old ; become rcotcd, or
come to a habite,by cufleme.
Invigilance: f. Inuigilancie, fleepineffe, drowfinelft,las
xine(fe, lacke of waking. wl
Invincible: com. Inxincible,vnvanquifhable,vnfubdu-
able,vnconquerable. |
Inviolable: com. Inuielable ; moft firme; not to be cer:
rupted,infringed,or broken.
Inviolablement. Inuiolably ; faithfilly.
Inviolableté: £ Inuiolableneffe.
nviolé : m. ée:f. Inwielate ; found, pure,uncorrupted,
unburt ; unbroken, firme,conflant, faithfi.ll,true,
Invitation: f, An inuitation, or inuiting; a 1g, OF
defiring; an allurement,or inticement unto, ©
Invité: m.ée : f. Fmuited, bidden; defired, intveated ;
allured,inticed unto. 1 j
Invitement, as Invitation. F
Inviter. To inuite, bid; defire, intreat; allure,intice,


unto. | *
Invocation : f, 4x innocation,or calling vpon.


Original 4rom J


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Tor


Mots d’ invocation. Conisring tearmes.


frarle,intangle.
Involution: f 4x inuolution, emvrapping, infoulding
infaarling jntricating intanglin


gan,
Invoqué : m.¢e:f, Inuoked, called upon.


belpe of,
Invoqueur: m. Aa inuoker.


difaccnftomed,difeontinued left off.


be is neuer idle.


Seruiceableneffe.

vulnerable : com. Invulnerable, unwoundable,
Jo. 4 Moy: pe : ERab, |
Toannes. c'e

Schoolemaifter,
Toannitiques. Aa Order of Monks that weare red ha-


brea;


Tobelin : m. 4 fot, gull, doult, affe, cokes ; alfo, as Go-
Tocondale. 4‘ Daller ; a peece of money worth about
S. .
Tooguer. To flopsor fland ftillas a borfe or cart, in the
way.


Jodelle: f. A Sea-coot.

Toeudi. Thwrfday ; Looke Teudy.

loffu: m.ué: f. Chuffie, fat-checked, fvelled or puft up
in the face. -

Joiaulier. Seeke loyaulier. ;

Toignant. (Partic.) loyning,coupling, yoaking, putting
together,

Tousen: (Adverb.) Neere unto, bard by,clofe adioy-
ning,almof touching bordering vpon.

Join :m, À ioynt,ioyning;clofure ; feame,

Toinct : m.cte:f.loyned ; coupled, yoaked,grapled,put,
couched,or clofed together ; knit, alfociated,or combi
ned with ; alfo,raught, fetcht vp,ouertaken,

Toinét que.(4 Coniunétion)fürtbermore,adde moreouer,
as alfà that.

Toincte : f as lointe,

Joinéture :f. 4 ioyat of the bodie,a knot in trees; alfoya
adymingscouplings Joaking, clofing, or couching toge-
ther.


Ioindre. To ioyne,couple yoake ; knit clofe,couch; affoci-
"ate, bv combine together ; to fét neere, or pring bard,
unto; al/o,to reach,or ouertake ; al/o, to buckle,grap-
plesor cope,as enemies,erc,together. ‘
4 Tointe:f. A ioynt ; clofüre; ioyning ; (eame,
Tointée: £4 ioyat, or double bandfull of; as much as can
be held within both bands together ; Infome countries
À of England it is called a yeafpen,in otbers a goppen-ful


4 {


Digitized ~ Gox gle


Involontaire : com, Insoluntarie ; againf the will
of.
Toro im, A coner,cloke, or thing that ferues to
(A . we ‘
Involver. To inuolue, enwrap, infould; intricate, in.


iB ;
Involution de procez, 4 iumbling, or confounding
Of a {uit,in fort, that one knowes not what to make of
it , or is fartber from ending it then be was when be be-


Invoquer. To inuoke,or call vpon ; torequire,or intreat


Tnufité: m.ée: £7 aufedunmonted,unufuall; dififéd,


Inutile : com. Vaprofitable, ungainfiull, incommodious,
vaferuiceable; of no worth, far no vfé, to no pur-


pofe.
In’eft iamais inutile. He is abwayes well imployed,

Pacs. Unprofitably incommodioufy unferuice-
ably


Inutilité : £. Inutilitie, unprofitableneffe, difprofit, um


yn Ioannes, He isa Pedant , or poore


bits, and the reprefentation of a Chalice on their


Toletrin : m, 4 yeunefier, or young gallant.


| Jime, frat, well-f

lieymerrie,buxome, iocond,

Tolice: f. 4 kind of foftyand tender flone which in froflie
weather falls unto duft,

Toliement. Jollily,gayly,trimly, finely, gallantly; neat-

y, featly ; merrily, buxomely.

Jolier. # Geolier ; A Goaler,

Toliet: mette : £. Neat, fine, tricke, feat, fpruce, nice,
prettie,and hand{ome.

Jolieté :£ Jollitie, iollinef[e; gaineffe, trimneffe, fine-
neffe, gallantne[fè; neatnefle, band/omeneffe, pretti-
neffe, comelinel]e; lineline fe, iocondne[fé, mirth,bux-
omnel[e. +


Toliveté. as Iolieté,


5


lonc:m, 4rufb,or bulrufh.
Tonc agu. Our common hard rufh, or Sharpe rufh.
Jonc à cabas. The pole-rufh, mat-rufh , fraile-rufh,
pi 26 bull-rufh, great water rufb. 5
-Lonc marin. The fea-rufhor fèa-ru rale.
Tonc marifc, ou de marez. The mari rufb, finooth
rufh, candle rufh.
Tonc odorant. The fiveet rufh, Camels meat,Camels
bay, Squinant. ‘
Jonc à racines odoriferantes. Cypreffe , Englifh or
Spanifh Galingale,  :
Toncade:f, A certaine {poone-meat made of creame,
Rofe-water,and Sugar. ?


ueredor fpread ouer.as with rufbes ; alfo, gulled, cog-
ged rise ieafled.pr toyed with. ee

Tonchée: f. A bundle of rufhes ; alfo, a greene banke to
fit on,or way to goe in, frewed with flowers, bear bes,
graffe,or greene rufhes ; alfa, the rufbes fo Sivewed; al-
fo,a greene cheefe, or frefh cheefe made of milke thats


of
greene rufhes; alfo, a handfull of fmall Wworie prickes.
hrott le vfeto sr a F at

Jonchement. 4 frewing with, or making of, rufhes;
alfo,a gulling,deceiuine beguiling,

Ioncher. To firew ; to (read, or couer (as) with rufhes;
to worke, or make, of rufhes; alfo, to gull; cog, or foift
with ; lie unto, deceiue,gine gudgeons, beare in band
with untruthes ; alfo,to dallie, ieaft,or toy with,

Toncheur : m. A frewer (as) with rufhes; a worker, or
plaiter of things with rufhes ; alfoya lyer,cogger, foifler,
deceiuer ; or ya diffembler, impofler, abufer of people
with falfe tales or fhewes. ;

Tonchu: m.ué: £. Rufbie, full of rufhes.

dong, asTonc, aa

Tongler, To iugele ; alfo,to play the Poet. .
Tongleries:£ Fugling trickes, feats of legierdemaine,
0,old Poetical inuentions,
Tongleur :m. A Jugler : Pic. alfo,a Rimer,or Poet.
Tonite. Young ; Looke Ieune(an old word.)
Ioquetter. To leacher ; 07,10 line,as a dog doth a bitch,
Torroife: £. 4 horfe-plumme.
Iofmin: m, The fhrub lafmin, Ielfomin, leffe,
Tota. A ior,point or pricke : Rab. °
lotte: f. (The bearbe) Beet,or Beets. à
lotteux: m.eufe :f.Claggie,clammit,cleauing,
Tou: m. 4s Ioug. |
Jou. as Moy ; Me: Gafc. :
Et jou mot. For my part I will be whift,or not fpeake
one word. :


Toiiant. Playing; gaming, (porting, dallying, ieafting,
paling


iginal from


THE-OHILO STATE INIVERSEE f


PE A Poy ES Ne


Toli: m.iolie: £. Follie;gay, trim, fine,gallant,neat,band. |
Sisoned, minion, compt, polite; aifo,


ombarbe: f, Houfèleeke, Syngreene; Looke loubarbe.


Jonché: mée:f. Strewed with,wrought of, rufhes;co- |


0,
curdled without any runnet, and fèrued in a fraile of |


:


UN, VASE ” “a bn: 4 f ae PS Se 5 2
{ A | 4


1a Vv * HOW:


Jouër d efpée. To fence,or play at fence.
En Touér s l'efpée à ini sane To doe what be
Lftwithall; alfo, to baue bu bands fill of; or 10 imploy
both bands in, : r
Jouër le gros iew, To play great game,to be at the fai-
ref; to throw away all at acaft,to venture a whole réfR
at once.
Touét fesieux. To doe bis feats,or play bis prankes; al-
fo,to play veakes,or keepe a terrible coile.
Jouer fon jeu. I ne joué pas aujourd’huy fon jeu,
He à cleane out of play. à
Jouëz voftre jeu, Play an aime caf (at bowles.)
Touér dela navette. “To play fait and loofe; or, a
wench to enter amanintober'Tables. ‘7
» Iouér des Orgues. autant que paillarder.
Jouér au rabat, To make an abatement. -
Jouër durebec, Stubbornely to refift,withfiand, or
contradict,
Jouér dlaronfle, To (nore ; See Ronfle.
Touér fon roolle;ou roule.Fo play bis part throughly,
tolay about him lufiily, ‘
Touér le roule,ou roulerde.To aét,or counter feit the
gun of. ae
ouér au Roy defpouillé. To leape ouer where the
hedge is loweft ; topull'a fleece fiom a declining fiate;
to helpe bim forward thats veadieto fall,
Jouër du ferrecropiere. To leather : Rab.
Jouér vne troufle. To gine a gudgcon ; or,to ferne a
ge or [lipperie triche. |
ouër de la veze, To play on the bagpipe; alfo, to
fizzle,
1! iouë demoy à la pelotte.He handles me at bis own
pleafures-hetoffes,or vfes me be cares not how.
Seiouër a. To mocke,deride, frmpe, icafl with,
Ul veut fe jouër à elle.He would be doing with herbe
would faine haue a ad at her, -
Nete jouë pas à luy; ner’y iou€ pas. (Said, by way
of admonition,unto one that intends to quarrel with a
man of greater flvength, or meanes then bimfelfé) med-
oo dlenotwithbim. ; Ga
I ne fe faut pas iouér au boeuf: Pro. Av Oxe is not
. to be dallied with, à
Mal ioué quifiertlaioué: Prov. He that will ieaft |
-, minfidoeitgentl.
‘Touérefle : f. Awoman-gamefler player, frorter,
louét. A fhittlecocke.
+ Touets, Toyes ; little (ports, apifh plaies, prettie or


lif


paffing away the time, na hy tlh
Enfe jotiant. In fport, game, ieaft, boording,mer-


rily.

oust :m. An oldrimer, ballade-maker, ev maker
of Enterludes for children,and countrey folke to act.

Joüart : m. AWindgall in the leg of a borfe.

loubarbe: f Houfeleeke Sengreene ,Aygreene,Bullocks
eye, Iupiters beard,

Joubarbe arborée. Tree Houflecke.

Toubarbe femelle. as Ioubarbe à petites fueilles.
Joubarbe à petites fucilles. The fimalefmall Sen-”
greene(with the pale-white flower) called wild Prick=
madame, ercat Stone-crop,and h'orme-graffe.
Toubarbe marine. Sea Houfleek,Sea Aygreen,bearb
Aloes,

Toubarbe mafle.Prickmadame,or Sengrecne the lef-
fer, with the yellow flower, : |
Toubarbe fauvage. Moufé-graffe, wild Prickma-
dame,

. Ioubarbe des vignes. Orpine, Liblong,Liuelang.
Grande Ioubarbe.Great Sengreen, great Houfleck,
lupiters beard, ;
Petite Joubarbe. ‘The male Prickmadame, or Sen.

greene the lefftr; alfo, Moufetaile, Pricket, Stene-

» bore, little Stonecrop, Wall-pepper, Countrey- pepper,
lacke of the Buiterie, ‘

Jouc : m..# luc; A benne-rooft.

loucher. as loncher; Tocog,to fiift, oc; alfo,as lu-
cher; to rooff, or pearch; whence;

* Qui avec mal plaifant fe couche, fouyenrfur luy le
vent fe iouche : Prov.

Joudarde :f. 4 Sea-coot.

Joue :f, The cheeke,the iowle.

Bailler par les ioués de. Locke Baïller.

Illuy en bailla parmy les iouës. He gane bim a
found box on th’ care.

S'en batre les joués. To repent throughly, or afi,
himfelfe extreamely for. ‘

_ Is’en eft donné par lesioués. He pulled,or fnatch-
ed it violently untobim,

Mal joué quifiert laioué: Prov. He ieafts butill
that burts bim whom be iealis with. AAA
loué: m. ée: f. Played ; gamed, fported, dallied. :
On Le ioué de fon cuir, Hee bath beene foundly
whipped. , re ieee

Iouée: f. The whole cheeke extending from the eye-
brow to the chinne; alfo,a box, cuffe, whirrit, buffet
on the cbeeke,ov eare.. 434


K


yix V4 os oon 4 livword)
Toueigneur : m. Ayounger brother: Breton: || Jonété: f. for leuneffe ; (an old word.
ai Touélle:f. A raked oe Soa Jouëur: m. 4 player,camefler ; dallier, porter,
3f - Jouëlles. Arched, or yoaked vines; vines fo vnder- Jouëur d' efpée. À Fencer,
= propped , or fafhioned that one may goe under the Touéur de farces, 4 Comedian,Stage-player, or com
# middle of them. «+ Le ae à ‘mon Player. ' rÈ
4 Jouër. To play, game, fport;, dallie, teaft; recreate, or Jouéur de Moralitez. An Exterlude-player ; alfo,a


olace bimfilfe, pale away the time; alfo, to aéi,repre-

pach counter feit (as a Comedian) the geflures ofano- |
th . : Sy 7 4 k

: Jour al amour.Oze to bold up bis fingers, andans-

ther , turned from bim, to gheffe bow many he holds


oe ‘Wouer t à bander & à racer contre. To deale in. all

Tomber ë, Looke Boule. -

ouër à. . Leoke + Sek :

Toner boutchors. To thruft out the harlot ; (a game

in fome vfe among Courtiers,and Competiters.)
11 Den a els ito eaten Be.


apace,at eue ct
ins, To lecher:qRab,


Buffoone,or profefjed Ieafler.
Jouëur de pafle pafle. 4 Iugler.
Il n'eft ieu qu’ à iouëurs: Prov. There is no playing
with any thabcannot play. =e
loufflu:m.uë:f. Chuffie, fat checked, (wolne, or puft
‘_ vpinthe face. a
Tou :m,A yoake; alfo;the head of a Lute, Violl, ec;
. alfo, the crofe-beame of a balance; alfoyas louc; a ben-
~ rooft. PRET |
Faire ioug. Toyecld,obey,fübmit bimfelfe. |
Farc is iou Totame, {ubdue, bring vnder,tove-
. duce unto obedience. ,


l'os iougal. Th'endsor outward part “ tbe
tee e bone toreards the care,


: aM Tougler..


ata


a “ig | Original from - ri

~ / ; d >


Ve | :


co V7


| Iougler. as longler. |

| See ig ~ pm nf

OUL: m.1e :f. Exioyea,v td,bad.

lovial: m.ale:f Jouiall, fanguine, borne under the
Planet Fupiter.


lovien: in. Jouialift; one thats naturally,and by com- |


plexton,pleafant,or fanguine.
Touigleur. Seeke Tongleur. yy:
Louïr. To enioy ; poffeffe bold, occupie, vf ; to take the
profit,receiue the fruit, baue the frustion of.
Iouissance:f. An enioying ; poffe/fing,occupying, bol-
fa ; fruition , whole fruite, full vfe, abfoluce poffe/-
‘on of.
Jouncher. as Ioncher ; (an old word.)
Jour : m. A day ; aifo,light,or day-light; alfo,thefhadow,
or lujter thats giuen vato a piéture by a skilfill worke-
- man; alfo,a Court,or pleading place, }
Jour artificiel. Th'artificiah, or tradefmans day ; coit-
. tinues from the vifing, to the fetting,of the Sunne,
_ Jours de ceffation, A vacation,
Jour civil. The cinile day; continues (as our naturel)
: 2g houres but differs in the beginning, by the different
ufe,or conflitutions of feuerall nations ; wher eof fome
(as the Chaldeans,and Perfians) begin it from Sunne-ri-
fing ; others(as the Fewes, Athenians, auntient Ægyp-
tians,and moderne Italians) from Sunne-fet ; otbers(as
. th'Vimbrians) from noone ; and others (as th’auntient
Romanes,and at this day,the French,Spaniards, Ger-
» manes,and the mol part of the people of our world)
from midnight.
: Tour dela Chandeleur. candlemas day.
Jour egal. Th'Equinogtiall or Equator; the day that is
as long as the night. .
Jour d’ vne feneftre.The bole,or whole compaffe of a
window whereby the light comes in.
Tour deloy, 4 Hall day,Court day,Law day.
Tour de morts Al-foules days :
Jour naturel. The natural day; confifts of 24 boures.
Jour de pain perdu. Shrose-tewfday.
Tour de Palan. as Jour de loy. ;
Jour des Roys. Th'Epiphanie ,or Twelfth day in
Chriflmas. ,
Jour de la SainGe croix, Crowchme(fe day.
Jour du Sain@ Sacrement. Corpus Chrifti day,
Jour fervant. Looke Servant.
Jour du toile. À day of pleading,a Court day.
Les trois iours detenebres.The three dayes next be-


fore Eafter.


Jour haut,ou haut jour. High adayes,at broad day-


light, farre on the day,

Tour de ma vie. Newer,not folong as 1 line,

Les bons iours, The hely-daies of Chrifimas,or of any
other good time.

Les Grandsiours. Aa extraordinarie Seffions,called
by vertue of the Kings Commiffion , or Letters Patents
diretted unto certaine Iudges of the Parliament(with-
in the precinéts whereof it to be held) and appointin
them, what place ae fit in, bow long they fball hs
it ; what caufes they.fball deale in,and bow farre they
Shall proceed inthem: The Peeves of France bane al-
fo their Grands iouts, which they hold once,or twice
ayeare, for the execution of their bigheft lurifdiétion ,
and for the bearing of Appeales from their owne infe-
-riour Courts. . J 3262

Vis à iour, Looke Vis. eit Mii
“Aiour. Tran(parent ; or fo made, fo cut, arc, at one
my fee through it in diners places. An


#Auiour laiournée, Poorely,barely, needily , nomore


Journalier : m.ere if. Dailie quotidian, ordinarie,con.


ie ea dcr et
my jour. Halfe fhadowed, balfe appearing,
me ti che dap tae 2 bal appearing


Pour à tous les iours. For the workie dayes, or to be
ufed ewerie day.

Bacchus eftant forti par le jour de lupiter; viz:
Out of the flit be made in bis thigh for Bacchus to lie


im. }
Bailleur de beaux iours. 4 cogging , gloxing, or
fawning companion ; one that ufts many faire (but ef
feétleffe}words, ‘
Bailleur debonsiours. The fame; or, an ordinarie
fireet-faluter. \ L
Donner jour à. To grace,beautifie, gine light, or luf
ter unto.
Donner jour à fa defpence. To labour to get bis ex.
pences a reputation;or fo to manage them as the world
may take mofl notice of them, ,
* Faireiour.Day to breake,or to appeare;(bence, Com-
pere ie dors, il ne fait pas encore iour. 1am not for
you good neizbbour; ) alfo,tomake a bole, or open a paf:
Sage, for light to come in at,
Faire jour à To make way, or open a pafjage, for a-
nother,
Faire jour en. To open; to paffe,or pierce through and
through,
Pierres qui ne portent point de jour. Stomes that be
not tran{parent,
Trouver fon iour. Te die,
Vn iour iuge de l’autre , & le dernier iuge de tous:
Prov. One day another,and the laft all,iudges.
‘A bon iour bonne eftreine: Prov. Looke Eftreine,
‘A boniourbon oeuvre: Prov, The better day the
* better deed ; Looke Oeuvre.
: Ce qui fe fait de nuit patoit de jour : Prov, The
workes of darkeneffe are at length difcouered.
Ja ne chante le coq f viendra le iour: Prov, Though .
the cocke nener crow day willappeare. ©
In'eft fi grandiour que ne Vienne vefpre: Prov,
The longeft day will hane à davoning.
In’eft qu’ vne mauvaife heure au iour:Prov.There |.
45 but one ill (or valuckie)houre in the day,
- I fuffic au iour de fa mufere: Prov. One miferie is y-
_mough at once, : à
Le coeur fait l'oeuvre, non pas les grands jours :
Proy. as in Oeuvre. i ~
Longues paroles font les jours courts : Prov, Long
words make fhort dayes; a long difcourfe makes time
tofleale away, à
Nul foir fans iour: Prov, Leoke Soir.
On reviént fage des iours : Prov, In time fooles get
experience. y
Nous achetons tout fors le iour, & la nui&: Prov,
All things are vendible fae day and night. €
Quoy que fol tarde iour ne tarde: Prov. Time
flayeth not on fools ; or, though the foole flay time flaics
not, ‘
Journal:m.# Iournau;a//o,as Livre,ou Papier Iour-


nal.

Tournal: m. ale : € tournall ; daily; donein, or belong-
ing to,the day. Que
Livre,ou papier iournal. .4 Journal, Diarie, day-
booke Regifler kept of dailie occurrences,

Tournalier : m. À lourney-man ; one that workes by tbe
day; alfojacertaine poifinous bearbe, which being ea-
ten of, kills within a day. * i oot


tinnall; alfo; vncertaine; to day one way,.to mor-
row


Original from
THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITÉS


4 arret re a A
&


i


*
pee
,” af See" Fp


nm 271 Le


-
}
; :


QE Re TE ee
vow another ; whence ; Touy.as Ioui.
Vn homme iourhalier. An inconflant or fickle bea- | loyallier: m. A Jeweller; A Marchant, or maker of
ded: alfo,a careleffe or improuident, fellow ; one that Jewels,” ;
is onely for the prefent. loyau:m..4 Jewell, -

Journau:m, 4 quantitie of land not much differen Toyaulerie : £, Jewelling; the trade ,or myflevie of Jew=
fromtb' t; and in fome countries (as in Chamt elling. é

pure ocd :m, rene f
oye: f. oy mirth,glee,gladneffe, reioycing jocondneffe;

comfort please delight lighineffe aoe, Ms
Jove de papillon. Short 10) momentarie gladne[fe.
Fille de ioye. A punke,or pleafant fnner.
Toye au coeur fait beau teint: Prov. Locke Teint,
Joye trifte coeur travaillé : Prov.Sad mirth denotes

a troubled mind,

Ioyeufement Joyfilly,mervily, gladly, blithely, iocond-
by,cheer efill


,


ly,
Joyeufeté :f. loyfunefe, cheerefulne[fe, iolitie jocond~


paigne) the verie fame : Or,as much land as a yoake

of Oxen can plough vp in one day; (svhich is of clay-
land about an Acre, and of fandie ground about an A-
cre and a balfe.) .

- Journau Bourdelois, ou de la ville de Bourdeaux.
(wherin notwithflanding it is but little knowne , and
leffe vfed)containes in breadth 112 feot,im length 224
but thefe feet (tearmed thereabouts, pieds de terre)?
are by an eighth part in three quarters lenger then or-
dinarie ones.

Journau de Bourgogne(enterre, ou Vigne.) Con-
taines 360 Pearches,or Poles.

Journau de Bretaigne. Is 20 Cords long, and foure
broad ,of 24 foot to the Cord.

Journau Engoumoifin, (Tbe true lugerum of th’an-
tient Latines)us 120 foot broad,ér 240 long ; or (which
comes to the fame proportion)20 fadomes bioad,and 40
long.

Journau de Xain@ongne. Containes 100 fquares,or
yron chaines,each of cighteene linkes, and euerie linke

a foot in length. ’
Journée :f. À day, or whole day; alfo, a day of battell,
~ or the battell it felfe; alfoya dayes worke, or labour ; a

dayes iourney,or trauell, é

~ Journée blanche. A boly.day, er play-day; called fo
by fome countrey people.
ournée des E{perons. The battell of Spurres, woon,
in the yeare 1513, by the Englifh upon the French,pof-
fiffed with a fudden feare , and preferring one paire
of beeles before two paire of bands,
Laiournée d’ vne geline, Am egge.
Journée fervante. Looke Servant.

Auiour la iournée: Onely from band to mouth,

Ila toufiours fa iournée faitte. He ia loggerhead,
or dull fellow. °
Bonne iournée fait qui de fol fe delivre: Prov. He
oa a good dayes worke that rids bis bands of a
ole. |
Les grands boeufs ne font pas le grandes iour-
nées : Prov. Laoke Boeuf,
Journellement. Daily,day by day,enerie day.
lourneu:m. Aquantitie of land (in the Seigneurie of
Conty in Clermont) containing 100 roods, of 24 foot
to the rood,
Journieur: m.A dailieworke.(vm)  *
Joufle : €. 4 luft; alufting, or Tilting ; alfo, a fight, or


-  battell.

Joufte. (Adverb.) Neere to, nigh adinyning,bard by, to-
wards ,befide.

Joufter. To 1uf,Tilt,or Turney; torunne one againft a-
notber ; alfo,to fightsor bicker ; as 5
Faire ioufter les cogs. To fet the Cockes together by


nee.
Joyeux :m.eufe : f. 10)fil,ioyous,glad, merrie, iocond,
gs frolicke, sollie, cheerefull, pleafant,
amefome,
Î eux comme yn efmerillon. We may fay,as crank
as a Cocke Sparrow.
Plus joyeux que rats en paille, ou fourmis en
grain. More iocond then Rats among chaffe, or Ants
among corne.
Joyeufe, & riche vie pere, & mere oublie : Prov,
Looke Vic.
Fu. Les Maux terminez en ique font au medecin
nique : Prov. Looke Nique. .
Ira. She third perfon of the Future Tenfe of the Verbe
Aller; whence;)Un’en ira pas ainfi, The matter
F fball - be “ES in that manner.
racond: m. de : f. Angrie,teaflie, cholericke, wafpi,
Cou ae ke art diplentd. ps
Iraigne. in flead of Araigne, Mot villageois.
Trascible: com, Cholericke, foone angred, fubieët unto
anger.
Ire:f. Ire, anger, choler, chafing, fuming, pettifhneffe;
wrath,rage,moodine|fe,indignation,
Ire defreresire de Diables: Prov. Brothers fivie,
dinelifh follie. :
Douce parole rompt grand ire : Prov, Great anger
is by gentle tearmes ur pue
Iré: m. ée:f, Angred, chafed vexed, put into choler.
Treufement. Irefilly worathfilly, flomackefully.
Treux : m.eufe :f. Irefull, wrathfull, lemacke full, moo-
LL à cron gl foone moued quickly vexed,ea-
e


Jrin : mine: f. Of Ireos.

Tris : € The rainbow ; alfo,a Flowerdeluce.
Tris de Florence. The Flowerdeluce of Florence,
whofe root yeclds eur Orice powder.

“Pierre d’ Iris, Some call fo,th'Opall, becanfe it refim-
bles a rainbow; ethers a fone thats of the kind and co-
lour, of the Girofole, but much barder then th’erdina-
rie one, .

Irrachetable: com.Prredeemable ; not tobe bought,


the eares. bad,or got againe,at any price.
Toufteux: m, eufe:£ Jafling, fill of 1ufingsthat lones Irradiation :£ An irradiation ; an inlightaing, or caf
to luft. ; ting of beames ; a fhining upon. ;


Touvence. asJeunefle. Youth,
Icones 7m, Ayouth, firipling, lad, fpr ingall, yong


t frais & nouveau ruine le jouvenceau:


Irraisonnable: com.Vareafonable soutragions,beafilie,


brutifh. ..
Irrecevable : com. nreceinable, vnimtertainable, not
tobewelcommed unto. =| ;


Prov. Looke Argent. — Inreconciliable: com, irreconcilable, onreconcilable B à
Jouvencel. # louvenceau. | moft contrarie,at extreame oddes. ‘ #
Jouxte. as loufte (Adverb.) Afô;according to, : com, Vnrecourable , pit me


STATE UNIVERSITY


i


meal lol filly gone,

ie | SPREE
blevarcuacable, = ons

Irregularité : £. Irvegularitie unvulineffe, difordey,out-


lashing.
disorderlie diffolute, lawleffe,


without risle..
rreligieufeté : €.1rreligion want of religion; Atheiline,
vngodlineffe, * | bs
| Irreligieux : meufe : £ 1rreligious,without religion.
Irremarquable :com, Varemarkable,not to be mar-
ked,no way to be noted.
Irremeable: com. Vareturaable, or, from which one
cannot goc backe, \
. Irremediable :com, Remedileffe , redreflelfe,jecure-
leffe,ivrecuperable, vnreconerable. ;
Irremediablement. Kemedilely, unremediably.
rt : com. Varemittable, irremiffible, vnpar-
oñnaùle, ; aT Len
Icremiffiblement. Urremittab}y, irremifibh.
Irremittent, Vaintermifine, continuall, without any
… paufing. ; ;
Irreparable : com. irreparable, unrepairable,unrefie-
rable,rmrecouerable. :
Irreparablement. Irreparably,unreftorably,varécone-


rably.
Itrepaffable: com.Prrepafable,ouer which no returne
_ canbe made. ~ ]
Irreprehenfble: com. 1rreprebenfible,blameleÿe,;vn-


reprouable.


reprosably. say
| Itreprochable:com.Vareproachable; not fubieét unto


imputation ; pure, fincere. :


mable. . x

| Irrequiet. Refileffe, vnquiet; aëtine, bufie, turbulent,e-

_ wer. flirring, : “Gt à
Irrefpeétueux : m. eufe : f. Vnrefpeétine, énoficious,


rude,

Irreveillable : com. Vawakable,in a dead fleepe.

Irreveland. Varewealable,not to be reucaled,

: Irreverémment. Varexerently, rudely.

Irreverence : f. Irreuerence,want of reuerence, vnma-

nerlineffeunrefpecfulneffe. _ :

Irreverent.Vareuer ent unre/pecifill,unmaneriie,rude,
roud. if

ue Trevor : com. Irreuocable,unrecallable.

Trot Irrenotablyunvecallably.

ifion : À Irrifion,maocking, flewting, {coffing at ; a de-
riding,or laughing to fcorne. :

rritation : £. An irvitation,or flirring up; anincenfing,
Urging ,or mouing Unto anger; 4 prowmocation; an ap-

etite. ; $
- Ind té: m,ée:f. Stirred, incenfed, urged, nettled, pro-
uoked,angred. ,


 Awatoanger.put into choler.

| _ Irritet les freflons. To pronoke an angrie perfon.
Irrogé: m.éc:f. Impofed, imioyned ; laied, or {et vp-
Irruption : £. 4n irruption; a forcible entrie; aviolent

; burflingsor breaking into, tal taepee

| Ifars:m. The wild Goats of whofe skinnes our Shamois

| leather is made: qLangued.. - Pa

_ [ Ghie:f. The Stiaticasor Hip-gowt :qRab, ©
her


APS. ee ee


€ L2
| > 0% | Iaye:f.:4 wilow, or withie groue; a boult, oy plot
Trreguhier: m. cre: f, Irtegular varulie, without rule, . Mosoe ig-with à ae


Irregulierement , Irvegularly, unorderly , lawlefly,


Ifloissm. An Mlander; one tbat dwells in an Ifle.


Ltreprehenfiblement. Irreprebenfibly, blamelefy,va-


\ Irreprovable : com. Vnveprouable, faultle(fe, vnbla- 17


 Arriter.Toirritesflivre;vrge,nettle, incenfe,pronoke,moue-


Iterer. To ilerate,n iteratesrepeat,redouble,doe eftfeons §


~


Hchine:f. The backe-bone, eed
ion : m. The huckle-bone,or hip-bone, ae
Uciatique: com. Troubled with the Sciatica ; pained in


ei Oxiers, or twig-withies grow; allo. a oteat
bundle,multitude,or pe of Oui ot a
Ifle :f Andfle,or Ifland, alfo, a bonfe that Hands bit
+ felfein themiddle of a firees.
OsdesIfles. Looke Os.
Iflette:f, A little Iffand,
Jfleux : m. cule: f, Jflandie; full of, or bolonging to,
Iflands. ; :


Ifftel: m, elle: £ Quicke,light, fleet, (wifi, mumble, ac-
tiue,liuelie, ‘ae, readie. f ;

Tfacllement, Fleet, fweiftly, lightly, quickly, nimbly, |
attinely,linelily readily.

Hope : £. (The hearbe)1/op,or Hifop. |

Lopleure, .4 triangle, er otber figure whereof al the

les be equal, |

Iffant. l’issant d’ vntombereau. 45 Timon,

Iffant. Going, flowing, or ifuing, forth...

Iifir. To iffue ; to goe,or depart out; to flow forth,

Iflu: m.ué:f [fied ;flowen, bruns, proceeded from;
come, rifen, bred, or borne,of. :

IMué : £ Theiffise,end, fucceffe, euent,cr proof ef mat-
ters; alfo, the toll, or cufiome paied for marchandife
exported, ,

Les seats d’ yne bette. The bead, andintralls of a.
-beaft.
Droit d'iffué, The fame; alfa,the fine thats duevn-


r ee co) Bird pre ts tae j

A nee ni S.liij d. upon euerie

au. as Tel; Such aone: €Poittevin,
>


10 a landlord vpon the fale,or alienation of bis tenants : ‘


Afte-mifte. Parler en ift
Lprucely ,quaintly, finica
eech, 2 che “
Ifthme :m.. An Iflmus;a necke, or narrow peece of
land betwcen two Seas; alfo,the bridge,or middle part |.
of the nofe, ;
Tftiomené. as Eftiomené: qRab. ,
Icalianizer. To talianixe it ; to fpeake Italian, play the
Italtan,doe like an Italian, : mn ;
Tealiennifer. The fame. - ‘ pat
Item. vn item. A parcel; a finall peece,or fume,


Iteratif: m. iue :f. Jteratine repeating, redoubling,ye- |


inforcing. JOR ened ose vist
Iteration :f. An iteration,repetition, venewment, ein


Sorcementsredenbing.tf Mamet,


Iterato. C’eft vne feconde Commifion, ou décret!
de la cour de Parlement, par lequelil eft mandé de |


mettre à execution ce qui avoit efké ordonné,non-.


obftantlefufan; où pour pafler outre à l'executi. |.


on d’ynexecutoire de defpens, nonobftant appo-
fition,ou serelarion, pour avoir efté taxez en la
prefence de la partie condamnée:Comme aufsien!


finance l'on vie de lettres ‘d’ Iterato, & nouveau! |


mandement; {Ragueau,


ov againe, : CNE
Ithiobole :m,.4 fivallomer of bit ls :ERab.
Ithyphallc 18. Made Rie


Itineraire :m.Aa Itineratie,cr direétorie forthe maya he
Booke,ar paper whercin the length, and courféofbigb- |
delineated, Saul) eee =.


Rs


à


wayes be


56%


LS LP
ate LES o> Este Baas À
nifte. To, va Hes,
3 by n =


~ Ur) ae


ey D


* { Jubé: m. a luppe; Alfosa vigh place made for fingers
‘|. orother pow ic ouer flages,drc. 1 #


Faire venir a jubé. To compell untoreafôn,
Tube : £. ‘The(thicke)mane of a borft,érc.
Prendre vn lion par les Jubes. asin Lion.
Tubé: m.ée: £. Thick-manedylike a borfi,érc.
Iubilation : £. Jebilation, exultation, great ioy, much


mobile : 3 A Jubilie; ayeare of releasing, libertie,re-
joycing. :

Tucheoir : m. A rooft,or pearch for pulleine to veft on.

se Iucher. To rooft,or ets a roofl) as pulleine doe;
- Looke Toucher. -

Jucondale : f. A'Daller;
fterl.

Tudaique : com. Indaicall, lewifb,of Lurie.
Herbe Judaïque. Jewes bearbe, Tetrabit, Glide-


wort,
Pierre Iudaique. À faire white flone fafbioned like
an Acorne,c> apegel witli many lines in equall dif-
tance afunder,

Judaifer. To Judaife it,play the Few, line after thema-
ner of the lewes. :

Judas : m. Judas.
Aureille de Judas. (The Mufhrome called) a lewes


eare,
Brande Judas. Freckles, or freckled pimples in the


face.
Judicature: £ tudicatute , Iufice, Iudgement; bence;
cede ludicature. A Indges place,
Iudiciaire : com. Judging , imperious; belanging to a-
Indge,or Iudgement ; alfo,iudicsavie,indiciall, done in
Court.


4 coyne worth about 3 s.


Appellation judiciaire. celle qu'on interjeéte des
fentences,appointemens, & actes qui fe donnent,
les chofes eftans conduiétes en Iugement; & fe fait
tant de vive voix,que par efcript.
Faveur iudiciaire. The faueur done by a ludee unto
afuitor.
Intereft judiciaire. LookeIntercft.
Judiciairement. Indiciarily, iudicially.
Judiciel : m.elle : f Iudiciall. à
Iudiciellement.ludicially; according to the Low, by due |
Tudiceuterne di ji, vnderfand ly,
‘| Tudicieufement. Iudicioufly, wifely, underftandingly,
Iudicieux : m. eufe : f.1ndicious wife,much tete.
ding,or of great underflanding.
Ive: f. (The bearbe) Ive,
Ive arthritique. Pield cypres, bearbe Ive, ground.
Pine,Forget-me-not. 3
Ive mufcate. The fame,
tye mufquée. The fame ; alfo,Pellamountaine, white
Poley.
Tuene. Looke Ieune. i
Tuge: m.A Indge,Iuflice, Commiffaries a vighter of cau-
ses, a decider of quarells,an ender of controuerfies.
. Juges es finances.Certaine Officers who examine,and
© controll the Kings expences, and 1h'accounts of the
fo Receinorserc, 15198
ESA & Confuls des marchands, as in Conful.
deflous l orme. The ludgeofa village ; or of


| the Courts of an inferiour Gentleman; fo tearmed be-
' | caufe be commonly fits to beare caufes fame
© Æime oe that groves in the bighway before the
es a Sa gt deflous l orme ; and called
| . (obecaufe he is not to fit on a Tribunal, or high feat,

| be encre to the gr


1


I.V G
Juges de la porte, In S. Lewis bis time three of the |
Maiflers of Requefls were fo tearmed , becaufe they
fat all the day long within the bars of the Court gate,
there to receiue petitions ; which if they contained or
dinarie fluffe, they difpatched prefently, but if they
were extraordinarie,or concerned the State, they aca
— the King witball. 4

uge a —— whom(or ad quem,to whom)a par-
tie appeales. :
Tugeveher. Looke Vcher. a
Len aura la taux du luge. He'will be foundly payed,
or throughly plagued , for it.
Nos Juges n'ont Dieu devant les yeux , ny fes
Sain&s, An equinocall ieafl; for, in many Courts of
France, God and the Saints ave pittured in the veofes,
and commonly iuft ouey the Iudges beads,
De foliuge brevefentence: Prov. A fioles boult is .
. foone fhor. ;
Juge :£..4 flautke,or branch.” :
Iugé: m. ée:£. Indged, adindged , doomed, fentenced,
decreed ; determined,ordered ; awarded.
Iugement : m. A indgement, fentence, doome, decree ;
letermination, order, award; the finall decifion of a
contronerfie ; alfo, aduice, conceit , opinion ; alfo,
capacitie, difcretion, underftanding, infight into mat-
Ser; ©
Fiens de chien, & marcd’ argent feront tout vn au
jour dejugemfent: Prov, AZ will be one at the la-
ter day (fay we.)

Tugeolle : £. as Iugioline.. '

luger. Toiudge,doome,fentence, decree ; determine, de-
cide order avard,cenfure; alfo,to decme,thinke,ima-
gine,conceine, efteeme ; difcerne apprehend.

Vn jour juge de l’autre, &-le dernier iuge de tous:
Pro. This day of the laft,the laft of all,doth indge: Finis
coronat opus,

lugere:m. A (Romane) furlong ; 24> foot long, and 120 -


road,
ey the iurifdic-


Iugerie: f. À Court,or feat of lufiice ;

‘tion, liberties, territorie,or precingls of a towne, -

Jugioline ; £. 7 Indian oplie pulfe ov white graine Sefa-

_ mum; alfo,the plant that beares it.

Juglande. noix iuglande. Awallnut, |

qu com, Of;or belonging to,the threat.

cines iugulaires, Looke Veine,

luif: m, A Jew,

luifye : f. A leweffe.

Juifverie: £The lewrie,or the part of a tovne thats in-
babited by lewes ; alfo,1evdeifme ; the religion,or fect
of the lewes.

luillet : m, (The moneth) Fulie,

Juillet rofar. À fjrop made with Roft-water and Sugar. |

a: f, The fruit or plumme called luiubes.

Tule: f. A fall worme that vefembles the many-legd
Scolopendra,or Palmer; alfo, an Italian coyne worth
about 6 d.fterl. He

mr : im Alulep,or Iuleb; a drinke made either ofdif=

illed waters and {props mixed together ; or of adecoc- À
tion fweetned with honie or fugar,or elfe mingled with
Grops sand minifired commonly as a preparatine to e-
en the pafjage of the inward parts , andto fit the
rs a purgation,

Jumeau.# Gemeau; 4 twinsalfo,a yong,or little mare,

Iumelet:m,.4jong,or little twin. ~

lumelle. A female twin, er ffler twin; al (in Blafen)


Tumelioasrte che hes, or fideb of a preffe
ui cheekes, or fide-becmes of apreffe.
Tument: f.4 mare; alfo,water(in old French. ey


bv Ss!


Dabigue: :com, Of,or belonging to,the law ; alfosaëti-
onable; fuable, or which may be put in fait; alle, inft,
orderlie;indiciall,
uement. Iudicially orderly jinfily, law c-
ue roa ly orderly ,infily, filly a à
Turi onfulte: m. À Lawyer. .
Je tion: £ Iurifdiction; authoritie, or power to
r iuftice,and execute lawes; (En droid la
Tarihi ne fignifie que la nue Iuftice fans
commandement: @Loyfeau,
Zlurifdiétion ficfale. rhe lurifdiétia a Landlord hath
€ bis Tenants ; or the priviledge be bath to beare
determine the files commenced againft them,
and all other complaints, or controuerfies touching bis,
or their tenures,
Baffle Jurifdiction. Looke Bafleluftice,
lurifprudence: £. The skill, or knowledge of lawes;
Iso, the fiile,or forme of the law,
Turiftes mud Lawyer ; alfo,a great fivearer.
Turon: m, 47 cath,
Juroye : f. Darnell,Ray,lueray,
lus im, Inyce , liquor, fap, moiflure ; _poltage,
broath, .
Jus. Adverb. Downe,or to the ground; whence;
Ruer jus. To overthrow,
Mettre jus la faye. To put off, or lay by, bis
coat,
Juicle: f...The little Seafifh rearmed a oer
Jufier : mi The giferne of a bird.
Iu(ques. Tull, vntill,unto,
. Jufquesiene dis mot; c'eft, ine? au cul,ou
au con.
Ia es à vous autres. Exen you your felues.
et ame: mit The weed Hogsbane,or Henbants
Se: White Henbane ; called foof it |
lei flower and fe


‘Jufgui ag i “Yellow Henbane, Eagle re
ne
Tnlaquintes noir, Blacke Henbane; bath great and

Soft flaulkes,broad and downie leaues,and bell-flow. |
~ ers yellowifh inthe top, and browne toward the bot
tome.

Iufsion :f..4 nn LUE or-
der fet dovone,expreffe charge given,

Juft: m, as Tus; luice,

Tufte: com, Iufts equall, indifferent, impartial, incor-
rupt, rightfüll, upright, fincere, livofiull, reafonable;
due,right euen iumpe Jeutll, fraight ; full, penfedls e-

i x as it fhould be, .::) if

ufternent. Iufily, equally, indifferently; impariially,
uprightly; lami, dulenen fight alpere


lufteflc: sf. Luflae fe iumpat(fe,euennelfe, true time glue
Pirie ood Nee it ightnef
luhice , law, ri neffe ightneffe
indifferentie , impartialitie ; pipe ee Gal.


La grande iument aioe qui fe bride: par la
prie A Ship,or Gallie ; See Margot.
lamais coup de iument ne fit mal à cheval: Prov,
A spomans blow nere burt the man fhe loued.
es Juner. as Ieune,& Ieuner.
lunjubier: m. 4 Iuviube tree,or plant. _;
Tunonique. Belonging toluno. Ocftre Junonique.
Looke Ocftre.
Iuoil: m, A white,and tranfparent fifh, that is no bigger
then a mans finger.
Ivoire: m. Ivorie; Elephants tooth, inisié
Ivoirin : m.ine: f Of Ivorie,like Ivorie, .
Iupin. Jupiter,» 4
Jupes com, High, Soucraigne, louiall, lupiter-


Pa m. The God, or Planet Iupiter; alfotinne;
tearmed by Alchymifis. {

upon. as Gippon; À fhart Caffocke.

Iuppe :f. 4 fhepheards pelt, frocke,or gaberdine sucha
er long iacket as our Porters weare ouer thegell of
their garments; (hence)alfosa caffoeke slong maaan
terkin,

Toppe To boot , fhowt, crie aut alowd ; ‘(an old


d.)
cance f. Anoath depofiti ition, fivearing,
furatoire: com. Sweaving,or,to be (ivorne.
Jurats de Bourdcaux. Areas the pes ct
in other Cities.
Juraye. as Yvraye.
lure? Fe: f. Sworne, depofed, that bath: dies


Jurez. Sworne Maifters in any Science Trade or 1 fie |
cultie.
Taille iurée. Which is leuied,and paied without SA
ment , or any examination of the fiubzects abilities.
C'eft meftier iuré il n'en eft pas qui nite Sher.
Looke Meftier. }
Jurée : f..4 lurie ; or rather a certaine companie of fib
ftantiall perfons fummoned,and Sworne to gine oi
dence betweene partie and parties
Les Bourgeois de Jurée. Sworne Burgeffes; or es.
men. *
Droidtde Iurée. An yearelie dutie payed in old time
unto the Earles of Champaigne by ail their fubiecis ;
viz. vj. d. i the pound vpon all their mouables; sand
ij.d. in the pound for all their immouables ; yet might
pes thembe a for itijis, fer. a yeare, At this day
+ the King, and other Lords of lurifdiétion receine, in
fi places , the like fn their Burgelfes» or oe


Taille &iurée. as Tailleiurée,

Jurement : m. Anoath, depofition, fivcaring; tbe ta-
king of an oath; a rapping out of an oath.

ius, To fiveare, depofe, take an oath, rap out an


force és mains d’autruy. (The old fifhion of fivra-


ring ) Looke Main. lowes,or place(or inflrument) of execution ; self sari”
Il iure comme vn Abbé; chartier; gentilhomme; . diétiens( for which looke the next martial nerds)
prelar. Like a Tinker, fay we. set alfo,a Court of. Luftice,or lurifdiétion.


| Ivrefon : €. (Th’aét of) drunkenneffe.

| Jureur :m. 4 ee or depofer ; one that takes an
oath, or often vaps out oathes 5 alfo, 4 luroï, (orwit-
nef depofed, whether. to wlter the meee bis


knowledge.
Juridicfanes m. Ades oy Magia ne tat ex. -» Juftice diftributive. Equall diftribution, dealing, or
uni inftice, pbs mt es bat bate Su the gining vnto euerie one sd ‘a
idicié :m.. A partie mubor, ts one 19 ce harmonique. Harmonious, andi proper.
| Leg bane) ihe bins one that is inlaw, | tion, : inn ul
Bbb SAAUr |


Iuftice commutative, Equalitie in exchange,
Prin corrective, Penall inflice, parifanentof of
o fenders,

” Juftice criminelle. That part of the law which deals
. with matters of life and death:


ho Digitized Go gle fe E % - ve


à


PR A RS DT A PS OR


t


© 2 ETC LE


Invi §


Iuftice de ferment. Trial of a caufe byan oath mi-
niflved vuio one of the parties (an auntient forme of
proceeding.)

Appeller, ou mettre en Jufticé To goe to law with;

to [ue,or commence a fuit, againft.

luflicc:£. Furs/tsition; power to adminifier iuflice,au-
thoritie to execute Lawes, or to keep a Court for either;
Of three principal kinds, High, Meane or middle,
Bafe or low ; (although the word lultice fimply, and
by it [elfe imports onely the laft; ) alfo, the precinét, li-
bertie,or territorie, wherein a Lord may exercife any
of thofe kinds ; alfo,the Court of fuch a Lord.

Iuftice cenfuelle,ou cenfiere. Aa aétion

Cenfuel rights or, power to determine Wissen:
Jies that concerne bis Cens: (A kind of \uftice fonci-

ere.) J

Juftice domaniale. a luftice fonciere,

Juftice pour fes droiéts, & debices. Furifdiétion v-
fürped by diuers Lords{o, ample Cenfiues,and of ma
ny va[[alls) for the righting of themfelues sm the reco-
nerte of duties withheld from them.

luftice fonciere.(The fécond branch of la Bafle luf-
tice) Éxercifèd vi tbe Bas lufticier ouer bis vaffalls,
and Tenants (at ot the pre[erwation,and reconc-
vie of bis Seigneuriall dueties; ( Djuers cuflomes (as
thofe of Meaux, Valois, Xanétoñge, S. Paul, and
the prinat ones of Paris) bane utterly reieéted,and for-
bidden this kind of bafe Jurifdittion ; Others (as thofe


of Anjou, Touraine, le Mayne, and Lodunois)con- |


found it with the firft branch.)
Tuftice manuelle. Quandle Seigneur, pour avoir
payement des arrerages de fa rente, ou charge,
prent de fa main namps fur I’ heritage en Ja pre-
fence du Sergent,auquel il les delivre pour les dif-
cuter, a
Juftice paribulaire à deux piliers, Belongs onto a
Lord High Yuficer ; Looke Pilier.
luftice à fang. So doc the Cujtomes of Anjou, Tou-
raine, and le Mayne, tcarme' La Moyenne Juftice;
giwing the Lord thereof power to indge, andexecute
theeues,and men-killers;and to that end allowing bim
tofet vp a paire of gallowes. j

uftice du fang, & du Larron.. Power.to take no-
tice of blowes,and bloud-wipes(beflowedin bot bloud)
and of theeneries which be not capital’; conferred on
the Lord of la Moyenne luftice, by the cuftomes of
- Picardie, and Flanders... Mie VAS
Juftice vicomtiere. la Moyenne Iuftice; tearmed’


fin all the cuftomes of la Gaule que.

La bañle Iuftice. Bafe, or low lurifdittion; of two
principall kinds ; viz: Perfonall; which taketh notice
of all perfonall ACtions(not exceeding the value of 60
s.or not fubictt to 4 greater amerciament then 7 5.6 d,
Tourn.) and reall,or foncieres for which loooke luf-
tice fonciere, and for more touching thy kind of lurif-


1 didtion,in, le Bas lufticier.


te Juftice. High Jurifdittion; authoritie to
and determine all criminall, or capitall matters
scept high treafons) and all cmile Aétions, or contro-
es, except in Royall cafes, andfuchas concerne
lemen,and the highwayes ; wherewith no Lord,in

Ly ght of haute Luftice, is 10 meddle Seeke


: Laha
idee,


luftice, The condemna ofa
nda ee oer


ce. An Executioner , or


>


La moyenne Juftice. Meane,or middle Furifdifli-
on ; authoritie to determine all ciuile controner fies(ex~
cept the before excepted in la haute luflice; ) and
of cage againft (ome kind of malefattors, (asin le


yen Jufticier. ;
Er : m. Th'effeét,or execution of Inflice, or of
lurifdiftion, A :
lufliciable: com, lufliciable ; under lurifdiétion, fub-
ect unto fuit,or lawes ; that is 10 doe bis fuit unto the
Court of another. ® :
se :com, Of,or belonging vnto;luflice,or lurif.
ICHOR,
ufficier : m. À uflice,or Juflicer ; a Gentleman that
hath(as almoft euerie Gentleman of meanes in France
bath) High, Meane, or Low Juri{dittion, within a
certaine Precinét; or within bis ewne (or another
mans ) Territories: AU Jufticiers (though otherwife
there be oddes pnougb in their Priniledges) mufl kecpe
Clerks; and Seales for Sentences, but not for Contratis,
if they bane not Droié de Tabellionné, ou Notariat
which onely fome fev high lufticiers baue:) They may
alfo baue to tbe mumber of fix Sergeants, and Goalers
for the Mn of their prifons.
Le bas Jufticier; ou,.le Scigneur bas Tufticier.
One that bath bafe Furifdittion(withima certaine Pre-
cinét)ouer bis we, or another mans, tenants; takes
notice of veall, or perfonall Actions not exceeding the
value of 60 s; or wherein a greater amerciament, or
fine then7 s, 6 d, Tour. lies not : with tre{paffes a few
ry a (as the reformed ones of Paris and Meleun)
allow himto deale , fo they deferue not a greater fine
\ thenthat ; but the moft reftraine him to perfonall mat-
» bers, and thofe efpecially that concerne bis own rights ;
vith which onely the Bas lufticiers of old time ufed
to meddle ; how/ocuer, their Iudges not content with-
all, baue in proceffe of time incroached on caufes bred
in-villages betweene paitie and partie, touching. fei-
furessboundaries, deliucrie of poffeffion, barme done
by trefpaffing beafis, and other fleight and pettie diffe.
tences, that require a {peedie, and locall aay li
For all which they are 10 keepe but foure Courts in a
yeare: ) Criminall perfons taken in the manner he
mufi apprebend , and may keepe them in bis prifon
foure and twentie boures ; but not longer, nor can
be proceed further againft them : Upon euerie Con-
fication, Efcheat , or Bien Vacant that falls with.
im bis Libertie: bee may take 7 s: 6 d. Tourn, but
they are fo few,and that fo little, as many lufticiers
neglect it, |
Le haut Jufticier; ou, le Seigneur haut Juftici-
er. A Lord of high lunifdiélion ; iudges, and de-
termines all ciuile , and criminall caufes (except,


as in la haute Iuftice ) happening within by Li--


bertie , 0: Precin&t ; To vebich end hee ke epes a ludge,

or Gardede luftice, at this time fliled higher ( fon
Bailly, & Lieutenant, ) who mufi bee learned,
anda Graduate (fora a thats no Graduate is
mot, ia France, beld worthie to pronounce the fen-
tence. of ee ordinarie lurifdittion:) And
becaufe of bis bufine([es determinable (if they
concerné the rights of bis Iurifdittion , or Seigneu-
ri) inbis one Court, he alfà keepesa Procureur

» fifcal, by the name, and mouth of whom be pleads,
euen as the King doth in bigher Courts-by bis. He
‘| may bunt freely in fit feafons , ouer all the wn-
ine ‘oundes of bis Liberties : Hee may fine
bis (offending) vaffalls at bis pleafure; and once in
<<his time canfe them all fweare , to acknewlede
: à .mo


Original from
tHE OHO STATE UNIVERSITY


feet! à LA) BI -


no other lurifdiétion then his; to preferue,by all poffible
meanes,the priuiledges thereof, and toi bimof
any that [hall offer to incroach upon them : He leuies
to bis owne vfé all fines, and confifcations (except for


bath ber Tearmes.)
Kali. (The bearbe) Glaffewort, Saltwort , Crab-graffe,
Frog-gra(fe. file
+ The beftyeHow Amber ; Bead Amber, Bracelet


bigh treafon)all Eftheats(except baftards os Amber.(Mor Arabique,)
mt and all Biens Vacans (except Some ki ad of at, as Carat.
wreckes) accruing within his Precinéts: In Norman- | Karefine.as Carefine.


die be cannot keepe malefaëlors in bis prifon aboue 24
boures; after which(if be bane not the whileft contlers-
ned them)be mujt {ead them vnto the next Supreame
Lord; In other Proninces be may keepe them longer,
and euerie where punifh, according to the cuflomes of
the countrey,all forts of them (euen to Sorcerers Blaf-
phemers,ér Idolaters;) Only he refèrs ouer to the kings
officers and Courts, all {isch as commit, or be charged
with,bigh treafon, ~ | :
Le Moyen Iufticier. The Lord of meane, or middle
Iuvifdittion; takes notice of all cinile canfes as well as
the Haut Lufticier (except in th'ordering of the fepera-
tion of goods betweene married folkes; tb'interdiétion
. of vntbrifis ; & les Decrets; wherein be comes as far
Short of bim, as he goes beyond the Bas Tufticier en le
feellé, confection d’ inventaire, emancipation,da-
tion de tuteurs & curateurs, wherewith the Bas uf
ticier us not 10 deale :) But what criminall caufes bee
may takenotice of is not agreed on by the cuflomes of
France; for fome of them as thofe of Paris,Niver-
nois,and others, affigne bim none but fach as ave not
finable aboue 60 s. (th’vtmoft be can impofé in any
caufe ; ) Others gine him power ouer Batteries, Bloud-
wipes,and fleight felonies; Others ouer Manflaugh.
ters, and capitall felonies : But ete UH-
10 the Common Law of France) permit bim to iudge no
offendors but {ich as are to efcape with lift, & limme;
And therfore bis Iudge needs not be a Graduate: Ni
bath he (as the Haut lufticier) a Procureur
(though he baue an Officer of almoft the fame nature,
tearmed Procureur d'Office) becaujé be hath no ff.
que, but onely an allowance of 60s. Tout. out of ete»
rie Confi{cation,E/cheat,or Bien vacant, thats leuied,
or gotten,in bis Precinét.
Iufticier. To indge, gouerne, (way, bane iurifdiétion'o
ner; chaftife,corvect, punifh; execute the alts, or ap-
ointments of luflice. |
fulticier pour fon fief, c’eft, faire les faifies,
Tuftificatif: m.iue: f. Inflificatine juflifyingvighting;
making eucn,or inft with,
Tultification : . 4 iuftification, purgation , cleeving


off 4: ;
Iuñifié: m. ée:£ Juflified,purged, cléered, ; alfo,made
iull,euenore wall with.
luftifier. Toinfifesplrge, cleere, excufe allo, to make
iufi,euen, or lenell with.
Tufvert: m. Greene-fauce. ;
Iuveignerie: f.rounger{bip ; the condition,eflate,or ti-
tle of ayounger brother : Breton.
Iuveigneur : m. 4 younger brother. suai
Iuveioneutie ; ou, Iuveigneureric. as Iuveignerie.
Iuvenile: com. Young, youthfull, youtblie, childifh.
Iuvenilement. Younglie, childifhly, youth fully, Jtb-


Karobbe; ou,Karoble; 4 carob fred; alfo,the twen-
tie fourth part of a grain (one of the leaft weights thats

- fed by Goldfmithes.) j
Kebule. rhe biggeft kind of the Mirabolan plumme:long,
and fomewhat like a Peare, or final Leymon , in


pes
ebus. as Kebules,
ufudure : m, The {and Adder. (Mot Barbare.)
Keratoide. Tunique Keratoide. (as Cornée; ) The
borne Tunicle of the eye,
Kermes, Scarlet berries, Scarlet graines; the feed of the
- Scarlet Oake,
Kefudure. qRab. read Kedufudure,
Kitre. #4 Pois liquide; Tarre,
Kytiele; ou, Kyriclles, 4 multitude or great number;
alfo,a mightic coile,or neife, :
Kyft: m, 4 membrane; little skinor bladder within the
bodie,containing fuper fluous bumers,


L “4


© A. An Article of the Feminine Gender (at in) La
maifon ; the boufe; alfo,a Feminine Relative;
+ are Nela voyez vous pas? See you not
; HS
La faire longue. To live abide pr Sur
Li. (4» Adurbe oper 5.
place ; (alf,of 8507 incouraging) Là, ou lala;
"Now now, got to goe to ; on there; againe there.
La bas, Beneath, below ; downe,downewards,’
Fen fuis Jà.1am of that mind,or bumor.
Que diriez vous la. What would you fay in that cafe?
Us ne pañleront iamais par la. They will neuer
Play tbat part,pold that courfe, yeeld unto thofe condi-
tions. .
Labdane: m,Labdanumsa fat,clammie,tran[parent er
Siveet-finelling Gumme or liquor,cathered from off the
leaues of the little fhrub called Ciftus Ledon; alfo,the
Sweet oyle thats made thereof. :
Labeche: f. 4 South-weft wind, i
abeur: m. Labour, tranell, toyle , paines 3 worke,
exercife; contention,diligence indeuour.
Labeurer, Sometimes vfêd for Labourer 3 whence;
En peu d heure Dieu labeure: Prov. God workes
bis will in à finall while, . :
Labie : f..4 hp.
Labier :m. ere :f Ofor belonging to,a lip.
Veine labiere. The fip-veine ; Seeke Veine.
Labile: com: Slipperie, vnflable, fleeting, fabien.


1.


to falling.

Laboration: f. 4 labouring pworking, tranelling moy
ling, toiling. THEN

Labordean:m. 4 Haberdine.


Laborieufement. Zaborioufh, painfully, roilefimely ;

K : diligently induprionfly. ie a a rg
REC EU Laborieux : m. eufe : £Laborious,painefiull,toylefome,
Alendrier: m.A Kalender,an Almanacke, difficult; induftrious, diligent, :
K Son Kalendrier eftrubriché. Her Kalender | Labour:m.Ti btilage;busbandrie,labouring, plough-
is full of Rubrickes ; (faied of a woman that ing,or breaking vp of the — Kr Pa
Bobby La-


—— ee a —_ oo


eh oe


cod yee lathe à 10e


‘


À Lacert: m. A Lizard;


L A B
Labourable: com. Labourable , le, fit to be | Laconifer. To live firiétly or fharingly ;t0 fpedke briefi=
Sten iitaetias A NE de mo en) am tn eee
Labourage: m, as Labour. | Lacquay. as Laquay. a wakes


Labouré: m, ée :f Laboured sxroughtstrauelled,toi-
led; flriuen, contended, indenoured,im; alfo, tilled,
aired,ploughed,busbanded, —
abourer. To labour, trauell, werke , toyle , moile,
drudge take pains; to firime,contend,indeuour,be dili-


enti, ‘
M la terre, To til,aire, plough, breake vp
busband the ground ; Labourer bled la terre; 10
{ow it,
Le grand boeuf apprend à labourer au petit: Pro,
The great Oxe learnes the little one to worke,
Tout ce que le Clerclaboure folle femme devore:
Prov. Ali that the Clerke can fcrape bis trull com
“umes,

Labouret: m.Shepheards purfè,Shepheards pouch, Toi
wort , (afeweed , Pickepurfe , poore-mans Parma«
cetie,

Laboureur : m. 4 labourer, worker, toyler; a Hind,
ploughman , busbandman, labouring man; alfo, as
Courtilliere. :

: Laboureur de nature. A mans yard,
Piece de laboureur falé. .4 peece of powdered


becfe,
Labrufque : m. The wild (grape-bearing}uine.


Labyrinthe:m, 4laborinih, maze; intricate mat.


ter,
Faire le tour du labyrinthe, To labour bard and be
neuer a whit the neerer;alfo,to fall againe,after much


adoe,into the nae ff bandled. !
Labyrinthé: m.ée: £Made as a laborinth, framed like


amaxe ; intricated; full of unknowne crookes, crecks,
turitings windings.

Labyrinther. To make (or make like) a laborinth, or
maze, to intricate; alfo,to wind, compaffe, or turne
many times in and out ; 10 be full of many unknowne
crookes,or creekes.

Labyrintheux: m.cufe:£. Moflintricate; full of tur-

ningsscrookes windings. %

Lac: m.A lake ; a great poole,or mecre ; alfo,a ginne, or
frare;as inLags. —. FREE

Lacé: m.ée : Ê, Laced ; bound,or tied with a lace; al,
Snarled,or infnaring. >, +

Lacement: m.,A lacing; al(o,an infnaring; or a fètting
of [nares for. «

_Lacer. To lace; to bind,n tie up with alace; alfo,to in-
fnare; or tofet ginnes,or faaresfor, = #

Laceration: f. 4 laceration, tearing, vending, difinem-
bring,mangling. . east « :

Laceré m. éc:f. Lacerated,torne, rent,mangled,di[~
membred, peecemealed, [ae


Lacerer. To lacerate, rendpeecemeale, teare, mangle, .


difimember.
Laceron:m. The Sow-thifile , Hares-thifile , Hares
= Colewort. 2
à b,the Viner, or lefJe Sea-dra-
gon ; tearmed fo becaufe it fomewbat refembles a Dra-
Licette, 4 flefhie mule; teamed fo bécane bath{as


d


‘| aLexard)a long taile.. ; 4 tt
| Lacet:m, Thelace ofa peticoat,a womans lace, or la-
__ cing; alfo,a fnare Bina


as are in a confumption ; of Tabia,a place in Italie,the


ee TOO ON oe ee 0

> 7 < rr 7 — 4
." .

» . ‘


PR AND


Lacque':f. Sanguine; rofé or rubie,colour ; (The true
Lacca 5 an Armenian Gumme vfed in the dying of
rep hance afterwards(growne artificiall)imployed

ainters, 4

Lacre: m, 4 confedtion,or fluffe made of rofin,brim,
and white wax Ag Eh sen to es
owne cold is as hard as aftone,and cleaues infepera-
ly unto the thing thats clofed with it; Our beft bard

wax is a kind of it. :
iflant :m.ante :£ as Laëtifique, ,

Lagtifique: com. Milk-breeding, milk-making,milk-

yeelding, … aie |

Lacunaire :m, The maine beame of a houfe being fème-
what arched;alfo,an arched feeling,or floore of boords.

Lacune : £. 4 puddle,pit,or ditch of fanding water ; al.
So,a fenne,marfb,or waterifh ground.

Lacuftre : com. Lakie,belonging to a lake.

Loan m, The fivcet porn Ladanum ; comes of a

er Lign ed fram the leaues of the forub
eae liquer:gatber edf f te far


Ladre : com. Leaprous,laxerons ; mexeld, fcuruie.
Herbeaux ladres. Fluellin, Speed-well, Ground-
heele, Paules Betonie.

Riche comme vn ladre. Seeke Riche.

» Celuy eftbien ladre,ilne fent point quand on luy

«pique la chair.Appliable toa dullard , or a coward ;
one thats unfencible and cannot, or fearefull and will
not, feele the wrongs done to bim.

Ladreric: f. A Spittle for leapers,a place wherein they
abide; alfo,leaprofie, (turuine[fe,meaxeldneffe.

Ladrige :f. Leaprofie leaprowjnefle meaxeldneffe, fenr-


“minelfe.
L'adronnerie: f. 4 denne of theenes.
Lagagne. Corne-rofé,red Poppie: Langued, .
Lai: m. Breadth of cloth,erc ; Seeke Lé,& Lais, as
Lai: m.Laïe:f. Lay, fecular; of the Lapetic,none of the
. Clergie ; temporallvulgar, |
Frerelai. A feruant inan Abbey,or Couent. ;


rm, Milke,
Lai&-aigre. whay ;alfo,a fillibubov merribowke.
aict caillé Curds,curded milke, frefh checfe. “
Lai clair, Whay. |
…Laiét esburré. Butter-milke,
Laiét de noftre Dame. The white Thiflle, -
Le laiétnouveau. Beefor Beeftings, ,
Lai&t Tabian. À milke thats verie healthfull for fuch


aire whereof is faid to baue thefame vertue,
Laict Virginal. À milke compounded of the froth, or
fpume of gold fleeped in vineger, and fait, infifed in
waters of Plantaine,Night{bade and Rofes.
Dentle laiét. A coults tooth, or young tooth ; alfo,a


ses grues. à

au delaict. Clarified whay; alfo, water of milke or

dravone by illitorie from milke, aly

Frerede A fofter brother, |

Herbe à laiét. Spurge, Milke-weed,Wolues-milke.
be au Lait. Sea Milke-wort , blacke Salt


t.
Mouches en laict. A plaine matter , cleere cafe, e- Sg
idem tion. i  .
Son abien du lait, His fleeping fivord(f =
‘flesh ath Ire ike = 4
te ts TR 1 JS +
| 7, ii
LÆ ~
THEGHIG UNIVERSITY ;
ed. - “sn V1: Fe: iv? F Lo _


la eS


LAI


Iaterté de bon laiGt.He bath beene well bredstbere
is much worth , or a great deale of good fufe, in


bim, :
Yvre de lait caillé. ‘Tipled,or diflempered by a final
matter; whofe map nor à by an)
‘weake liquor. rome ve
Vache de loing a lai&t affez: Prov. A forreine com-
moditie cannot be deféctines we eftecme that moft that
comes fürtbefh ; eee
s Vin fe ranean pr it ol fur vin c’eft venin:
v.Wafh thy milke off thy liner,( fay we.
neg on cn oh
Laiétänce im, ‘The fat\or foame of lime,or chaulke, re-
Pare TN ene eae on 3 alfo, as


dala

Laicte: f. The milt,or foft vob of fifhes.

| Laiété: m, 6e: Aile. ge hie |

Laidtée: f. A litter of whelpes: Sans me

Laiétence.asLai@ance, “1 ~¥

Laicterie: A Dairie,or milke-Bonfe. =

Laicteron : m. The Sow:tbifiles ©" *
Laiéteron dpre. The pricklie Som-thiftle,
Laicteron blanc. The wbite-flowere pile.
Laiéteron liffé. Hares Lettuce ; the fimooth(or ordi-
narie)Sow-thifile. 71
Laiéteron noir. The wild , and pricklie Sow-
thrfile.

Laiétier : m.ere: f. Milkje, full of milke, milke-yeel.
ding made of milke. |
L’herbelaiétierc, Tytbimal, Spurge, Milke-reed,
Wolues-milke, \

Vache laidtiere: 4 milch Com i
Laictifique : com. Mike-making,milke-peelding. —
Laitué :f. Lettuce, jae -

Laiétué aigre. The bitter wild Endiue, or narrow-

rt Cab oe ie —-

+ Lai&tué capuñfe. Cabbadge Lettuce. ke
Laictuë rar es Taies Lettuce,Corne fallade.
Laictué crefpe,ou crefpuë, Crifped, curled, wrink-
led,or crumpled Lettuce.

Laidtué pommée.cabbadge Lettuce loafed Lettuce,

beaded Lettuce. ;

Laiétuë Romaine, The greateft kind of Cabbadge

Lettuce. -

- Laidtué ronde.Loafed,or beaded Lettuce, that grows
= clofe by the ground. ,
Laidtué fauvage. wild Lettuce , greene Endine ; al-
fo,the bearbe Hawkeweed; alfo; the bitter wild En-
en CM eens y dif

Laid: m. Laide; f Foule,deformed,mifhapen;dis figu-
red, il-fanoured, ouglievncomelie ; filthie; loathfome;
vile. .
Laid comme vn marpaut. See Marpaut,

© Laide vilenie. 2s Laidange,

Laidange: m, Reproach, reuiling, railing, defamati-
on ; intuvious, opprobrious, or outragious language ; a
bainous imputation : cp celuy qui. a iniurié
yn autre à tort fe doit defdire en iuftice, en fe pre-
nant par le bout du nez: @Ragueau.


Rey


‘rin À


on, outrage 1 Words,
Laidangeux : m. eufe : f. Reproach,


opprobrious , defamatorie , flaundi ht te
ous, : x
Laidement. Foul!.deformedly, mifiapenly oui, i


ur edly 5 loath; A ae 6 ks
À fae do DU À Sonnobatenkli, pretiie awd


gt eens aca


Laidanger. Torenile yeproach defame diferediteraile


L A I:


Laideur : £.Foulne [fe deformitie jll-fanouredne(fe,oug-

~ ine ; nr ot it
doyer. as Laidanger, $

Laie: £ #Wood-ground by meafüre, or quantitie of Ar-


Laier. c'eftmarquerleslaisen vn bois tailils avant
couppe d'iceluy;pour les y laiflet.
Laiéte : fs Layette. ms
Laighié: f wood: qPic.
Laignier: m. A wood-ja7d,or wood-pile,
Laigs: m. Legacies ; things bequeathed by will.
Laine:£ wool, - ;
Laine de bois. Cotton,bombaf,or bombace.
ime fourge. New-fhorne , unwafhed, or greazie


#00 *
Laine avec le fuin. The fame.

‘Mouton à la grande laine. seeke Mouton,

+ Batrelalaine.To lecher to baire-beat it. K
Demander de la laine à vn Afne, To askea thing of
them wbicb haie it not. . fe
Titer Ja laine. (12 {pinning of wooll) 10 draw the
thread out; alfo, to twitch a cloxke off a mans backe,
and runne away with it.

‘A mol Pafteur le loup chie laine: Prov. 4 gentle

Shepheard makes the wolfe fhite wool,

Livn ale bruit! autre lave la laine: Prov. ‘rh’one
els the credit th'otber takes the paines,

Qui n’a laine boiue à la fontaine: Prov. Let him

that bath no wooll drinke at the well, 5

Laine-facture’: £, spinning, carding, working of woll;

Cloathing ; or the labour,or trade, of Clothiers,

Laineux : m. eufe:f, woollie ; full of wool. ad
Marcher avec les pieds laineux: To goe foftly, tread


Laie Laon: AE (on) à iN"

Lais : m.Trees,or sleft as markes in acopfe-roods
or,as Layes(in the later fence) ==
Lalfird A Lizard; a Newt, an Aske; See Le:


ar ;
Laifarde:£, as Laifardr Lezard,

Laifardin: m. Lixard-hke; of,or belonging to,a Lizard.
Laifche. a Lefche.

Laife:f. The breadth of a peece of cloth, Ruffe, ground,


Ct. . §
Laifle :f. as Lefle ; Alo, a leafe of bounds,erc. ©
Laiflé: mde: f Lefts relinguifhed, layed’ apart, put

off; ginen ouer, abandoned, forfaken,omit ted, forgone;

See Laiffer.

11 a laiffé fes houfeaux, Hebath ‘tipped vp the heels;


or is readie to doe it.


Laiffer. To leawe, relinquifh,lay apart, fer afide,pur off, |
let alone, forgoe, let goe, forfake, abandon, gine ouer


Laiffer les botes. Looke Botes.
Laiffer courre. To bound, or let flip,\a Dog at


Deere:

Laifferdire. cela fe laiffe dire. That is common-
. ly fpoken ; Te me fuis Jaïflé dire cela. 1 was told

that. san. fh


Laiffer de l’eau°en fon moulin, To referue vato
bimfelfefome worke,or fomewhat to doe 0,1
Laisser le ieu quand il eft beau.To give ouer a game
at the fuireft; (Appliable either to a temperateyor an |
irrefolute pumer.) Dre

- Laiffer la lancette dans la veine. Seeke Veine.
Laiffer le monftier ou il eft. Not to change, ov aliet |

amauntient cuftome(efpecially of the Church.) = "1

Laffer Je moule du pau Secke Moule.

Bbb iy


ot ed) Saket RS


LAM


Onne doit


¢ a a cel terre. po
eigneurs arigo-
ro La LA a so quit becanfe tis |


Lats: med aed legit dint) of awild Boare wolfe,


| Laift: F as Le ; or Li ate
' Laitage : m. as Laitt
| Laite: £. The milt,or fo ia y 7
aitifle. 4 kind of whiti
aiton:m, ce
(He m, The ballaft
: Laitterie:f, 45 Laidterie.
| Laive:£ 4 kind oftile.
 Laiz :in. 4 Legacie; alfo,the increafe that a riuer -yeelds
to aLord(by an Ifland, or Hoult growing withinit; )
alfo,rews of {hrubs, or pres mue ina ne
Vader wood.
Laize: f. as Laifc; Breadth.
Laize de cuir. A fcourge,or thong of ales.
‘A la grandelaize, Amply, 2e or fle
alfosat tb'old rent.
Lamancur :m. The Pilot of a.


hip.


Lambdoide. Commiflure diem ion,
or fèame in the hinder part ofthe seull,.
mbeau : m. Afh } peece of fuffesor
ae leo ! baling ba,
1. aol whole ; a
|. Lambeaux. fige AM af the ragged baire,
| or ragged ( coat of a Deere.
_ Lambeaux de feu, Streakesor flakes of fire,


| Misparlambeaux. Rent, or torne ia peeces; ouer-
throwne,ruined, fpoiled.
Cela ne fe trouve point es lambeaux des lurifcon-
fultes. There is no law for that opinion; or the rag ced;
and beggerlie interpreters of the law haue no uch
thing among them,

Lambel: m. 4 Labell of three points ; or a File with

three Labells pendant; (The mark of an eldef Jonnesin


Le To gully deccine,delude,befot,bring à inte a
fooles Paradice. ff
in:m, The great partie- coloured , and flingin
© Bumble,or ent bee se great cokes, ce
don lout Joobie, foolifh lubber.
ambiqué : m. ée: DNA Liebe,
Lambiquer. To difiil by a Limbe
| Lambourde:f. 4 Summer-tree, fil fi mor fr
:th'ends of Fepfis 40 ie ine ~ Sit
pees Lo tm. The an ofa Label, or Label of a
File, in Bla
| se Lambriquerle cerveau, Tobeat purzle,or role the
bead about.


| Lambris: : m. Wainfeot, feelings ès Peitixedior em.
Pet i feeling,» +
po :m, A wain{colting, or feeling ; Afgan


See nd oan ; Paton


Lamen : m. # Lamentatio
Lamentable : com. crabe wailefill, mani ;


dolefult, ART D


e moane,
Lames: € (The Plurall of Lame; alfa tbiearthiedregs,
@ thal th ing there {
pete: laren sp of. ee ofa “lala,


Lamie : f. A Breake-net ; the greatehy à pr mr j
Lamine: f. At


| Les
LE


Lampe:f. .4 Lampe; alfo, tbe fhar pe-pointed'Docke ;


Lamperon:: m, Abitile Lampe.
tt : meufe : £ Full of Lampes; ofor belonging


Lanier m4 tandleflicke,or branch, for a Lampe,


Lamponner. as Lanterner.
taenes. :m. 4 vaine got, a fond or idle ¢ coinpa-


Tarps: m. A Lamprill,or little Lamipr ey.


Lamp
Lait: f. as Lampfans.


is


Lanes m. Wollage; the trade of sn he
Lane: er in frinming salt frace,peufé in in-


ae eae (hor fe-


dirai


LAM


or waut of the Seasafier a tempefs alfo,the cd Ed
ofaWeauers .
N’admirons le fourreau pour mefprifer Ja
let not an outfidebe yeah to the nee of Ui


tion: f. À pére SR bewailing,
AS AN 34 pitifull complaint...)

nter. To lament, mayment ; waile, weepe, com-
plaine pitifully, ma


alfo,a word vfed among boyes in a play (muchdike our
Fox) wherein he towhem tis ufed.mujt nee th
reft indenor to catch bim.


nous kind of Dog-fij

; 7 ol of metiall Lahoud idee
Shingle , or flate ; a.thinne planke, or boord; alfo,a
brafin tombe, or tombe-plate ; Alfo, a Corflet made
ae ri MN to moue with or be the more pliant


| The Lampaffe (or fwelling) in a borfès
anpañé de gueules.Langued,or, whofe tongue is red;


LE tearme of Blaxon.)
Lampatt. as Lampas,


( whence; )
Lampe de marais, The water Docke,water Sorrell,
bor fe Sorzek.
Culde lampe. The bottome of an out-intting rome,
fifhioned like the foot of a Lampe.
De main en main yous eft la lampe.baillée. 44
length your turne is comes jonr cous fe is. now to
 fPeake,dre.

ampereau : m.The name 71 4 black 2 vine which yeelds
very good wine.


10, Lampe,


iid :£AGloe-wormesor Glow-bird that fines.
t


nion,
ourde :£. Ti be Cloat,or great Burre : Langued.


roye: f. A Lamprey. 2
Bf yon: m, pa Ah ;


fans: nade es; (a wild pot- es à
lers, which in cold we,
bo ces and cannot be
rr ae elicate fmall-moutbed}
pita a iatick fea) which Po et
and bellie, and inflead of each
ial seg @Marfeillois.


:f, À sd lunch rene, edits ine dati À


(the borfeman that bearesit,) aLanceere, ame of
mes ;


noinal FOM


THESOF IO-STATEUNIVERSITY


 Lanceman : my\A Compatriote, or. 6


BAM N


Armes;alfà the im aPedegrees:;
Lancei a oran et e
a tilting
RER Amans perds 4
Lance de carriere. A flaffe to run at the Ri
à boëre: n : 93th! is J


À ce courtoiferas L
TI de S.Crefpin. 4 open et
Lance fournie. A maneof Armes,
points; viz. Sas
à ché  Armour-bearer; and two a for tivo Arch
s(t sre ae bro


ma baggage.)
Court lalate Totilt,on toranneiatitilt.. worst


rae eet


- Ha labonnelance; 8, olahardie lance. ( Phrafts


poner uftd i in one défgrase, of 4 #
: Coward, }:
Hardie fangue is at lance: Pro Cou ago len-
guage a cowardlie lance. NE. l
fie m. éc : f. Throwne; ‘ured, Fung dared al
pierced, pricked, or thruft through; alfo ;
. thru pers Deere; alfo, meagan


flavmelie
Lines E Ribwvort Phenteine,Lambes. sé
mae (a
word which the Frenchman. borvomes Reed to


» mocke bim witbull, )


Lancement: m. The fame; olan throwing, han,


Lancer. (Viol as IR
or ene TUE


Pinging, darting ; alfo, a rowfingsar plaies ofa


Danocaleok Lanceolette. as Lancelée. .
Lance-peflade: m. nA Lai the mesh of
= er in a foot-comp RUE i


-alfi,to vovefe,or

Se Lancer dons, To vane beading pr à .
~ Self bafibint

Se Lancer fins To runne fetcely, rh fou give
a violent, or hot charge,vpon.


Lanceron: m. 4 leg, or lacke j a: Pickerell thats about


afoot long,


|| Lancette: f. À Surgeons Launcet ; alfiya bitle lance.


Laifler lalaticette dans la veine, Seeke Veine, .


À Lanceur: m, A burler,darter,thrower.


| Lanciere:£ C eft vn fommier mis à vn


Lanci:m. The Squinancies alfo,a kind of fitch,or Paine
like a flitche»
Lancier: m. À Lance, Lancer, Speareman ; a barfe-
aman that ferues with a Lance; aos Lanciere,
minée
dtravers le ee aft,
as Abbée,


Lancinant. Pricking, | riking, me LE
fosrending,or tearing wit the er ; alfo,


confuming.


| Länciner. To pricke, firike, open, or thruftinto (as with


‘a lance , to rend,.0r teare wk: the.
a ch ame ne ai
Lande. € 2 ‘Lando, Land’ 54 villa rab,


or bufhie Plaine.
grave: A Lantgranes the Earle ofa Prowinct


| Landie: f, The dec AEM ROMMEL 1


L nr qu


Landie defch


SAB


mare


k Langue:


C7) ONE PR ee ee ME ET


LAN


pond ate m. A rude clowne, gaxing ‘a i.
viele | leaden fellam, pooie {neakeshicy mar 1


ii ivel: m. The Laaterne of 4 Ship. :
,andyer, To, cloy, wearie,. trouble; be tedious unto,
anefet: im The Hawke fo called.

Lanfrel iu cher. Fo; lecher. Rab, |

Langage. me Lenguaattat ey Speech difeourse ; af,
a Langaage,or Tong
C'ett. va, langage à du temps des gure, bonnets.

This is as old wines tales or a fabien of-{pecch cleane
out of. Salhion,

sm, #4 Lang gagoutsr Langagier.._
et. To chat,pratle late many words.
eur: M, 4 prater, pratler,tattler;bablere

L er:m.cre: f Prating, babling, sailing, il

langue: …

L'angat a Lang sal ‘

Langayer. To mot diftourfe, boldchat withs,aifo,to
fearch the root of the tongueofaHog,erc.

Lanÿayerie: f, The worming of Hogs,crc. « |
angayeur: m. A great talker; aff, an Officer that
Searches the ton gues of Market-Hogs, thereby to.dif-

.  cernewbether they be fouad.or no,

LES m. A kind of fea-bird, which diuing into the

of aWball, feeds on bis heart,

3 Little Swath-bands, or clouts of wooll
for little children,

Langssa't Woollen Swath-bands, en for little


girlies fines de
D cp


dr
es So Ga i


Grogs Kn in of


ne yi
nd prickles on her backe, —


Langoutti in: m. À great (or the greatef ) Prawn.
La


gLangu 3
Langoyer. To languifh,or pine away,
Langrole: f. The Newte, Aske, or final Lizard that
bauntetb old,and ill-kept baufes. @Langued.
Langrouft: m.The fea-Creuice ; or,as Lavgaulle,


Language. as Langage. .

Lang as Langa ier, or Languard, |:

ee ree” ye an
ting dame ; a tittle-tati sr pute Re
mint tones neuer ren ae


guayeur. as
f, 4 oe a of {pe et of fe Jae
sere Tenens ope a phrafesor

particular Nains, or People ufing a ie
Breech; Tres Ceux de la langue de France, d’
Angleterre, d'Efpagne; the French, Englifb, or Spa-
nifh Nation; alfosthe bearbe Adders tongue.
Langue de beuf, Lang de beuf, Ox- tongue, rxigh
7 ding Buglofe; alfo, a kind of weapon Ufed i in old


ge ede boucWild Bugloffe,wall ange pe
Bugle Vipers bearbe.


Lan de cerf. Brian fone Harts-tongue;
ni sie


. ana ie wena Sees, fr eer
Beam i sien, ra ne Bd


ey fk ps ating companion, |


LAN


Langue marine. A À of long and h narrow Sole,or
daintie fifh like a Sole.
Langue de mer. 4 narrow Premontorie,or peece of
land running into the fea, and refembling a tongue
thruft out of the mouth,
Langue d'oyfeau. An Afhen Key, or Kite-key 5 the

Puit of the Afb.

anguc paficrine. as Langue d’oyfeau,
Langue de Serpent. Adders-tongue Serpents-tongue
(an bearbe;) alfo, a certaine tongue-refembling preci-

ous flone, (as fome bold) not bred on the earth, but ix

beanen , whence it falls in the wane of the Moone; 3
alfo, the venomous tongue of a Detratlor ; alfo, the
a ~Si and Saw-like Snowt of a wep Indian
fea-
Langue detripiere, That feolds like an Opfler-wifé,
or butterwhore.
Herbe aux langues, Tongwort, rong Double.
tongue, Horfe-tongue, Laurell of Alexandria.
Avoir la langue en la bouche, non en la bourfe.
Sayd of a Babler, or Blab, -whofé tongue-flrings are
quickly unlooffed,
Avoir Ja langue bien pendue, To baue am eloquent,
and ¢lib tonzue in bis bead,
Bailler du plat dela langue. 70 footh, finooth, flatter,»
gloze,collogue with.
Prendre langue. To learnenewes,or get intelligence,
abroad ; to take prifoners thereby to examine what an
enemic intehds.
Prendre ae entre eux, To conferre, or debate a
matter toget
Tirer fa langue fur. To fcorne, flowt, mocke, de-
ride.
Hardie langue coiiarde lance: Pro:Thife that brag
moflexecute é leaft.
Longue langue courte main: Prov. Thofé that pro-
mie rie performe leat,
Qui langue a à Rome va: Prov. He that knowes
mn and when, 10 fpeake, may trauell any whi-


Beau parler n’efcorche langue: Prov. Good words


coft nothing ( fay we,
Sieus rs du pied que de la langue: Pro.


Better may afoot flip then the tongue trip.

angué: m4 Langued (a tearme of Blafon,) °
Languette: f. A little tongue ; al/o, the wee/elt, or co-

uer 7 of the throats alfo, the point, or tongue of a - 4
: ‘ner; alfo,the pre srt ore pcr ue

L de haule-bo ie tore, i
. tenon,which pk rovers fa Fa HIDE
Langueur: f. a pee

forme, feeblenefe ;
no ae


Lang ais anid ined, fainted,
‘Yon 4 Bide i ede i
ang dre sal Ah de yb


ET pence


ing;
A sf met-


Sprains. Snowe ,


L AN


_ Lanieres. Hawkes Lunes,
Re y long a laniere : Prov. Ta
è t t ;
ren! El) ‘et a mer at apy se
wants,
Lanifice: m. wooll-worke;
an rue oe -worke; or working with soot hin
que: com, Wooll-breeding,
raring : com. Ofsor belonging 10,00
Bourre lanifle, Flocks Fool a] a the knettie, or


uneuen fwellings that be in fome threads LE ill-fpuane
Wooll


Lanoy. as Lanier. @Savoyard. ~~

Lanfquenet. A Lanceknigbt,or Germane fun, at
So,the name of a game at Cards,

Lanftringue. Drinke contr epmnans (a ‘Dusteb word, )


Lantagine: € 4 kind of Lame, iv Bayeree F be


leaf yeelds no manner of [mel
Lantane: f. The wayfaring tree.
Lante, A kind of Spi


Lantenaires: f Laniers ; called  fo,yoben of themfelues
or 4 to France out of Nort Countries; in
ich the cold and falt ee the fea coni-
monly the beautie of their feather
Lanterne: f. A Lanterne ; alfo, the Anchor clofure
of à Tymber vault, where the ends of the branches
thereof doe meet.
Lanterne de mer. 4 ffh which fome bold to be the
Rochet; others the Milan Marin; others, as Arcndelle
À de mer.
Lanterne à pagnons. A paire of trundles, ortrun-
* dle + ré ich is turned about by the cog wheele
of a Hi,
Lanterne fourde. A clofé yron Lanterne, or theeues
Lanterne.
Croire que veffes font lanternes. To miflake verie |
groffely,to be of amoft at beleefe.
anterné: m. ce:f. Puxled, confounded, troubled, |
~ much perplexed difiempered ; miferable,wretched,in a |
eared raking, À ma fil or ill plight; alfo, abufed,


irene: To ca, fil fi y dally,or play the foole with;
Abu Mt ef tedious unto; alfo,to loyter; alfe,
buggared ; alfo,to suff, reuell, feaft |

ted A 2 lesen nights together. .

Lanterner él. To puxle,confound,or intoxi-

i the braines to fill the head withidle soni :


Limnertierie: fC ing ; Vanitie , Goleries
a A ie mee
Lanternerie de cervelle, Trouble, ot intoxication.of
the braine.

Lanternier:m. 4 Lanterne-carrier ; alfo, a co


er dallying.or witleffe ersidle,or vainet
raie night- ; one that, wher others
are in bed,reuells abroad,or bankets at home,


Lanugineux:m, eule ; £ Cottonie, cownie  moffie; |
me or wooll ; alfo, couered with foft, and


eye email.
ass wool,
| aon ge det. a :

m. Theordinarie, Parpe pointe Doc
Lapas:n. Patience Sinks Renter te


Lapeten mat


rdDorke,


Qui a mangé Je lard Prov, 4


ire: m. A Lapidarie, or leweller. A la fin {aura on
thecfe, hom cunning foewer, will at ibe leng be difeo-
€a. :


Lapidation: f° fonings a battering, or killing with |
“Stones. As Lo LE BAY PTT:

Lapidé: m. ée:f ‘Stoned; beaten, battered, or killed
pith fees PN à SM : arm 3e FRG.


Lavidair


Qui a mangé le lard ronge l'os? Prov. Let him that
bath eaten the Bakon picke the bones:


Lapidement : m.'4 flonings os SPT Lardafle: £. 4 fticke,thruft, great pric e.
Va lapidement de grefle, À violent patteving of | Lardé: m.ée: f. Lardod 1 hes fied
bailefoness 3: VOR AO es bree eG or dreft with lard ; alfo, ipped,quipped,taunted: alfo,


Lapider. Fo flore ; to throw ones at} to baïter knotke,
or kull with fiones ; alfo,to raine flones.
Lapideur: m.: Æffoner, 0) |
 Lapifidié : m.ée: f as Lapifié. +: .
LS mm, ée : f. Made or become flonie, turned into
a fone, Apa, ‘Lie Stter
se me be made flonie,become flone,be turned in-
to a ftone, RAA St 1 Sh
Lapin: m, 4 Rabber. % SL TO
ll a memoire de lapin. He hath a verie bad memo-
vie; or forgets, by 100 much ball, wherefore be makes
baf, 19 0 RUN ONE


Lappe:f. A Burre (of what kind foeuer.) mar:
Lippe grande, The Burre Docke, Clote burve,great
Burre. = . ‘ 7.

Lappement : m, A lapping,or licking up. : 6 V1

Esper. T6 lap,or licke up. er way ee: ae

Lappeur: m. A lapper,or licker vp of: rh 4

Lapieau: m. Ayoung Rabbet.

Laps: m,'4 firs flide, fall, faile. <i Aletta
Par laps de temps. In a (pace ; with traëtor by cour/é


prickéd,or pierced into,as with a lardin priche, |
“I, Tolard; to fticke, se dre with lardial.
fo,to pricke,or pierce, as with a larding pricke :.alfo,to
“Gut quip nip,taunt,breake a ieaflon.
Lardier: m. A tub tokeepe Lard, or Ba hon in; al, a
te A lay it, falted, on ; alfo, a beaftlie, or flonenlie


Lardier: m. ete : f. Of,or belonging t0,Lard.
Lardoire: € 4 larding flicke,or Price," APS
on: m, The little flice or peece of Lard heremirh
meat is flucke ;al/o,a flowt, cut, gird, nip, eaf broken
on. .


Lardonnement : m. quipping, cutting, dir dE flow.


ting. ‘
Lardonnet. To quip, nip cut, flow, gird breake a ieaft
>


‘pon. ,
Lardonneur: m. 4 quipper, cirder, flower.
Larege: f The Larch,or Larinx tree.
Lareze. The fame, .
Refine de Lateze. (Our ordinarie) Turpentine,
arfondement: m. The difeafe wherein one voids bis


oftime. — k | fat;or greafe in his excrements.
| Laqs: m. A faare, ginne,os grite 1 M: LaRodi m,UË: f, That voids bis fat, or greafe in his
4 _ Laqs courant, 4 noofe, grinne, faille knot, excrements, +R AE


Are ee Vi re SEE
aquay: m. AL 00 ootman.
Lacing de mer. À kind of verie fivift fifh. Satoh
Laque..as Lacquee dt Wire, eye
Taquefenée. Membre viril," © satan
Laquelle chofe. which, the which,that,the very fame,
thing. + À
Lar reo mans chiefe boufe; (the vight,or inberitance of
bis eldeft foune;) Bayonnois, -
Larcin, Theft;whence; 14 $
Les larrons s’.enerebatent , &les Iarcins fe def.
couvrent: Prov. when theeues fall ont true men come
at wae À Fc" rs k Por, :
ard: im. Lard; fat Bakon,the fat of Bakon,or of Porke;
alfo,a Flitch of hee ; alfo,the tree of a faddie.
Lard efpié. Thelard of the two vtmoft, and fate
peeces of a Flitch of Bakon diuided into three parts tbe
Legs or Gammons bauing beene formerly cut off.
Il y a du lard en luy. There is much fubfianceor great
Pdbéilie,in bim. ens te
Crier au lard fur, Publikely toflomt, feoffe atymocke,
se gr Ro LS |
Tout yeftoit du lard, All was feta boight,the world


Large: m. (Subftant,) Rooiné, Cope, Pace, widib, or

Po a ie Peep ed Ca

| Oy op Bei the nei inde, |
+


Unity; t0open,widen,gine roome,or {cope unio, ?
Large: com, (Agee) Large, wide broad, pacious,
. roumtbie; ample, great big; open; dbuatdat bounce.

A le 2 . à À ' , 6
Large de bouche, & efroit de cein@ure. That prow.
mifes much, but parts with little ; or, that promifes
much more then he willingly parts with.
Autant defpend chiche que large: Prov. The mifer
matches the vathrift in expences Phe one often wafting
as much by allowing too fcant, as the otber by a


The
L bimfelfe. « : ï
argement. Largely, widely broadly-filly, imply preat. À
Dale. pl bon RE
Largeffe: f. Bountie, liberalitit ; alfo a largefe, or
CAGE of mg calt among the people; alfo,a dona-
tiue beflowed on fouldiors, ©". CRE |:
Larget: mette : f. Somewhat large yeafamable wide,
Latgeut £ Largene(fe breadth wideneffe latitude (pa.
croufnefe ; greatnefe,amplenelfe, bigncfe.
Largiteur: 10. A liberal giver, beower,or [Pender on,
Lae € ‘Roome, feope, facioufaeQe, width, wide-
nelle * 2


Faire ldtoue. To giuë roomé, make place, leûéfjace
enough: \ eV 3 OlL2 ri


ran all on wbecles there. +3
Faire du lard. To line idly, fare deliciouf fatten with
_ pleafüre;andeafe. i
Frotter leur lard enfemble; Looke Froteer. +
Frorter à quelqu'un fon lard. To cudgel bim found
by,to thwacke or belabor bim throughly, A |
Icéter fon lard aux chiens: To /pend bis fubfance |.
waftfilly or vavworthily ; to fquander all away, © © 1
Ila éle mh He i moft guiltie, ov be onelpri. |
|. gattiesof that theft © rea rk ae
© Faire trembler le lard au chatnier. To shave: wie


| shave,
| his terrible fivaggering;euerie peece of lard that béares
OF bim. ER. va


Prendre lalargue en haute mer. To put out into the
maine? °° PRE PRE RP na
Tenir la largue. To keepe abroad,in the wide fields,
or in the open high way. is

0,


arigau, The bead of the windpipe, or throat, conf
i vette rite ibm ead


letting out, breath alfa Flute or Pipe is call


: : ei
100 large,a proportion) it may alfo be inter reted thus:
tiberall doth {pend bis pelfe, the pen the raft .


Eu


DSL SL Se! et Re


ee


:

|

|
‘


L: A S!


demne,or punifh;little ones in others. :
Abandon fait larron: Prov. Things left at random
canfe true menturne theeues. . LE
Left cault larron qui defrobbe avn larron: Prov,
He is a cunning thee ft that robs a theefe.
Il femble à vn larronque ‘chafcun luy refemble:
Prov. A thecfe imagines enerie one bids, fland.
Ou Marchand,ou larron: Prov. Either a marchant
or a theefe; a fpeech verieordinarie in the mouthes of
Shop-keepers,who thereby pretend ,that not comming to
their wares fo eafily, they cannot fell them fo cheape,
as theeues dee,

Larronceau: m. A pilferer, filcber, little theefe.

Larronneau: m. The fame.

Larronnet. To fieale imbeaxell, purloyne, filch, mimme,
pilfer, play the theefe.


Larronnerie: f. Theewing, lealing,pilferng, flcking,


purloyni Ke

Larronnelle: f. 4 fhe theefe.

Larronneux: m.eule: f. Felonious, theenifh, fill of
theeuerit, : sx

Larronniere: f. A denne of theeues, the retreat of
theeues, theeues bauen,a place of refort for theeues.

Larval: m. ale:f, eis griflie, ghafilie, ghoft-like,
dreadfull,wan, pale.

Larve: m. A Hag, Spirit, Goblin, Night-ghoft; alfè, a
leane, pale,meagar, withered {crag ; one that looks like
death,or agp


LAR
the clownes in fome parts of France.
Boire à tirelarigau. To drinke till bis throat cracke
withall.

Laringe, The root of the tongue ; er,4s Larigau.

Laringuau. The fame. |

Larix: f, The Larch,or Larinx tree.

Larme:£.4 teare; alfo,a gumme-drep, the fat moiflure
that diffills from diuers trees ; and bence;
La larme du fapin. A cleere, and well-tafling liquid
Rofin, that iffues from hetweene the barke , and inacr
“‘rinde of a young Firre tree; In our [hops it is common-
Med erronioufly) tearmed Venice Turpentine, fayes

thiolus.

Larmes.Beads made of the feeds of a certaine plant.
En larines de fol ne fe doit on fier: Prov. 4 fooles
teares are not to be truficd.
Ce que Maiftre donne, & vallet pleure ce font
larmes perdues : Prov. jm waine doe groomes deplore
their maifters bountie.

Larmelette: f. 4 finallteare.

Larmette. 4s Larmelette.

Larmeux: m. eufe: f. 44-beblubbered, full of teares.

Larmier : m. The éaue of aboufe; the brow,or coping of
a wall, feruing to keepe, or caft off the vaine; alfo, a
loope-bole or final bole in a wall to giue light; alfo,the
eye-veine,or veine thats next to the eye of aborfe.

| Larmot: m. 4 kind of Lizards pid

Larmoyable : com. Bewaylable, lamentable, wofill,


worthie of teares. : | L «as Larigau ate
Larinoyement : m. A weeping, bewayling, lamenting, | Las: m.as Lags; 4 füare. s
Sledding of teares. Las: m. Late: f, wearie,tyred,barvied,ouertoyled,or


faint with toyling.
Lafanon: m. The panne of a Clofe-floole. ERab.
anophore:m. The groome of the Clofe-floole.
Lafché. 4 fifh that fomewbat refembles a little Shad ;
(caught,and called fo,about Montpelier.)
Lafche: £ (The-vermine called) a Ticke, or Sheepe-


Larinoyer. To weepe,wayle,whine lament fled teares,
diftill drops of moifture.

Larmoyeux. # Larmeux.

Larmuse: f, A little earth-Newte, or Aske. (Dauphi-
nois,

Larneffe. as Larronneffe ; a (he theefe.

Larre de chats: m. (atermavling, (vieil mot.)

Larrecin : m.Larcenie,theft,robberie, felonie,theenerie,
ftealth, pilfering, filching, purlayning,

Larreciner, as Larronner.


Larrecineufement. Theeuifbly pilferingly, flonionfly,


loufe.
Lafthe: com, Slacke,loofe,wide,flagging ; weake, faint
… valufiieslanguifhing,y iffe,lisher, flow ; cold, coward-
lie,faint-bearted,vamantie effeminate ; lewd,vawor-
thie,bafe,trecherous, — x


with a felonious intent. 1 1, hon un Coufture if; Anopen feame, :
Lens peulé if Ernie filcbing, ? rie oe ett banging ati

ilfering nimming imbeaxelings nie 6 thé: m.éc:f,Looffed,tyed; unbent ; releafea;free
Ps Me ab banded land;entilled ground. j FG Ve: 4d ; seen:


Larron: m. À felon, theft, robber, purloyner, ftealer,
imbeaxeler, pilferer, filcher, mimmer, , 9).
Larron d'eau. Amifine in a Conduit bead forthe vol
ding of fuperfluous water. :, ii
Larron d'une plume, The pith of a quill;the feather,


delinereds
 Lafchée:f. Alooffing, flackening,widening unbending;
remitting,releafing, freeing, letting goes
Lafchement.. Slackly, loosely, flagging!y ; remiffely,
weakly,unluftily ; flowly, litherly, negligently ; coldly,
_ faintly effeminately , wickedly lewdly ; unwortbily,.


or light fuffe that iswitbinit, : Lafcher. To flacken,pyden,looffe;vnbend,let out ; free,
Rte A gingerlie tread, foft gate, fearefull |. ge forgoe, let “et PA. | sf
flepping,doubsfull pace... Lafcher la bride a. To ufé more gently, giue more li-
Les anions s Es 16 ge fe def eats we chef
couvrent: Pro. Theeues bra elpes true menun- | Lafcheté: £ Slackne er emifineffe; faininelfe,
i ai Oe ~~ | weakenefesomluftinef ethene idles ier
_ D'un larron priué on ne fe peut garder: Pro, There ne(fe ; cowardife unmanlinelfe, faintheartednefes tre-
© js noward for a familiar thee e. | cherie,lemdneffe, ommortbinesfe 5 alfo, an abfird, fot-
Tellarronelcordon;Prov.seeCoxdon. | Her fuir
A gros larron corde: Prov. À frongtheefe | Lafdaller : m. 4 tyr Jade; alfo, a dreaming, or laxie
mes (or needs) afirongbalter, 9) draw-latch; alfo,a'yind of birds |
latrons ont toufiours les manches pleins | Lafnier. as Lanier. <i
; th eof | Laffe:m. ée:f.as Las; wearied ; alfo,{narled, or in-
of gifts) fnared; alfo,laced ; bound,or clofed up with laces,


Lafler. To wearie,toyle,tyre; alfosto lacesto bind,or.clofe |
~ up with a lacesalfo,to fet ginmes,or grinmmes for birds;(ér
… Wece)alfo,to fnarle,or infnare;alfo;a dog to es.
| ; ®


On fe laffe de bien chanter: Prov. The beft content
wae


ments breed facietie, :

Lafferon. as Laiéteron. gids
aflet:m, 4 fnare, ginne, grinne; alfo, the lace of a
momans Petticoat, - Pik eg's 0

Lai f. Wearineffe, valuflinelfe, fatigation, faint-
nelle, à ’ 2

Laffiere: £ 4 kind of net, or toyle for wild beafls.
ais. Coitture de laffis, A Networke Cafe gmt.)

Lafhitude. as Lafleré. ;

Laflus,ow Lafus. Abone,abowe yonder there aboue;al-
fo,opward, ; ’

Latage: m, A lathing; lath-worke ; a couering;or clo-
Jing with lathes. <3) ae Le ES 18

Late: f Alath; alfo,a certaine fine due vpon claymes,
or conteflations within Provence. sr

Latent. Hidd lurking clofe,priute, fecret ynknovone,

Latentement, Hiddenly, Lurkingly, clofely, prinily, (2-
cretly, d : HX)

Later. To lath, to fet on lathes. : 00

Laterne: f The jutcheon, or knob,in the middle of a
Timber-vault. : ‘

Laticlave: m. A kind of Caffocke worne by the auncient
Romans, A0

Latiers: m. Thoft which in Provence exaët the fine be-

*_ fore mentioned in Late, }

Latin: m. Latin ; the Latin language.

Parler Latin. To /peake Latin;alfo,a fafhion of fpeech
fed among prifèners ; thereby to draw fome drinking
money from neve-come guefls. 1
Femme qui parle Latin: Pro. Seeke Femme.

IL eftbon Latin, He is a good Latinift, be writes, or
Speakes,good Latin, "7" be
Il y perdit fon Latin, He was there erauelled,plun-
ged,or at a Non-plus; be knew not what to make of, or
- what to fay unto,it, te
“Qui a florin, rouffin; Latin, par cout il trouve le
chemin: Pro. He that can (pend,and fpeake well,and
bath a good borfe under bim, needs not god out of bis


way:
Latin: m. Latine: f. Latine of countrey, or in fpeech ;
of,or belonging to,the Latine language. *
Marchandife Latine. Excellent good fluffe; or, the
beft,ov moft viterable commodities tearmed {0 by Mar-
chants.
Voile Latine. 4 mixen, or finacke fayle.
Latinément. Ja Latine; after the manner of the La-
tines. i.2
Latinier : m. 4 Trucheman,or Interpretor.(v.m.)
Latinifateur: m. as Latinifeurs
Latiniler, To make Latine, turneinto Latine, write or
‘| © Speake Latines alfo,to inkbornizeite 0
Latinifeur: m. One that writes or (peakes Latiné; al,
en inkbornifer; one that vfès inkborne tearmes,
Faire du Latinifeur. 4 dunce, or ignorant fellow to
counterfeit Schollerfhip: © IRR
Latinogotifé: m, ge: f. Barbarous,Gibridge; mixed
. of Late and the Gothes language, 1 ;
ection f. A biding,lurking lying bid;a playing leaf
in fight. \ cae
Lake, m.ée: f. Sr q r rm :
Latiter, To lurke,lye hi ight. -
Latitude.f. Latitude, A largeneffe,


Latrie: £. The féruice, or worfhip due unto God.


Latrine : £. 4 Prisie, Fakes, Houft of Office: al the
finke of a prinate pis ; or ak:

Latrineux: m. eufe: £ Fakes-like, of a Jakes, fall of
Fakes, filtbie, finking, full of ordure. Le

Latte: as Late; a Lath; alfo, a Land-meafure (as
Perche) in fome places longer then in others whence;
Latte de Barbezicux. is but nine foot, Latte de
Montignac Charante,eleuen foot, long.
Tuftice fous latte. C’eft fous le couvert de la maifon
du feigneur feulement,

Latteron. See Lai€eron. :

Lavace d'eaux. 47 inundation, fierrounding, rauage,or


great floud,of waters (by the fall of much raine.)


Lavacier: m. ere: f. wafbing away violently rauaging,


or fiveeping before it (as a fwift current) all it meetes

wilh,

Lavage: m. A water-poole, or plafh; a peece of land
feral, or past Us aya à alfo, À waf-

ng.

Lavages. as Lavailles,  . à
Lavage de chaux. whiting or wbite-lime,wberewith
walls, Gc,are vvbite-wafhed,

Lavailles: f. Swillings,Hogs-wafh,wafbings fer Swine,

Lavanche de glace,& deneige.A great heape of Snow
tumbling from the top to the bottome of a Hill, and o-
uer throwing whatfoeuer lyes in it Way.

Lavande: f Lauender, Spike.
Lavande femelle. white-flowred Lauender Spike.
Lavande mafle. The common, or blew-flowred La
uender Spike. aa es

avande Romaine, Roman Lauender.

Lavandiere : £ A Lavadereffe,or wajhing woman;alfo,
a Wagtayle,er Water-wagtayle..

Lavaret: m. A whitifh Trout, or Shad-like fifh, bred in
the Lakes of Savoy,and Dauphiné. ee

Lavaron: m, Another fmall fifh; as Cabation.

Lavaffe. as Lavace.


Lavatoire: m. A Lauatorie; a place, or veffell,to wafh


im, + |
Laubaut. as Clabaut ; a great ‘yelling Curve,
Laude. The toll thats payed for wares retayled in cer.


taine Faires,and Markets within the dominion of Ber- |


ry ; (and elfewhere.) ;
Late N =. ée : £. wajhed; rinfed; clenfed(with water;)
athed.
Main lavée moins leyée : Pro. See Main.
A main lavée Dieu mande la repeué: Prov. God
Sends bis bleffings to cleane bands,and hearts,
En vaiffeau mal lavé ne peut on vin garder: Proy,
‘Wine will not keepe in anuncleane ves
avedan: m. An yron-gray lennet; or a bor{e bred on
Lavedan, one of the Pyrenean Mountaines whereon
the beft borfès of France ave bred: Thefe horfes (ayes
a French Cofinographer) are more nimble, and more.
Strong then Spanifh Fennets; but the Mountaine u not
large,and therefore there be not many of them,
Lave-main: m, An Ewer or Lauer,


Lavement: m. A wafhing, rinfing bathing,clenfing (in


water.)


Laver. To wafh,rin{z,bathe,clenfe (with water.) -


Terre à laver. Fullers earth. STE
Laver vne brique.To loofe labor or ta labor in vaine.
Laver les mains de. as ir Main, x :
Laver lenez à. as, ;
Laver latefte à, To chide, reproue,checke, taunt bit.


terly; to take up for balting;to ufe hardly handle rude- |


Yy,deale extreamely with.


a Kk


sae


Se Se ena


Lazaret: m. A Lagaret,or Spittle for Lazer. À
Lazanon : m. Seeke Lafanon, ART. CAES
azur: m. The Lazullor Axureflone, i SL
Lé: m. Breadth; alfo,the liftof Cloth,or Stuffe. … =" |
De deux lez. On both fides. Vn drap de deuxlez. 4 |
pe “broad cloth, L ¥
un le & d'autre. On both fides. .


Selaver d’une faute, To purge,cleeresacquit himfelfe
of animputation. | :

L'un a le bruit l'autre lave la laine, The one does
what the others faid to doe; (Sicvos non vobis.)
Pour laver fes mains on n’en vend pas fa terre:
Prov. Newer did cleanlinell any man vndoe.
Vnemain lave l’autre: Prov. Oze fèrues anothers
turne.

Laveut: m. 4 wafher.

Laveure: f. The water wherewith a thing hath beene
wafbed ; alfo,a wafhing,

Laveure de miel. Liquor wherein Honie bath beene
parified,orfodden. S

Laveure des Orfebvres. The wafhing of Goldfiniths
fivcepes; vir. the fiuffe which they find in tbe furnace
after a melting,and among the duft of their fhops after
Jiweeping; all which they put into a veffell,and wafhing
it, picke that which is good out of it.

Lavoir:m. A poole, or pond, whereat buckes, dre, be
commonly walbed , a wafbing place, a wafbing poole
or pond ; alfo (in fome places) the peece of wood(fome

* three foot long, or bigh) wher eon a wafhing bafon,fisp-
ported by three or foure brackets doth fland.

Laurageois: m. ife: f. Of Lauraguez; a part of Lan-
gucdoc.


Herbe Laurageoife. woad ; fo called, becaufe it


Dulong,& du lé. Euerie way, :
Le. (A maftuline Relatine,or Article;) the, the faid, the |.


Same. , |
Lé: m: lée: £ Broad,wide,large; Hence,Sain& Pierre
enfente léc; S. Peters in the broad way; QOrle: |


eatin al fill pone

: m.ale : f. Loyall,truetruftie, faith fe

re tigen that place. +. 7
eaute: f. Loyaltie, faithfillneffe,trulineffe,.

Lebeche, as Leveche. à re ï M

Lebre. as Lievre.

Leconomantie:f. Dinination by water in a Bafon.


@Rab.
Lechedoige diode Dainty, rr
echedoigt. alech. Daintily, /paringly, by degrees
pe ch 9 4 parcels by nc bane 7 met
Lechefrite: £. ADripping-panne. É
Lecheinent : m. A licking,or lapping up.
Lecher. To licke,lap, flap vp..


growes abundantly in Lauraguez. Peu peut bailler à fon efcuyerqui fon coufteau le
Lauraye:f. À groue,or plôt,of Laurell trees. che: Prov.He that pinches Lim muftpine another.


Laurens. Laurence. ui va il le ui repofe il feiche: Prov.
re de Sain& Laurens. Great blifiers im the L Sache wos Suis eee
face. echetcan: m. 4 auce, lick-difh, licker

Laureole: £ Lowrie, Lauriell, hurge Laurell, title ion ap-fruce, eka nr 6 a
Laurel, dde 7 "
Laurcole mafle. Male Lauricll; bath only one flemm
fet verie thicke with leaues ; but in all other parts re-
fenibles ordinarie Lowrie.

Laurier: m. 4Laurell,or Bay tree, |
Laurier Alexandrin: Laurell of Alexandria;longue-
Laurell, Tongue-blade Horfe-tongue, Double-tongye. |

Lauriere: f. A plotjor groue of Bay-trecs. = SEN

Laurin: m. ine: f.0/ Bayes ; /et,orflucke with Bayes.:


panion.
Lechereffe: f. A lickerous,or favvcie woman.
Femme lecherefle ne fera ia porée efpaifle: Prov.
_ Thelickerous boufwife féldome makes thicke pottage.
Lecheur: m, 4 licker,or lapper vp of; See Lefcheur.
Leçon: fi A Leffon; Lettre, Document, Infiruction, .|
cepts |
Ledteur : m. 4 reader. : .
Leéteur publique. À Profefor,or publicke Reader,in
an Vmucrfitie crc. CRE Et


| Lauferne: £ Shrub Trefoile, Milke Trefoile, Citifus | Lectrin:m, as Lerrin.
_ Bufh. a se .ecture: f. A Ledlure; a Reading. rf
‘| Lauferte. The fame. ne as Laidanger. . 2:
3 Laxatif: ms iue: f. Laxatine,loofe, foluble. Lede. as Ledon.
Laxif: m. iue: f. Laxatine. Ledoires: f.Reproches,reuilings defamatorie tearmes,


edomier: m. The Lote,or Nettle tree,


Laxité : f. Laxatiuenefie.
Ledon: m. The fhrub Ciftus Ledon, from the leanes |.


Lay:m. A Lay,Song,Roundelay; alfo,as Lé;the breadth


of cloth,e>< ; af, a dolefull complaint, pafionate la- whereof Ladanum is gathered,
menting, pitifull wayling; Secke Lays... Ledoyer. as Laidanger, . GR
Lay:m. laye:f. Lay, fècular temporall. Lée sf. A wild Sow


E Caufes de lay a lay. Cafes meerely temporal,
Frere lay. 4 féruant in an Abbey,or Couent.
Lave : f. 4 (wild) Sow that bathyoung ones.

: Laye. The leffes (or dung) of awild Bore;alfo,ranks
Sof: Diag Copfèvrood, left as marks to limit bow
~~ much of the reli is to be félledsand fold at once. : \.

avé: m. é¢: f. Bois layez. Marked bow furre to.be


Legal: m. ale: f. Legall, Wwfill of the Lam apa


ny Law, : ‘ 4
Domicile legal. The boufe thats enioyed by reafom. of
an PRE Office. ét - 7
Legalité: £. Lawfillneffe,lamfilll gouernment.
Legatt: m, 4 Newte,or Lizard, ps. |
Lo m. ÀLegat; the Popes Embafadour ; 4/f, a
4. (= in


See PS, eine to be eee wb Tenet Ren “1 ad
| copfemood left growing 10 the fame purpoft. | Legataire: com. A Legatarie ; the parti ow
mae Layer Pa ais ae marten near) ou à beghestbnd 5 HERO cs <
Lee Sh aaron , for the felling, and [aie thereof. - ris Legater. To be ine pwil.

À RE ‘Layette: £ A Till,or Drawer 3 alfoga Box wish ills or e NA age or Legat.


Lay Seine if Pi pain ol


NE En SAE Gaya) 123


7 (thats’ aden, 0
… fhallow waters) difébarges part of it burtben,
Légendes 4 puling ; 41/0, words ovals th,
| po em ps y | 5 a


.


LA ET


Lefchard: m. A lickorous, or fiveet-mouthed flapfawce ;
alfo,a micher, or miferable niggard ; one that continu-
ally licks up,or lookes after, pelfé.

se € Along flice, or fhine of bread, dre 3 alfo, as


Leche de mer, À flymieworme, thicke asa finger,
and a foot long ; digged by fifhermen (who vfe u for a
bait) out of the fand, wbereim;unle[fe it be quickly ta-
en up,it quickly hides ut felfe againe.
Lefchedoigt. See Lechedoigt.
Lefcher. as Lecher. ;
Lefcherie: f. Sawcineffe , lickoroufneffe, much lic-
11€.
Lefcheur : m. A licker; a lickorous companion.
Lefcheur. (Adjeë&.) Ofien licking ; lickorows.
Au chat lefcheur bat on fouvent la gueule: Prov.
The lickorous cat comes unto many a pat.
Lefcive. 2 Lexive,
Lefciver. To bucke clothes;to wafhrince,or fcoure with
lye.
Lefe-maiefté: f High treafon.
Lefer. To burt,wound,annoy, offend,
Lefer la maiefté, To commit high treafon. ,
Lefion : f. Hurt, wounding, barme, offence, annoy-
ance.
Leffe: £ A Leafh,to hold a dog exc in ; a bridle or falfe
reine to bold a er by; any fuch long fring.
Leffes. as Laifl


2 le la voudrois sluftoft chevaucher que jones. en
leffe. (4 knausfh phrafe ia Rab.)1 bad ratherrideber
then lead her.


Leffive. as Lexive.
Left. as Leftage.
Leftage: m. The balall of a fhip.
Le ftager. To balaft a fhip.
Lefte. as Leftage.

Lelté: m. ée: f. Balafled ; alfo ( but not fo properly
Pansies or loaden (as a fhip.

Lefte: com, Quicke nimble s aline, fprightfiul,. difpofe,
readie,linehe ; apt,or able for imployments , alfo, neat,
comelie handfome quaint or curious in:

Leftement. Quickly.nimbhy, aéhuely, wi ie oa
tie; lively merrily; alfo, neatly, quaint

Lefter. ro baluf ; al, (bit nog inate ta, load, or
füll-fraught,a fhip.. : 1

Letabonde : com Jocond,fvolicke, son al ab
as merrie as maŸ be,

Letargic. as Lethar;

Lethal: male: f D


ie met Sy
Lethargie: f 4 Lethar, are; |
Ga called by fome;t Vs. ?


Lethargi


ar ill; (and a al


pane; m. Deaths mortalitie ; Fgitaiaes re
| Lethean: manne: Rpeadpa ag seen At |


ptet Abel of ambi


cs if
Letiere re
| Leton: peg oe
À Lexrin: m,, i es
| Les eg rat of the fer
4 4 ; Epifllesor Mi ine; A | atent.
res |


com, Sicke of a ne a ie


—-~ “Ts


LEY
aclient to bis counfell for the furceafing, or compouh- 4
“ding of the fuit,
Lettres de baillie.writs of. Executionsor an exeetion

\ againft the goods of,
ettres de aoe Bills of lading,

* Lettres de committimus. 4 Commiffion.
Lettres d'eftar,Looke Eftat. iw
Lettres de pas, ou de pafle. A Paffe, or Pafport;
x Licence for the pafage, trauell, or ranfpor tation


rR bonnes lettres, Learning.
Au pied dela lettre. Literally, hifi precifel, ac-
cording to the true fence of the place.
Ce me font lettres clofes. Thefe things are mifteries,
or fecrets untome,
Prendre lettres. 7s (at a certaine Card-play) to
crauc leaue to give ouer a game which be undertooke
to win,
Tefmoing pafle lettre: Prov. The depofition of a pre~
lent witne|}e 1 a more hay euidence then a bare
proofe out of. “y writin £: 4 hifi
ttre: m.ée: f.Lettered,learned ; s i, or frm
Shed with,good letters.
Lettrifé. Vers lettrifez. whishrunne vpon the letter; sar.
all whofe words begin with one and the fame letter,
Lettron: m.Gumme joie ral Cichorie; or, ws Laic-
teron; the Sow-thi
Letuge: m. The pres of a fhip.
Leu: mas Lieu; a place ; and hence;
Sans feu ne leu. without houfe or harbor.
Teva zm. leué: f, Red, perufed, .
e. Droict + le, mr Droicr,
: À An upfittine sz prifing,or getting vp.
Porn: m. bi (for head) .
+ Honteux comme vne truye he emporte vn levain.
Secke Honteux.
evandicre: f. A Midwife.
evant:m. The Leyant, the Eaft; the Eaft wind, or


countrey.
és de Levant. The fmall medecinable foell,tear-
ps, Vnguis Odoratus.
~ Vent i A Southeaft wind,
aire voile en Levant. To fayle Eaflward ; to be
flolne, filched, or purloyned away.
Levant, Raifing, rearing rifing, arifing ; leuying ; lea-
ening.
Tombant levant:’ Well ov ill, bigic miffie ; bere or
there,one way ar others( Aduerb jally bh)
eee, @Rab. in flead of, d’ Ellend ; Secke
leon: f. A flegmaticke dropfie 5 or, as
Hypofarque.
Leucophleomatique: com. Sicke of, or ‘troubled
with ach) a fleg mee dropfie,


Here ih éna ae (
A t nt eman. :
Le des fra oe a profiling =) or Soul-
ae nd bold Sofas but ain


A a abd


Le XO iSigr


wd Bi ds,
iy i fa Sande ie at bob
ew'th t
pie af wae 4 va are sie
s ie
Tous Es i Le
| | pilenanfaagh ar gran pe mere


a


®@riginal from
PERE STATEAUNIVERSITY


~


bed


LIV


Je een Oe eee


Arreftleyé. A fentence publifhed, or exemplified.

La main luy eft levée.His goods, which were feifed,
are delinered backe unto him. + Hi

Au piedlevé. Pourfuyvre au pied levé. To pur/ue
hard,neere, foot bot,clofé at the beeles.
Prendre au pied levé. To take at aduantage, or at
the worft; to furprifé om a fuddaineor before prouifion


made, x
Refpondre à pied levé. To anfiver fuddainely, or ex-
tempore,

La tefte levée. Bolly confidently, with bead lift vp ;
. or holding up the bead as one that hath gotten the bet-
tér of bis aduerfarie,
Leveche: f. 4 South-weft wind.
Levée: f. A banke,or caufey vaifed for the keeping in of
a Riner,or water; alfo,aleuie,or leuying of money, foul-
diors, rc; a gathering, or getting in of the profits, or
fruits of land ; alfa, a pr aduancing ; and,
a rifing,as of the Sunne,

Vnelevée de bouclier, Much adoe about nothing ; a
great fhew, or much doings, to little purpofe ; migbtie
preparations for a meane exploit; a notable coyle, or
ftirre,when it needs not.

Levement: m. 4 rapfing, rearing, boyfing, aduancing,
lifting,or fetting up; alfo,a leuieor leuying; alfo,a lea-
uening,

Lever. Tolift,rayfe,reare,eleuate,aduance,boyfe,beaue,
or fet up; alfo, to leute, collect, gaiber; alfo, to lea-
ue,


[A

Se Lever. Torife,arifè,get,or grow up. :

Lever vn arreft, To publifh a fentence, or decree,

Lever boutique. To fet up fhop. .

Se Lever au Confeil. To goe fit in Counfell, ;

Lever le cul.Il leur fit lever le cul à. He raiféd them,

er their fiege, from. i “teh

Lever vn enfant des fons. To chriften,or be witnefe

to,a childat the Font. * CE

Lever des eftoffes. To buy,or take up, fluffess

Lever la main. To take vp a tricke at Cards.

Lever la main à quelqu'un. To reftore unto him the

goods taken fram him by order, or authoritie,

. Leverenfamain. To take into bis hands, or poffe/fi-

on; to feixe vpor,in his owne right. f

Lever le mafque à. To unmaske; lay open,difcouer.

Lever le menton à.To bearten,barden,imbolden,in-

courage,afsure. Ê

Lever le nez. To take courage, or beart at graffe, to

licke vp the heart. : :

Lever de fentinelle.To reliewe a Sentinell,to put one

in bis roome; hence alfo,to diflodge.. |

Leverla table. Totake away.

Lever matin n’ eft pas heur, mais-desjuner eft le

plus feur : Prov. Looke Matin,

Il a beau fe lever tard qui alebruitdefelever ma-

tin: Prov. He may well enough rife late thats thought

to rife early; The like is; à

Qui a bruit de fe lever matin peut dormir iufquès

à foir: Prov, He thats well thought of, may play the

keane long before be be fufpetted,or detected aknane ;

(fo many men that are not as they [eeme to be, beguile

| thofe,who feeing no burt (i{pett none.) ’

| Levefche. as Leveche; aifo; common Louage, Lombar-

die Louage ; alfo, the hearbe Alexanders.

Levee. as Levefche.  :

Leveton: m: Yeaft,or Barme, LT

Leveur: m. Arayfer, lifter, aduancer, boyfer or beawer

up of; alfo, alenier, collector, gatherer ; alfo, a leane-
Aer. sp


Levrier: m. 4 Gr


Luv :


Leveure debiere: f, Yea/t. - a
Levier: m, A Leauer ;an Fron crow,or wooddenbarre ae
to lift up things with. ae
pe 14 as se Tnt À
evis: m.1fle: f. Foulding,or to be fonlded up;whense;
Deicke. a f ie é a
Leviftic: m, Louage; or;as Livefche. J


* Leur. Their; Ceft leur maifon; alfa,theirs; as, C'eft


le leur; and,their owne,or their own meanes;whence,
Ils. n'ont moyen de le faire du leur; al/o, them; as in,
Il leur a dict.

Levrault: m. 4 Leueret,or young Hare; alfoya Romane |
beame,or fielleere ; See Crochet.
Ily alevrault au croc. There is fome good prey to be
caught, fluffe tobe found, thing to be had.

Levre: f. 4 Lip; (alfo,an Otter.@Sayoyard,) \
Levre fendué. 4 Hare-lip,or Have-mouth.

Attaindre du bout des levres, To touch daiatily, or

but fleightly,

Bailler mornifle fur les levres. To gine a cuffe on the :

‘mouth, a thumpe on the lips. :

Bailler mornific fur les levres du Roy, To coyne Ale

moneysto make falfe coyne. Î

Femme qui fes levres mord, &c; Looke Femme.
Levrefque: com. Greyhound like; of,or belonging to,a

Greyhound.

Levrete: f. as Levrette.

Levreté: m. éc : f. Kindled,as a young Leueret.
Levretée. A Hare-lipt,or blabber-bpt wench; alfo,a
wench that hath beene buggared by a Greyhound,

Levreteau: m. A Leueret; a young,or little Hare.

Levreter. To kindle young Hares; or,a Hare to kindle,

Levreton: m, 4 Greybound-whelpe, a young Grey-


hound. <4
Levrette: f. A Greyhound bitch; al/o,a moft laftinious
and incontinent wench,a common hackney,a bitch-fox;
‘alfa, a littletender lip. 1 1°. ay


rr a oo


ai coe F
oe ee ee


à
«
a


r Greyhound. hese hat
Pe a te An Irifh Greyhound,a great Grey-
ou. à : |
Pain de levrier, À Cheffe-loafe ; bread made of tbe

courfeft of corne. : Wey

Souppes de levrier. BrewefJe made of courfe browne

bread,moifined with the laft,and worl fat of the beefe-
f :


pot,
Halevrier. (A voice of incouragement,or excitation:
boo,now now,hoe dog, boe well done dog; alfo (a voice
of incenfing fucb as be readie to fall together by the
eares.) Now lads,to it boyes,cuffe or cudgcll one another |
and {pare not. ; ;

Elle penfe que de toute taille bonlevrier. Sheis fo
indiffer entsor generall in the Mptertainment of (eruants,
that (fo they be young and luflie) fhe cares not of what
proportion,or lature they be. Looke Taille. — \

- Ln’ eft chafle que de vieux-lievriers : Prov. Old ‘
bounds doe bunt the fureft ; old Greyhounds bite the oo
Shs sing Dev
Oncques maftin n’aima levrier: Prov. Nenerdid
clowne affect a Gentleman; nor a rude peafant a cinill
prefident. :

Levricre: f. 4 Greyhound bitch, eee Rees
Levron: m. 4 young,or little,Greybound; alfo,a young
wanton fellow that (as a young Greyhound) minds no-
thing but pleafure.
Leurre: f. 4 (Faulkoners) Lure.
Oyfeaux,ou faulcons de leurre. Are,properly, (Quen,
Le Faulcon gentil, Pelerin,Tartaire, Gerfault, Sæ | *.
 creLafnier &le Tunicien, x4
Cccy


.


7 7 eee


_o=- ~ Lie in


eo Did A


Leurré: m.ée:f. Lured; manned, or madewnto the
lure; alfo,allured ; alfo,better trayned thembe was, or
taught more wit then be “bre e bad; whence ;

Il n’a pas encores efté leurré.(Said of a grofe,rude,
ignorant and unexperienced fellow.)

Leurrer. To lure ; to manne,or make unto the lure; alo,
45 Defniaifer; al/o,to allure,inucagle,intice.

Lexive:f. Lye (wherewith linnenis cleanfed;) alfo,a
bucke of (linnen) clothes.

Lexiveux: m. eufe: f. Full of lye; or,as Lexivier.

Lexivier: m. ere : f. Of, or belonging to,lye; fit for le,

Lexivieux: m. eue: f.45 Lexiveux.

Leyau: m. A wowad of the breadth, and depth of an
yach. qGale, ‘

Leyde : f. A certaine tax, or impofition vpon Wine, and
other commodities. .

Leyette. as Layette.

Lez: m. An edge,brimme,or fide ; alfo,the lift of cloth,.
ec; alfo, the breadth of any fluffe; alfo, a meafure


whence;
Lelez d'harenc. Containes about twelue Barrells,
Le lez d'harenc for. Containes tenne thoufand red
Herrings. =”
Lelez de maquereau, ou morué, as Le lez d'ha-
renc.
Le lez d’un navire. The ballaffe ; alfo (leffe properly)
the fraight,or burthen,of a fhip. ee
Le lez de Saumon, A meafure of Salmon containing
two Hambours. z |
Lez. Nigh,towards bard by,neere to,
Lezard: m. A Lizard; Newte, Aske; alfo, a kind of


{mall Dag. ;

. Lezard Chalcidique. 4 [potted Lizard which is very
venomous and yet,taken in drinke, bealeth the burt be
did, - +
Lezard de mer. A kind of Mackerell. ;
Lezard verd. The great, and barmeleffe greene Li-
zard called in Ftalie (where be is moft , and beft
knowne) Ramarro ; See Lifarde.

Bec de Lezard. A Lizards beake; an Fnftrument,or
paire of tongs, wherewith Surgeons draw bullets, or


bone-fplents out ofthe bodie.
Sel de Lezard. Laoke Sel, 2
Lezard : m. arde: f. Ofor belongingte.a Lixard.
Plume Lezarde. A biting,flanderous,or defamatorie
penne.
gon part ing tin oné 2
jage: m. A binding,tying; faftening jaitring uniting ;
et eine ; combining together.
Droié de liage. Hoopage ; orya fee due to fome Lord:
for the booping of ewery wine-ve(fell their vafals haue.
Liairre: as Lierre,


Liais: m. A verie hard free flone whereof flaire-fieps,
| and tombe-fiones be made. ;

| Liaifon: £. A band ; connexion, colligation ; knot,obliga-
tion; faflening, tying, or ig bard together; alfè,a
Ad 4 bi . in et a * get


Liänts eo, The bands of lead faflen the panes of a

window to the barres. wa

Liard:m. 4 brazen coyne worth three deniers, or the

: _ fourth part of a Xe #75

Liarder. Tabecer get poorey, [lowly ,or by the penne,

Lialle:t Ahead à
m. 4


| fc: bundle bend of el
anim ee


er


ee ws


(efpecially for fifo) not much different from our Laft; -


Libanomantie:fDivination by incen{e,or frankincenfe.”

Libanot, ou Libanotis. Hearbe Frankincenfe, Rofe-
marie Frankincenfe,Libanotis Rofemarie,Hart-root. |

Libation: & 4 facrifice, or thing offered; a tafling in
Sacrifice.


Libellance. Le Clerc,& libell. du Baillage ; C'eft,le


Libelle : €. A Libel, or defamatorie booke, crc ; alfo, a
Writ, Citation, or Proce(je, containing the [ubflance of
the fuit ; or (more properly) the originall declaration
upon any Attion; alfo, a Bill, Certificate ; Requeft, or
Sapplication,in writing. ».

Libellé : m. ée : £ Declared upon.

Adjournement libellé. Qui contient la demande
du Demandeur, & les moyens d'icelle, afin que le
defendant fçache s’il doit plaider, ou ceder; & s’il
delibere plaider qu'il vienne inftrui&, au iour de I
affignation,pour defendre.
Commiffion libellée. C'eft, narrative. 4
Exploié libellé. Qui contient le faict de l'exploïct;
ou les moyens de la demande, & conclufion du
Mandemens libellé de I ef

Mandement libellé de I' efpargne ; par lequel eft
declaré le Sik fe Record

ral doit payer la fomme,pour la bailler,& delivrer à
vn tel, en l'acquit du Roy, à telle chofe, pour tel
employ,a tel eftect. €Ragueau,

Libeller. To declare upon an Attion of TreSpas, Debt,
Couenant,crc ; asunder Libellé,

Liberal: m.ale: f. Liberal bountifull, franke,open-ban-
ded, free-hearted ; bencficiall, gracious,belping propi-
tious, good unto. : ‘

Liberalement. Liberally, frankly, freely, bountifully ;

~ beneficially, with an open band, in full meafüre, in a-
bundant manner. ade

Liberalité: f Liberalitie, bountie, frankne[fe, largeffe,
beneficence ; abundant and free giuing.

Liberation: f. 4 freeing, difcharging, relealfe, remit.
ment of. }

Liberté: f. Libertie, freedome; full fcope, good leaue,
ample or free choice; an uncontroulable condition; al-
_fo,openne fe,plainnefie boldneffe in fpeech or action.

; Libertinage: m. Libertinage, Epicurifme, fenfualitie,
licentiousnefesdifolutencffe,

Libidineux: m. eufe : £. Libidinous,lafcinious luxu-
vious, lufifill,incontinent, lecherous,

Libidinofité: f Lufifidlneffe, luxurie, lafcinioufnepe,
lecheroufnelfe,incontinencie, flefbline(fe.

Libraire: m. A Booke-feller,a Stationer,

Librairie : £ A Librarie; a fludie, or {hop , full of


bookes. :
Libre: com. Free,frank,at libertie,quit;opensunbound,
unbounded, unlimited, vunreflrained ; exempted from,
not fubieët unto; boldyvncontroulable.
Librement. Freely, frankly, unboundedly ; at pleafure,
. with full libertie,withont controule; willingly witbout
“conftraint; en de feare.
Libure: £ 4 little 7fle(cut out of the land) whereon Bay
alt is gathered after eucrie tyde, 2
Liburnique:£.4 verie light,and fivift fhip,or foift,vfed
be auncient Pyrats


t ;
Licaleil: m, A Lampe; qLimofin, qRab. 7
Licanthrope: com. ‘Troubled with the frenzie, or me-
Re Er gh henri re Ya al

ice : f. ALifis, or Tilt-yard ; alfo,a bitch; alfo,a whore
(See Lyces) alfo, the wooft, or thread of the fbittle, in
weaning ; alfo, a certaine round peece of wood in the
Ge - fe Price


@riginal from
4. JaRONIO STATE UNIVERSITY


re sgn lena -


NE tea: ae


nom de celuy auquel Je Receveur gene- |


Lice de charpenterie, A frame, or double,and clofe-
wrought pou barre of er 3 fitch as the rhe
tions of water-worke piles, &rc,are compalfed with.
De haute lice. Of rich worke,much warth; bigh fiile,
excellent fluffe ; bence, Tapifferic de haute lice, The
beft kind of Tapiftrie, HID!
Fuirlalice. To fhun, or quit the field; to refife, or a-
bandon, the fight ; (any way) to flinch . 1g
Lice: com. Smooth, fleeke ; See Liflé, gi
Licence: £ Licence, leaue, liberties permiffion, fuffe-
vance, ;
Licencié: m. A Licenciate ; a Batcheler of Diuinitie ;
one that hath bis Grace for a Doëtorfhip ; Ia Law, one


Licencié fousla cheminée. One that doth his acts in
Tenebris ; one that fteales a Degree,or gets it without
defert. , AL
Licencié: m.ée: f. Difinifed,difébarged.…
Licencier. To difmiffe, difébarge, give leaue, graunt li-
cence unto. 37 Lin
Licencieufement. Licentioufly, freely, with full fuffe-
rance, . |
Licharder. To licke daintily, feed quaintly pick up mor-
[els curioufly.
Liche. A kind of the ff Glaucus.
Liche-caffe: 4 lick-box,a fweet-lips.@Rab, 1
Liche-doigt: m. One that lickes bis fingers one after
the other; alfo, one that does things leifitrely, or by
peeces; whence ; ; a
Aliche-doigt. Peecemeale;by patches or parcels, by
degrees, one after another afüdaintily,or (paringly,
Liche-frite: & 4 Dripping-panness + 410 4"
Lichement : m.A licking lappingsor flapping-up, |
Lichene: f. ARimg-worme,or Tettars 5
Licher. Tolicke ; laps flap up. © ieee
Licherie : f. A licking, fawcineffe,lickeroufneffe. >
Licheron: m, A faweie co SAME
Licheur: m. A licker, lapper; or flapper vp of; a licke-
rous,or facie companion. :
Licifque. À dog ingendred betweene a wolfe,and adog.
Licifque orgoofe, A fault bitch,
Licitation: f. A profering, or fetting to fale, unto him
that will gine mojt; al/o,a prixing,or cheapening.
Licitation & decret. Fine and recouerie,
Licite: com, Lawfiull ; allowable.
Licol: m, A rope, balter ; borfe-collar ; Looke Chevef.


tre,

Gens de fac,& delicol. Rogues,vagabonds;al/o,beg-
ging Friers. — -

Licorne: f. AaVaicorne ; alfo,Vnicornes borne.

Liét: m. 4 bed,couch,pallet ; alfoyacourfe,ryanke,bed, or
laire of flone,exc.in building, Ae te)
Liét brifé. Mariage broken,a maried couple parted,
Liét d’un cerf. The lodge ofa Deere, \
Lict deluftice. A Indiciall Seat,or Throne of Iufiice;
the Kings Seat in a Court,or in Parliament,» ;
Liét de matlas, 4 Mattereffe,or Flock-bed..
Liét de'parement. The bed wherein a woman byes ins
alfo.a Sparuer ; Looke Parement.
Lits de parlement. Quilts fluffed with chefinut
leaues; tearmed fo in mockage becaufe being flivved,or
Stirred on,they makea Editer confifed noife,
Liét d'une Riviere. The channel of a Riuer: 1:
Liétverd. A couch,or bed ofeafe to fit,or toll on in the
day time. 8 ee let
En liétde chien n'y a point d’oingture: Provi The
kennell of a dog’s without {weet ointments,


that bath leaue to plead for clyents; an vtter Batri(~
ter,


LIE


Le Lict eft vne belle chofe,qui n'y dort on y repo-
ri ÿ ee ri well-made bed’s a good,and friendlie neaft,
À one fleepe not on't,be takes bis ref.

Pik. Segte Littée,  . tt #
iCUerc: £ A Litter,or Horfe-litter ; alf,litter *
Ses, ; alfojold ph - ae espe:
Batre lalictiere, A borfe to fay or continue in, or not
to flirre out ofsthe fiable. .

Fairelictiere de, To violate prophaneyabufe; depife,
contemne,make vile account, or bafe ufe of; wead va.
der foot. :
Mettre à la liétiere. To ruine,ouertheow, pull downe,
put unto moft vile or bafe offices,tread under ‘foot.
ac : fA kind of woodden,and warlike Lagine ued in
old time... .

Lie: f; Thelees, dregs, grounds thiche fubance i
tles in the hottome of f. Hor. ee ay gg
Tirer yn trai& fus lie, To broach aveffell below
er the bottome; to leacher it, or get a licke


at.
Lie ::com. cheerefill, pleafint sbuxome,


Dire vne chofe de chere lie. To fay à thing with a
merrie countenance,cheerie vifage looke full of glee.
Faire chere lie. To be iocond,merrie; frolicke; to mahe
great fport, or good cheere,
ig: m.ée: f. Tyed,bound ; iflened, fettered; obliged;
annexed ,or knit-unto; combined,or united with 3 bol-

| ding,or banging together,
Potage lié. Broth,or pottage thickened with the yolkes
of egges,or crummes of white bread.
ié avec fueilles de pourreaux. Heakely bound God
wot; r'eadic,or we 78 be looffed.
ee So meet wit quelle broute: Pro, The
3 muflbrouxe where fhe is bound ; where aman is
fetled let bim feeke to lue. à :

Liege: m. (orke. sates

Liege, Fief liege. as Fief ample; Seeke Ample.

Liege :m.ée:f. Corked ; flopped, or under. with

keswhencez Ra ‘
Soulier liegé. À Corke fhooe. sa :

Lieger. To corke; to flopraife,or vnderlay,with Corke,

Liement: m. A binding,tying, faflening, fettering knit.
ting,annexing unto; a combiping,or uniting with ; an
unvon,or adberence ; a clofing,gluing, fouldering,a bol.
ding or hanging together. sv

Liément. Merrily,blitbely, joconds sbuxomel,gladfime
ly with much glee.

Lien: m, A band,or tye} a line, cord, firing; any thing
that fafleneth,or fettereth ; asa thong, rope, gyue, ma-
#acle, fhackle,drcs alfo,a ligament,or ligature;alfa,the
loope of a dart. prema; à à
luftice patibulaire à deux piliers, & liens par de.
dans & par dehors. 4 Gibbet flanding on two pillars;
a paire of Gallowes, boynd both within and without;
belongs unto,or may be kept by,a Lo,bizb lufticier.
po Pierre aux liens. Lammas day ; or the firft of
Auguft,

Cen’eft que trainer fon lien.He does but divert, fora
while,the plagues which will fall vpon bim;or,goe whe- |
ther be will, make what hift he can,be carries bis pay
ment with bim; beace the Prouerbe ; 11 n’ eft pas ef
chappé qui traine fon lien. i
“A mefchantichien court lien ; &, à petit chien pe: |
tit lien ; &, à rude chien dur lien: Prov. Looke
Chien, > :
Rien ne vaut poulain s’il ne rompt fonlien: Pro,
©The colt that’s halter breakes not mettall wants,
iens, as Leans. à
Cee i Lien.


Original fron
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSE


PET" 4


L. ited es is


=


LIE


Lienteric. Flux lienteric. as Lienterie,

Lienteric: £ À flux wherein meat is voided (raw,and
undifzelted) presently after the eating thereof.

Lienterieux: m. eufe: £ Troubled with, or ficke of,
that flux.

Lienterique : com. The fame.

Licpard: m. A Libbard,or Leopard.

Lier: m, The allay of coyne.

Lier. To tye,bind, faften,knit ; balter, fetter ;
nite,cambine ; oblige,or make beboldento.
On lie bien le fac avant qu’ il foit plein: Prov. 4
facke before'wbe fil is eafily bound vp ; there's bope of
compajfing one that’s in want.

I] ne faut pas lier les Afnes avec les chevaux: Pro,
we mufl not mingle bad and good together. ;
Liernes: f. Slits, Enterlaffes, or Entertoifes of Tim

ber.

Lierre: m. Juie. ;

Lierre arboré. Tree Juie, wall Fuie; the great, or
climing luie. :
Lierre blanc. The white fuie, or female great Fuie,
bearing a white berrie.

Lierre clavelé. as Petit Lierre.

Lierre Helix. Barren,or creeping luie.

Lierre noir, The ordinarie climing, or black-berried


dulder, v-


Iuie.
Licrre piquant. Rough Bindweed.
: Lierre terreftre. Ground Inie,Alebooft,Gill creepe by
ar ground ,Tunehoofé,Catsfoot,
Lierre trainant. as Lierre terreftre;or creeping and
barren luie. j :
Petit Lierre. Small lnie,ground luie,creeping or bar-
ren luie.


Liefle : f. Glee, mirth, gladne[e, ioyfullnefe,cheerefull-
neffe, lightneffe of heart.
iet. as Liais.

Liet: m.ette: f. Glad, blithe, mervie, iocond, frolicke,
pleafant,buxome ,cheerefill.

Liette: £, 4 ill,or drawer; alfoya casket,orfinall coffer
“full of tills,or drawers.


ged Li ES Ne


: Am Lieu: m. A place; roome ; feat, ranke; 3 alo, a
k qualitie,calling,degree, ftate ; alfo,cr fi rece
: honing, account ; alfo, a boufe,or dwelling place ; and
i hence ; NA LEUT
# Lieu chevels. 4 Mannor-houfe. Norm.  .
es Chef lieu. À Lords chiefe Houfe, Place, or Mannor ;
(and,in the cuftomes of Mons,and Valenciennes each


of thofe Townes is tearmed Cheflieu.) 921 >)
Aulieu,& en lieu de. Ja lien, in flead, im the roame


En remps,& lieu. Fitly conueniently, feafonably,tben

when it fhould be. , anal fein;

Surle lieu. There; in that verie place; allo, prefent-
_ by incontinently, forthwith, before be flirred one foot
thenc ae


e. re ;
_ Hn'a feunclieu. He hath nor bout nor harbour ; be
path not a bole to hide bis bead in,
S'il y a lieu de s’arrefter à fon dire, 7fthere be caufe


= tofland on bis report, if there be reajin to build vpon
Rect a
“i e bon 4
ont mefchant lieu: Pro,Seeke Parole, +
LEUR À ape mom “ate
” 4 . 3 hwo + ET:
ve ae ngne; Containes 50 Portées.
he PE Ep = tes à AN AA ;
cantaie vere neere re of ur mile ;


Digitized™bBy Go. gle


» & BF
Les moyennes lieuës, comme cellesde Dauphiné,
ie Lange are about three of our miles,
Les petites lieuës, comme celles d'Italie; ave little
other then our miles.

Lievement. as Levée.

Lieur: m. A binder, tyer, faflener, knitter balterer.fet-
terer; foulderer uniter of.

Lieure: f. as Liement; or,as Liaifon:

Lievre: f. 4 Hare. |
Lievres cuiraflez, ou morionnez, So de fome An-
thors tearme poore Artifans that watch,

Lievre marin, ‘The fea Hare; an ouglie, and veno-
mous fifb, whofé left fide nothing refembles the right,
Bec delievre. A Hares lip, or mouth; the wpper lip
cleft in the middle vp to the nofe.

Memoire de lievre. Extreame forgetfillnefe.

Oeil de lievre. An eye whofe lids keepe open in flee-
ping; alfo,one whofe upper lid (by conuulfion,or otber-
wife) is teuerted, and thereby hindered from conering
the white, PSS |
Oreille de lievre. Seeke Oreille.
Palais au lievre. The fimeoth Sow-thifile; or the milke
Thiftle called,Hares Lettuce, .
Pied de lievre. Hares-foot, Harefoot Trefiile, bafe
Trefoile,rough Clauer. a

Plus couard qu'un lievre. More beartleffe then a
Hare (then which no beaft hath leffe beart.)
Fuyarden lievre. That runnes when be fhould re-
Sift; or(more properly) that runnes becaufe he cannot
refi.
Le lievre eft mis au rouët. Looke Rouct.

+ Je fçay bienougiftlelievre. 7 know well which is
the verie point,or knot of the matter. Voila ou gift le
lievre (to the fame purpof?.)

Il fait accroire que les lievres pondent, & font des
œufs. ( Applyable to one that 4 anextreame prater, |
and a monfirons lyer to boot;) He would make vs be.
leeue that Hares lay egges. f

Les chiens vous mangeront le lievre. That which
you bane gaped, or hunted for will be bad, or got, from
Prendre le lievre au tabourin. To performe impoffi-
bilities ; whence the Prouerbe. ‘i
L'on ne prend le lievre au fon detambour. Apply-
able to fuch,as firimeto be obeyed by force ; or thinke by
lowd, and great words to ouermaifler euerie bodie ; or
prefüme they can furprife a place whofe inhabitants bad
notice of their comming: And is as much as to tell them,
they labour in-vaine ; for Hares are not to be caught by.

"drumming,

Bon eftle lievre dont la peau coufte cent fous:Pro.
The Have whofe skin cofis deere is worth the hauine :
we fay of a thing bought at a high rate, it bad need be
daintie it coft bim fo deere; or,it is a Hare dreffed with
Venifon,or Deere, fauce. |
En petit buiffon trouve ongrand:lievre : Prov, 4
me e bufh may bold a great Hare; a little bodie a great
eart. 3 f
Pas à pas le boeuf prend le lievre: Pro. By little and
little À CRT Have; The like is: 2
Vne vache prend bien vn lievre : Prov.Patient per-
fenerance wins ground of bafiie vehemence; fo may a
paced Cow oretake the nimble Hare,

Lieutenant: m. 4 Lieutenant, Deputie, Subfitute,
Vi ; alfo, an-under ludge, or the deputic of a
Bailli, or of a Lo, high lufticiers Indgeswhence;

ieutenant civil. A Indge of ordinarie controuerfies
betmeene partic and partie, re Li
/ - Lieu.


Î
”
0


Original from


M 2 THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


"= 4, L . d + ls à rT es sy {4 Mi * Ce A A
; ‘hw yo te eo ee Na ot d'a ni URSS ENT. DE:
’ u 215) K 7 4 * @** of - * cu rele


E I:G: 1E I G
. À < 2 a
Lieutenant criminel, (Son office eft de s'infor- {. ing totbat linage, j Er A
mer des crimes, & faire le procez aux criminels, Retraié lignagier. Seeke Retrai patent...
ar interrogatoirestecolemens, &-confroneations; if. A line; any flreake, {mall draught, or linea-
& en apresles suger: cognoitt des deli&s non pu- ment; alfo,a toread,or long firing ; a verfe, or time in
nis par le Juge du lieu: cognoiftde remifsions,rap- writing, à flockeor branch in a pedegree, adegree of
pels de ban,& pardons: peut faire armer le peup e: kindred; alfo,the third part of a barbe corne, or the
ne doit afsifter au iugement des procez civils:) twelfth part of un inch in meafuring (and the laf, and
There be two forts of them ; viz. de robbe longue, & Teaft of that kind of meafure.)
de robbe courte, fomewbat infériour to 1’ethers, as Ligne blanche. The lower part of the bellic whereat
being receined,and infituted by them, . the mufcles thereof doe meet; the white line,the vmbe-
On n'y peut mettre Lieutenant. ‘This mufi be done licall veine,
in per(on or cannot bedone by Atturney: Ligne de compte. The line made(in an accompt)from
Lieutrin. + Letrin, re the fubieËt totbe fumme ; alfo,a ranke, or file of coun-
Licux: m. eule: € Fulboflees,dregs,or grounds; thick |: tersincafling,


4
in the bottomerafter landing, - Mettre enlignedecompte. To reckon, efieeme, ac- :
Lifrelofre: m..4 buffefauffe, fwag-bellie,puffe-bags Ça | cowntallow of; to regifter in the Kalender of account; A

L word coined in derifion of the Germanes , and Swift toremember , or mention in difcourfe, as a thing of
‘ fers) ET Some importance.
4 Ligament:1n. A ligament,or ligatures a tie;band, or igne eftainte. 2s Droié de Defherance, |
Jiring ; efbecially, 1b'infencible firing thats. feated ci- Ligne feindte. A fuppofed line in Geometrie ; ued |
tber within,or neere unto,a ioynt, and is tearmed by often as a Demetient, when a line is fuppofed to runne ws
_our Anatomilts,a Ligament. aw) from one point (without latitude, or thicknef]e)to ano- v
Ligamenteux : m.cufe:f, Full of ligaments, rings, ther, . a
ligatures, Ligne de perles. 4 thread of pearle. 4
Ligature :f. A ligature,tie, band ; alfosa binding, ty- Bois de ligne. Timber (quared out by line and lenell, A


ing, faflening. 1
ige :m, Allegiance,or liegemanfhip; whence s
Fiefs tenus à plein lige. Ficfs beld by full homage or
allegiance, -
ige :com. Liege,leall, or loyal! ; fubieétvaffall ; naty-
- rall,ones owne. ' 11024
Garde lige, The gard,or defence of a Lord, or of bis
cafile or principall boufé, due from the vaffall (fiffici-
ently, and for certaine dayes armed )-when there is
need or when he is required thereto, “a


wrought timber; alfo, an angle-rod,
Cotte & ligne. (which fhould rather be, cofté & lip
Ne ;) Sigmifies peculiar kindred; or a particular
branch of a familie, or kindred; and fo when a man
Sines bis wife athing, à cote &ligne, be meanes it
abfolutely unto ber, and ber orne kinsfolke,
Tenir cotte &ligne. ‘Tobaue the law in bis owne
bands,to doe what be if. - LE
Biens meubles ne tiennent cofté ne ligne; afça-
ner fuivent eftoc,cofté,ny ligne. .‘
irer


= Hammagelige, Sceke Hommage; Where though (in | hors ligne. To /ianme up; the cuflome oj
: Ho mi plein)it be fäied, that it, and Lige be all Auditors, ec, who fet the eee of exerie es
pe one(becaufe the cuftomes of molt places confound them) | : th'end,or outfide eos 1/7" Spee 55 ee
ns Jet by fome Plein 1s beld more abfülute then Lige. Lignear:m.are:f Linear,by line, in a direët cowrfe,or
Prince lige. À liege Lord age Prince to whom one is line; alfoybelonging to a line. +: |
by birth, and fortune fubieët. Lignée :f. as Lignage. :
nl Scigneur lige. The fame; alfa, a dire,immediate op Ligner. To line as a dog(or dog-wolfe)a bitch,
7 next Lord, Ligneraye: f. A line-yard,or flax-yard, |
Tenué lige. as Tenuë à ligence. Ligneul: m. Shoomakers thread ; or, a tatching end.
4 Ligcaulté: £ Loyaltie , or the fidelitie due by & fubie®? Ligneux:m.eufe:£, wooddie, fil of wood alfo, full
ic vato his naturall Princes. . i of lines,or finall and long threads.
a Ligement. Loyally, by allegiance ; alfo, divecily, imme- Lignier: m. Apile of wood. :
4 diately ext vaio. : 2510 Lignoul. 4s Ligneuls |
: Eigeoce: £ Liegemanfbipsallegiance. faith, loyaltie, Ligombeau : m. 4 ea Creuice,or little Lobfier. :
L voir de ligence. The garding of a Lords cafile, or | Ligoter. To prune a vine; to take from about ititbe
i boufe,due by bis vaffall(armed,and on horfebacke)cer- | …: ones,clods,or bearbes that binder the budding there-
\ taine dayes, and nights in the yeare; or when be is re- of. . rt aa
+) quired thereto. or otherwife, as the cuflome of the | Ligue: £ A league , or confèderacie ; a complat,or com-
: place,or qualitie of bis Tenure binds him, Ronis of fides,or parties which bane beene dinided ;
Tenuédligence. A Tenure im chiefs a-diveé, oF an agreement made,or alliance contracted; alfo,mutu-
immediate Tenure ([ubielt unto the Devoir afore- all intercourfe of kindneffes ; alfo, an excellent Soul.
faid.) : der,eight parts whereof be fine gold, three filuer, and
Ligier, as Leger, three copper. i
Lignade :f. Wooddage ; prouifion of wood. Ligué:m. ée:f. Leagued,in league with; confederate,
D’ aire lignade. 4 fhip te take in, or to firnifha {hip combined allied with,
with, fuell,or fire-wood. ù se Liguer I'vn à l'autre. To make a league, to côtraft al.
=e Li age:m. A linage, progenie, locke, race, kindred, iance,to enter into confederacie one with another,
ae) e,parentage; alfoswooddage ; and bence; Ligule:f. A little tongue,lingell, tenon; a fpoone; flice,
ea Devoir delivnage. A certaine toll takem for euerie or {mall ladle;vfed by Apothecaries ; allo,a {mail (Bo-
load of wood thats brought into Rennes in Britaine: mane) meafüre containing about a fpoonefull ; and in
- Lignager: m. A direél kinfman See Linagier. | weight three drammes,and aferuple.
Lignagier:m.ere :f.Direéllp akinne,of neere kindred; Ligumbault, as Ligombeau. |
of the fame flocke, line, boufe, race, familie ; belong- Liguttic : m. The bearbe Louage, Li À
RE
&


Original fron :


nS ide


| aa
Limignon d ve andere me acade


, ae. _ al PA UNIT. 7. ee
\ . tu > FT L L
* ;


LIM


GC a ET Oa


Liminaire : com. Set before th'entrie, or at the begin


Lilac. as Ben (oftwe fllables.)  * : :

Limace : f. 4 Snaile(moft properly, thedew Snaile, or
Snaile wishout a fhell ;) alfo, as Volute ; any thing
that winds,or turnes like a Snaile-fhell,erc.


Limaceux: m, eufe: f. Saailie 5 Snaile-like ; fill of


Snailes; alfo,as;

Limacial : m.ale :£. Ofa Snaile, refembling a Snaile;
winding, twirling, or turning about like the foell of a
Snaile.

Limaçon : m. .4 Snaile (and mofl properly that which
hath a fhell.)

Limacon de mer. A Winkle,or Periwinkle.
Petit Limacon de mer, 4s Nerite.
Herbe à Lirnaçon. Medicke fodder , Snaile Clas


ner,

Pierre de Limaçon. The Snaile flone ; found in the
heads of fome(dew)Snailes; tis white, fomerbat tran[-
parent , and rugged; it fèemes paige er ips pref-
‘fed betmeene the teeth, breaks as {mall as fand : the
vulgar hold it good for aTertian,or Quartan Ague.
Treffle au limacon. as Herbe à limaçon,

Faire le limacon. To wind,twirle, or turne round a-
bout; fouldiers to doe the ring or to caft themfelues in-
to a ring.

Aurant chemine yn homme en yn iour comme vn
limaçon en cent ans: Prov. Aquicke workeman
difpaiches as much in one day as a flowbacke intwen-

. Le, ”

Contre la nuiéts'arment les limaçons: Pro,Szails
arme themfèlues (put ont their bornes) towards night.

Limaçonner. To twirle,turne, or wind about, like the

Swell of a Snaile , or as fouldiers that caf} themfèlues
into a ving. °

Limaille : £. File-du/l, pinne-duft.

Limailles : f, as Legumages; Pufe,

Limaire. A young Tunnie.

Limande:f. A Burt,or Bret.fifh; alfo, a broad Pipe-
ftaffe,or boord, prepared, fafbioned, and fit, for caske;
alfo,a fhort cudgel. !

Limas. as Limaçon.

Limaffe : f. # Limace.

Limafle à eau. The little water Snaile,

Limaflon. . ‘fb ait ile ‘

Limature :f. 4 filing ; FAR

Limbe de bouteilles Zhe mouth,or brinke of a bottle,

Linbes.A low,and vafanorie roome in prifons; alfo,the
Purgatorie of vabaptized children.

Lime : f. À file; alfo,as Limaçon. Pm
Limes. A wild Boares nether tusks,or tufhes.cuo 1

Lime fourde. A foft,or fmooth file, which. makes ne
nf when tis rfed'; alfa dreaming, ley 1
knaue ; or,as in; : : ;
_. Fairela lime fourde. To gineno earé unto; or, te
 feeme as if be either beard not, or cared not to beare,
Limé: m. éc:f. Filed; finootbed, polifhed ; [craped, or
fhauen vnto a leekneffe,or enenne|fe; alfèlicked; alfo,

_ gleckedor looked askew at. ,

; ner. To file ; /mooth,polifh; tofcrape,or fhaue a thin,

| read re ne 1 Hare db
“her young ones ; alfo,to or looke askew ate -

$3 & Li Sonslemipaat. ‘ime Le

bap ial

{rep delimettre; PAUL PR »

. them beine called Limeftres..
| imeur :m,4 1 di Lae
Limeure:f, Fr


+ ten er
VE


LÉ é mg. al
ne m. A limiter, bounder, flinter ; prefcri-
er. : SA à
Limitation :f, A limitation yeftritiion, vefiraint, pre-


Limite :f. A limit, bound, flint; border, frontire ; pre-


one.
Limité: m. ée: f. Limited,bounded, flinted,reftrained,


Limiter, To limit, bound, flint ; prefcribe a condition,


Limitrophe: com, Bordering upon, adicyning or hy
Limoine:f. Pyrola winter-greene, Winter Beets, wild
Limon: m. Slime; or thicke,and flimie durt gnud.mnive,


Limonier. Cerfs limoniers. Stags painted, as Thill-


Limonne. 4s Poncille, 3
Limonneux:in.eufe: f. Slimie ; muddie, boggie, dur-


Limpide: com, Cleere, bright, fheene, glaxie, tran[pa-


rent, :
Limure. File-duft ; alfo,a filing.
Lin: m. Line, flax ; flaxen or bempen yarne; linnen


L
7
| se Linder par terre. To creepe , or crawlealong the


F 2 - Ofigina
seedy Go gle eae THE OHIO STATE


LIN


‘ning of; dedicatorie ; forerunni


Scription modi,


Scription; a condition, courfe, or compaffe appointed


prefcribed a certaine courfe,or compalfe.


appoint a courfe,refiraine within a cempal]e.
imiteur : m, À Limiter ,bounder, flinter,


ing neere unto,
Beets.


puddle, dregs; alfo, a flimic foile; alfo,a Lemmon; al-
fo,the Thill of a waine,wagon,cc;1n which feñce(be-
— = a confifis of two beames) it is moft ufedin
the Plur. LCR :


borfés with carts at their beeles.
Cheval limonier. À Thill-borfé,or Cop-horfé; be that
goes next tothe waine,erc.


tie,mirie puddle, filtbie, full of ordure.


cloth. à
Lin fauvage. Flax-weed,wild flax,tode-flax,Flaine-


wort.

Lin vif. A kind of Indian line,or limnen which the fire
purifies but confumes not.

Goutte,ou c,dg lin. The weed Dodder ; (and ”
flax it [elfe ufaid to bane the gowt, when one fiaulke


twines about another asit growes.)
Il a meflé le lin avec la chanure ; &;
Ilatiflulin avec eftouppe. He bath mingled flax


with toe; bebathinmbled good and bad together,
Linage :m, Linage,kindred; See Lignage.
Linagier: m, Adirett,or neere Enfin 7 :
Linagier fur linagier n’a point de retenuë. One
cannot reconer the land that bath bin bought
1% another,
Linagier: m. ere : £ as Lignagier ; Neere akinne,


dc.
at Flax-weed , Flainewort , wild flax, tode-
a f
Linarole :f.The name of a delicate Italian peare which


is ripe in Anguft,
Linceul:m. Afheet(for a bed.)
¢ plus riche n’emporte qu'un linceul: Prov. ‘The
jche carries but one fheet ? bis graue.


_ ground.
Line. as Ligne.»
Lineament: m; A Gneament,or feature, of the face, or
= of any other part.
Lineature : f, A lineature,or feature,

qe error ro hr 2
À Is. Palmifiers,and Fortune-tellers

their conieblures. x

LI-


from
UNIVERSITY


L IN.
| Linge :€ .4 locke, tinage,parentage.


Linement. as Liniment, . may
Linge : m, Linmen, flaxen ; alfo, apeece of linnen cloth.


Li nge : com, Lanke,thinne yneager, [craggie, leane.


LIQ
Liperquam, faire de liper. To fhew bis authoritie , 0
el the world (ee sd Spr to beare bimfelfe. as one


* that can doe allin all; to take exceeding much upon
him : This word is (corruptly) ufed in [had of; luy per


Litigere. as Lingiere. nt |. , quem(all things are done.)

Lingerie: f, The making,or felling of linnen cloth; al. | Lipie.See Lippie. . |
So, linnen, linnen fuffe things made of linnen. Lipothymie: £ A fivoonding wherein the patient feems ‘

Lingiere:f, 4 Seamfier ; a woman that makes, or fèlls | _ dead.” x ‘
Lanen,or linnen ware. | { Lippaitet m. Lip-falue.

Lingot: m. An ingot,lumpe,or maffe fmettal. | Lippesf. Alip; (See Lype) aif, as Lippie; or Lippi-

Lingotiere : f.The mould wherein ingots are framedyor | _ tude, ; ;
caft, rg Lippée: £. A big bit, 4 good morfell, a moutbfill; a!fo, W

Linir: m, A Flax-man; a feller of flax. ameale,or bellifull of meat,

| Liniere: f, 4 Flax-wift, Mouche de lippée. A lickorous,or faucie companion. 4

Liniment : m, A liniment, or thinne ointment; alfa | Mavoit fa lippée du butin. Hee bad a fhare im the a
fincaring, annointing, gentle dawbing, foft rubbing bootie, 2 | +:
on. ‘ Ilflatee pour la lippés, He collogues with one,of pur- A

Linier. To fmeare,annoint rub foftly,or gently on, pofe to get ameale by bim. Pi

Linitif: m.iue:£. Mitigating, refrefhing,paine-affwa~ | Lippie:f, The redne(fe,or foreneff of a bleare eye, ;
ging,ache-quailing ; mollifying, fuppling. Lippion. Part of 2 womans ec. |
inition : f. A finearing,annointing, gentle rubbing, ~| Lippitude : f Blearednefle,or bleare. eyedneffe ; a run 4

Linomple :£.4 fine,thinne,or open-waled linnen much ning of the eyes accompanied with paine , and red- es
vfedin Picardie (where it is made) for womensker- | _ nee. ‘1
chers and Church-mens furpleffes. Lippu : muë: f. Thicke-lipped, great-lipt; alfa, pow- Re


=


ting,or hanging the lip,as a child thats readie to crie,
Liquabilité : f. Aptneffe 10 melt,or to become liquid,
Liquation :f. 4 melting.
Li fa m.éc : f, Diffolued, melted, made liquids
clarified,
Liquerice : f. Lickorice,
Ligueur: f Liquor, humor, moifture, (ap, iuyce,water,
-iqueur Septembrine, Wine (becaufè ts made in
September.) SR
Liquidation :£, 4» euidence, cleering, maniféflation;
alfè,a difcuffing,or ite


Liquide: com, Liquid, moif, wet, thine ,pure,cleere ;
maniféft,euident,pr ent; certaime,
Debte liquide. 4 cleere, jure, found debt,


Liqui é:m, €e: f, Clee sag Ie a euident,
Pregnant,certaine apparents alfo ed,examined,
alfo,made liquid joeibenengee ;

Liquider. To cleere,manifefi,make pregnant, certaine,
apparent ; alfo,toexamine,or difcuffe ; alfo,to make li-
quid ynoift or thinne. « ats ‘>
Liquider les defpens d’ vn procez. To cleere y or
tocorrect,them; a Judge to fet downe which fhall be


‘Linon: m. 45 Linomple; Some alfo tearme Lawae fo.

Linoftolie: f. A cutting of the baire.

Linotte:f. A Linner, |
Ila vag teftede linotte.He bath but a ligbtor viddit
bead of bis ovone.

Linfueil: m. 4 fheet ; See Linceul.: 2

Linteau: m, The lintell,or beadpeece ouer a doore, .

Fiotheau, ac Lineage pach à
ion: m, A Lyon; alfasthe (Zodiacall) Signe Leo alfa
a peecé of: ane des about 6 re i : Le
Lion de mer. The fea Lion; refembles bothinfhape,
and bigneffe, the land one; al, a kind of great Lob.


LA 5 : =
Dent delion. Dandelion, Priefles crowne, Swines
frowt, Piffabed.
Pas de lion. as Pied de lion,
Parce delion. Lyons claw, Setterwort, Settergraffe,
baftard blacke Ellebore ; alfo,as ;
Pied de lion. Lyons foot, Lyons paw, great Sanicle,
our Ladies mantle, (fome alfo tearme Lyons leafe, and
Lyons Turnep, pes Leoninus. )
Sault du lion. : LA certaine tumbling triche vpom a


fioole,or little bench. : allowed,and which not;( This pbrafe is applied efpecia
Vin de lion. Terrible flrong wine ; fuch as makes the ally,to th’examination Faro ES
drinker, fellyand fiaibus. — charges; ich as be the due fees of Counfellors, Attur-


Batre le chien devant le lion, See Batre.
Conje€urantle lion par les ongles. Ghefing at the
Lyon by bis clawes ; at the bumor of the man by bis
courfes; Looke Ongle, i .
Coudre la peau du regnard à celle du lion. To at
tempt that by fleight which bee could not gbtaine by
might à : ;
Prendre le lion par les iubes. Te performe adifficule
or dangéreus ati, * . ‘ Ae
Jn'y eut iamais bon marché de peaux de lions?
Prov. A Lyons skinne was neuer bought good cheape ;
the valiant euer fold their skinnes full deere,- j


neyes, Officers Clerkes dre.)
Lire: € The muficall Infirument Lyra,
Lire. To read. | ; :
Autant vaut celuy qui chaffe & rien ne prend,
comme celuy qui lit & rien n’entend: Prov. Hee
that huats, Mail pr nought, is much, like him that-
reads,and conceiues nought. 2 , 2
Lire-liron, The burthen of a fang. .
Liripipié, Hooded,as a Graduate. RE
Lic :m. A Graduates ee ja
iripipionné. as Liripipié; Aljomellow, cupfhotten,
on, Yahi to MN and therefore bearing the red-


Lionceau: m. 4 Lyons whelpe,or young Lyon, faced linerie thereof,

Lionin : m. ine:f. Lyonifh,Lyom-like,ofa Lyon. Liron: m. 4 Dormoufe. PR Sa NE
Lionne: £ 4 Lyonelfe. x: yoy) | Liron depain, A little gobbet, luncheon , or cantle of
Lionneau : m. 4s Lioncean, age T breads tes vN ee ae
Lionneux: m. eufe: f. Full of Lyons, Lis: m. 4 Lillie, a
Lionnier :m, 4 keeper of Lyons.) à os Lis blanc. 7hordinarie wbitegarden Lillie, |
‘Lionnin. 4 Lionin; Alje,ofa Lion-tavnie colour. : | Lis celefte. The blew Lillie, eo)


| Origiral.fr@m AIRE Beas
THE-GHIO* STATE UNIVERSE i sits
f = » vi RE, me oS: i SPN ae


1 on, [inoothing. Sees
<u Lifte sf, A Gitrelt,checkroll or catalogue of names, dc;


wre eet mt. — CE ee rae a ee LS 1.


LITE


bath beene melted (that it might be purged, andclee- |
red from the lead or copper that was in 11)which being
- done by a gentle fire giues it a filuer bew, and thereby
this name, ; À
Litharge d'or. Gold foame ; the bef kind of Litaÿgie;
comes of lead wherein filuer bath beene melted bya
Finn great fire,gimng it a golden lufier,é there-


Lis


Lis d’eftang. Water Lillie, water Rofe,the yellow and
white Nenupbar, —~ ,

Lis iaulne. Liriconfancie, yellow Lillie, :
Lisde mer. The white fea Daffadill, or white fea O- |
nion,

J" Lie fauvage. wild Lillie mountaine Lillie; alfo,Liri-
ricenfancie, or the yellow Lillie,

Lis de vent. A gu/t,or flaw of wind; alfo, an oppofition
of two contrarie winds; or as Rumb. L
Aller au lis de vent. To goe clofe by the wind, faile
with a {cant wind,lay tacke aboord,

Lifable : com. Legible,readable.

Lifard : m. as Lifarde; or Lezard.

Lifarde :£ A Lizard; Newt,Aské ; (See Lezard ;) al-

fo,a woman that reads much.

Lifarde verde, The great, greene,and barmele[fe Li-
xard Ramarro ; a friend unto men,on whom fhe loues
10 gaxe,and whom fleeping fhe vfes to gard from the
treacherous af[aults of Serpents.

Lifer. To lift,or border agarment ; alfo, to coaft along by
a countrey,

Liferon :m. withiwind,Bindweed,Ropeweed,Hedge-
bells.

Liferon afpre. Rougb Bindweed,
Liferon grand. as Grand lifer.

Lifet:im. the Vine-fretter, or diuells Goldring ; (a
worme ; ) alfo,as Liferon ; Witbiwind; and bence ;
Lifet petit. Small withiwind,or Bindweed; alfo, the
blacke purging Bindwecd. Cs det
Lifet picquant. Rough Bindweed.

Grand lifet. The great,fimooth, white Bindweed ,Repe-
weed withiwind,Hedge-bells,

Lifble : com. Legible,readable,

Lifiére: €. The lift of cloth,or of luffe; th’edge,or hemme
of a garment; alfo,th’end,or thextreame outward part
of any thing ; and hence,a frontire, march, border, vt-
moft bound,or coaft of a countrey.

Lificreux:m.eufc:f. Prefcribing the limits, appoin-
ting or fetting out the bounds of feuerall countries,

Lifisque. # Licifque. \

Liflant. Sleeking,glaxing polifbing.

Liffant de gueulles. Scaled Gales; (4 tearme of


blazon.) 581 À ;
Liffe. 2s Lice; Alfo,one of the ropes wherwith the main-


yard of a {hip is boifed ‘vp; alfe,'a vowler of maffine
‘laff Hors Carré doe leeke, and gloffe their


- leather,
Liffé: m. de: f Sleeked, gloffed,glaxed,polifbed; fimooth,
flipperie,glib. AE Re ue
Lisser. To fleeke,to gloffe, to glaxestopolifh, 16 finootb,
|. oo UE er LE :


10 make flippert ‘ ae
Lifferon’: m. Th’ hearbe Pevuinkle,or Periwinkle


 Liflure: £ A fleeking, glafing, polifbing, fe vinga lof


this name. |
itharge de plomb. as Plombagine; 4/0, as Efcu-
me de plomb, d
Lithiale : €. The fione in the bladder. :
sms f. Diuination by the cafling of pible |
ones,
Lithortipon. for Lithontripton; Stone-diffoluing,or
owe breaking + (Rab. gt
Liticontefter. To + dur. in a fuit ; viz. to deliner or lay
open before a Judgethe chiefe points of the declarati-
on,and anfwer. 1
Litiere:f, Aborfelitter ; alfo,litter for cattell; alfo,old
dung,or manure ; See Lictiere. i"
Litige. swit,controuerfiedifference, variance,conten-
tion, firife, debate: In law , s'entend proprement
quand y a Aétion intent¢e'par adjournement,pour
la chofe contentieufe ,& de qua controverfia ck
Litiger. To firine, wrangle, contend , maintaine a fuit
againfl; to be at variance, bold debate, goe to law


with. ;
. Litigieux: m.eufe: f Litigious debate fill contentions,
in fuit; or fubiedt unto fuit.

Litisconteftation : £ The delinerie, or laying open of
the ae points of a café , pro & contra, befère a
Judge ; done after the declaration , and anfwer bee
put in. psi!

Litispendence: f. The banging of a fit; or the trial,

disceptation,or decifion thereof.

Litorne :f. AWing-tbrufh ; or the red (potted Thrufh,
that feldome,oi newer ,appeares in Summer.

Litre. as Litre, 1

Litron: m. A meafire(moft commonly) of wood,contai-
ning fomewbat more then our pinte, and vfed by the
Retailers of Salt,Pulfe. Millet ,Rapefeed.erc.

| Littée: £ The litter of a Bitch Lyoneffe,coc ; alfo,a bed,

or cake of leawes, bay, graffe, oc, to lay, or packe vp


Litteron. as Litron..”

Littre :£ 4 fimerall girdle ; the blacke wherewith the
| wpperpart of a Church is compaffed , at the funeral of
a great perfon. ~
- Littron. as Litron. : Le
Lituë: m.. Acertaine crooked flaffe vfed by the Roman

Angures; alfo,a Crofier,or Bifhops flaffe. ;
Liture:f. A dafh,rafe,or fiveake through a word with
a penne ; alfo,a dafhing, vafing, flriking onta blotting,
~ or blurring with a pen.
"s fal he xf, The (bird) Pellicane.
alfo,a liftjor feluedge ; alfo,afmall (quare oût-iutting iveau. Secke Niveau. > i

À mer os iller ; alfo,as Littre. ss Livel. d'unlivel, Lene 0 0
Lifteau : m. A little lift; roll,catalogue ;feluedge, "| Livefche. Lombardie Lowage; alf?,Alexanders,
Lie « Lit eo at. iF 0 TER Livide co mal es et at
Literaire: com. O/,or belonging to,letters,or learning. | _ or dead, colour,
Literal :m.ale: f.Learmédyiterallswell feene in hberal | Lividité: £ Liniditie, lewneffe, wanneffe, bleakene[e,

Oe, 3 ia NET; NERO ESS Rae Tear paleneffe, 3 tbe colour appearing vpon a
+f elearning. — "7 AE ffroa


sblacke and blew ; a dead;earibie, leaden bew,

Bae Livoy : m. A fimall vine-booke or vine-knife.
Livrailon:£ Aliuerie,or delinerie; alfo,a court-difh sa
€ 2 di ifhe à plentifill table with some part of
of all the meat thats onit. 16108
Livre. Abooke « compeftion,or wor ke,insoriting.
n


mised ibe


Lien


Original from


epouizes y GO: gle ac TEKE- OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


of, #7 2 s S


~. Volivrea perfonnages. 4
I veut vouourgeent If
dy, no bodie can get a woe
die to fpeake.
Livre: f. A pound weight.
Lalivre d'Anvers. The
16 ounces. dur
La livre des Apothecaries. Containing (in many pla-
cés)but 12 ounces, which we call Troy weight, and
was th'auntient Romane weight: (Our Apothecaries
fe the fixteenc-ounce pound.) uno ete
Lalivre d Efpaigne. Containes 14 ounces,
La livre des E{piciers,Grofsiers, &c. Containes but
12 ounces ; (whereas our, Grocers pound contai-
neth 16.)
La livre de Florence,& de Gennes, Is 12 ounces.
La livre de grofserie. Containes 24 omaces,
La livre de Lyon. Js 15 owaces. Fe CR
La livre marchande, Containes in fome places 14, in
others 18 but in the moi 16, ounces; which be diuided
into 32 bale ounces , theyinto 64 Sezains,thofe into
123 Trefeaux,they into 256 Gros, and they inte 512
Demi gros. ‘
La livre des Marefchaux.The Farriers pound; con-
taines 12, ounces, diuided into 90 drammes, they into
270 {eruples,and they into $40 Oboles,or half pence.
La livre Medecinale, The Phyfitians pound ; contains
allo 12 ounces; but they be diuided into 96 drammes,
» they rato 288 (eruples,thofe into 576 Oboles, they into
1728 Siliques,and they into 6912 graines, à
‘Lalivre EM Milan, ou de Ja Soye, Is but 12 ounces.
. La livre du gros poids. Comfifts of 26 ounces.’ |
Lalivre du petit poids. Is but Ta ounces, 2.
LalivreRoyale. The Kings port, Aver, du poids
Pound maff or dinarie pound, contaimeth 16 ounces...
Keduicts de livres en quarterons. \(Somembat like
our brought from a noble Lo nine-pences is Hd
Livre: f 4 pound in money. tate
Livre Barrois. Is worth but14 s-Tournais one fhort
of 18 d.fterl. 1 FA
Livre Bourdelois, Is but 12 Solz and a balfes or she
hatfe.of the Pavifian pound, by
Livre Manfais. 1545. fterl. or double the worth of


inarie pound, containing


the Tournois, { ade
Livre Parifis, 1s worth 20s, of Pariser 25 Then
which come 1025. 6.4. ftexl, |


w
Livre Tournois, The pound Tournois ; the moft or-
| + dimane French pound ; amounts but to 2 s. fterl.\ \
Livré: m, ée:f, Delivered; giuen, or diftributed.anto,
Livrée:£ Adebucrie of 2 thing thats giuen; and (but
lee properly) the thing fo ginen; bence,a Lrueries Ones
cloth,colours,or deuice in colours worn by bis ferwants,


or others. :


Tae STS red n
La Livrée des Chanoines, Their linerie, or carrodie;


or money. : LA TS
Livrement: m. A linerie,or deliuerie; and hence; \


| Livrer. Tagiue ; to deliner,or diftribute unto, so beflem,
or conferre on ; to paffe, or yeeld ower; to put imtotbe

| _ hands of. Scuba s 1

! Livrefque: com. Bookifh ; fo" belenging to,a-booke.

| Livrets. À Pampbletyor tittle book... \e0.)
Lixive.as Lexive. | | RENTE
Lizant. Bgrcering ; erting ali or border ons alfoscva/-

|" ring along by the borders of. pete
Lize :com.Gb, fmooth, fleeke:QRab. 1.1 27 -

: Lizeron : m, Wäbiwind,Bindmweed, Hedge-beUss.


their flipend, exhibition, dailie allowance in vidlualls,


Livrement de fult, & terre. Liuerie,and feifin, T


Lizet. as Lifer,

Lizette : f. A little grayifh-vermine(which grawes, and

does much burt unto the young buds of grafts) beld to

- the fame effects im the yard ibat tbeCantharides —
08,» -

Liziere:f «s Lifiere, :

Lizieux: m.oollen clothes made at a Normand towne
fi called. -

Loage. Seeke Loiiage.

Lobe :m. ihe lap,oi loweft part of the eaves alfo,a lobe,
or lappet of the liuer.e>c ; alfo, as Loupe; (aljo, a lie,
Sib,iealt, gullerie,mockerie; In old French, ) ;

eau? m, A little lobe,lap,or lappie peece of.

Lober. To gull,coufen,deceiue,beguile.

Los m.ale:f. Local! ; belonging to, or containedin,
a place,

Localement : m. Locally,in a place.

Locar. bled locar, 4 kind of wall Barlie, called $.Pe-
ters corne.
ocataire: com. À Leffee,or hirer ofa houfe,or lodging;
alfosa bireling,one whith i, or may be bired; aljo, as
Locateur.

Locateur : m, 4 letterjor hirer out of. Ù

Locatif. À tenantsinmate, Soiourner ; one that bireth a
lodging or two to liein.

Location: f. 4 biring,or letting out of; alfa,a placing ;
a fetting,or beflowing in a place.

Loch: m. 4 Loche,or Laboche; a liquid confeélion, os
Loft medecine, thals not tobe fwallowed, but beld in :
the mouth untill it baue melted, end fa paft by degrees
dotene the throat ; See Lohoc. 3

Loche: £ The Loach,a {mall fib ; alfo, thedew fnayle,


or fnayle without a fhell. re
+ sede Is fomewhat leffe,and daintier then


He Loach which is commonly tearmed 5.
ae a
mer. Ailittle fifo bred of, but neuer fo big
| 5,the fea Gudgeons fame call it Ry.
Locher. fog Poke ha mu mt hea
thing thats looffe. ÿ :


Lochette : f. 4 Groundling,or finall-bearded LadiE. |


Locquet,4s Loquet. !.,: !

Locule: m. 4 litle bagspouch,or pinft.
Locupleter. Toimich,or make mealtbiess + -
Locution: £. locution, faying, fheechmanaer of fpea-


king. sve
Lodier: mi. À quilts or quilted counterpoint for a


Lodes. as Lods : €Breton,. es
Lods, Fines of Alienation due toa Lord vpon the pur.


chafe of a Cenfuel inheritance beld of biws Sceke |


‘Ventes ; or Droit de ventéss i) - oo ‘
Loe :f. 4 quantitie of fifh taken, as acufomie, by fome
© few Normand Lords, of onevie fifher-boat that comes
into,and moores within, theit hauens, creekes or bar-
bors sefpecially ifthe boat belong vnto any of their te-
nants,or any inhabitant of their territories,
Loere:£.4é Plongéon de Riviere, €
Lof. Seeke Loo, : : :
Loge. vnloge qui peut. 4 lodging at randome,alodg-
ing where one can get it, or afcambling for lodgings;
from fouldiers incamping,or entring of a towne, when
commonly euerie one takes the firft lodging bee lights


072. ane . "
Loge : f. 4 lodge,cote, fed, or fmall boufé ; acabine in
a [hip ; a booth in à Market,or Faire g@c,
:: Droit de loges. Looke Droi&,,


~ In’eft pas mercier qui ne fgait faire fa loge: Bo:


eae


He isnot worthietovfé a trade that cannot, with bis

owne bands, fit all things vato ir. ps

Logé: m.ée : f. Lodged houfed parboured lying, fo-
iourning at abiding in,a place.

l'en fuis logé 13. 1 am of that mind,or bumor.

Nos gens en font bien là logéz. Are of a right mind

ia that,are in the right for that.

Logeable: com. Lodgeable, barbourable , intertai-
nable ina boufe.

Vne niaifon fort logeable. A houfe of great receipt.
Loger.To lodge, lie, fosourne,barbour, dwell, abide for
a time ; toboft, Inne, or lie in an Inne, alfo, to lodge,
intertaine, gue boufe-roome,affoord a lodging unto.
Vous me logez chez Guillot le fongeur, Look Son-


SS ORL Ome 0. CAEN


cur.
Sc loger fur le blefme, To looke,or wax,pale ent |
En mauvais voifinage fe loge on: Prov, Seeke Voi-
finage.
Pope : f. À little lodge,cote, roome ; booth ; cabane,
lodging,
Leslogetres és coffes des febues, The boles; ef din-
ples, wherein busked beanes are lodged,
Logie. Droit de logies. Looke Droid,
Lovique. Logicke; the Art of reafoning; the way to rea-
on .


ht +
LANCE CX ° tra


Pont aux afnes de Logique. The connerfiontéfpro-
pofitions; alfo,Looke Aine.

Logis: m, A lodging boufe,drcllimg. "+ 1: !
tel is des’ gens de pied, ou l'on n'a point la
peine de fermer les portes, A prifon,

Logifine : m. The due, and iudiciouswnderfanding of

a thing,formerly confidered,and efteemed ofaccording

L to M the preci yf
ogiftique : £.TW Art of counti practife of A-

; nee or sb part thereof which containes Ad.
dition, Subftrattion, Multiplication,and Dinifion,

Lohoc. A Loch, or Loboch; an*Elebluarie, or medi-
cine more liquid then an Eleétuarie, gp to
the lungs and windpipe and to be licked,and let down
the throat by leafure. ; JG

[olal, BL oiauté. ar Loyal; SsLoyauheé
o1al; &,Lolaute. as Loyal;: RHIC 3

Loidorer. To defume,reproachenileyaileon. 1.

Loier: m, as Loyer. TARN VP TITIECNIO

Loiñceau. Seeke Loinfeau. 00171020

Loing. Farre,much,a great way off.
Deimander de loing. To aske a Sarvoalier pe


garlan.t


und
a farre-fetcbed question, as one that w inom 4
thing without feeming to defreit,” © 9 9.
ner oe Let eat que le bout de fon nez.
He is a dull,carele(fe,idle,improuident fellow.
Pasa pas on vabien loing :Prov. Faire and fofily
oeth farre, * TA hating bk, .):
etire chofe de loing poife: Prov. A little,or light
~ thing farre carried proues heauie.” Korn
nr va mette :f. Somewhat long,or farre; little
, 0 " - er L a
Loingnettemeut. Somewhat long,or farre off; a lit-
tle way off. Ap F


Lombard


Game, -
Lémbardie:f, Lembardie ; the bithermoft part ef 1-


off the Fo 3 40 be loath, to goe doubt filly, or drowfily
to-worke. ine
Long: m.Longue :f° Long; tall, flimme ; extended,
r- ched; continuall, Fins, wearifome ; allo,
great,largeymuch. BIL € FO 1
Long bois. A Pike,or Speare, Asa
1 2 i luske , i on he ; or.
Slowbacke, a tall,ill-fauoured,looffe-bangled loobie ; a


Deloifir, at & awit sea ah
oo à Perm em! Df
Tout à loifir.Leafüreb, faite and foftly not 100 fifisby


degrees ; idly, litberly, lowly, di
Ges 4 )il me loift. 2may,1. am


Loift. (A Verbe 1m
allowed it is lavefull for

Lombaire : com, as Lumbaite. |

Lombales :f. The parts which be on each fide of the


nauell.

Lombard : m. The name of a fertill vine; alfo, a Lom-
bard; one of Lombardie. , : AR
Le boucon des Lombards, Am impoifoned bit (fir
the Lombards are {aid to be great impoifoners.)
Freres des L ds. Males, Moonecalues, mon
flrous birthes ; tearmed fo,becaufe the women of Lom-
bardie by much feeding on bearbes, fuites, and otber
crudities, bring forth fometimes thofe monjters in flead
of children ; Looke Frere. y
Patience de Lombard. Patience perforce,a firted
or unwilling patience,

Les graces du Lombard font trois dez fut table:
Prov, For fo much is the Lombard affeéted unto that
meager,and umworthje fport,as (by his good will) hee *
falls to it as foone as bis meat is ont of bis month, ~~
ard: m.arde : £.Lombard,of Lombardie.
Lettres Lombardes. Letters Patents whereby the
Lombards and other Italians ave licenfed to trade, or
eer” tovfe,in France. . =
che Lombarde, A flocke-fleene ; or fafbion of
balfe-fleeue, whofe upper part is raifed , and full of
plaits,or gathers,
Poule Lombarde. A great Henne, or Henne of the


talie,

Secours de Lombardie. Succour thats too long in
comming; or (0 long, that its unfeafonable when it
comes. /

Lombe:m. The loyne, flanke, or baunch ; the leg, or
dnucklex , a 1
im. À ground worme.
L'on. Many, fome, they ; asin, Von dit; Some people
report, tbe world is of opinion, men fay.
Lonce: f. The Ounce,a rauenous beh.
Lonche. 2 Louche : @Normand.
Long : m. The name of an apple whereof excellent cy-
der ismade; alfo,length; al/o, a long, or tedious per-


! long aller. At the length, in th’end, in continn-
ance ,or proce(je of time. ;
Tout au long del’ aulne. Throughly, foundly,to fome
@, from one end of the thing to another.

n bailler tout aulong à. To gull, beguile , delude,
come ouer finely. 1 ;
Faire le long.To tinger, Pa Are driue

J;


gangrell Eat. : ;
Vaitleat long. LA Galle, Foi, or Bricentines See
“‘Alalongue At length, in tractor continuance of |
time , yet at the lafl,ajter much adoe, oe aig

: er


Aller long. Tofhite oner nine bedges; to haue the
Squirtjor alaske. '" in! We
Avoir lesdents bien: longues. To bawe-a terrible
appetite, or extreame flomacke, to be continually, or
cruelly, fharpe fet. ax | «+
La faire longue. Ine la fera longue en cemon-
de. He cannot line any time, bee will not be long a-
line.

Longues paroles font les iours courts: Prov. Long

difcourfes make fhort dayes.

Longale :f. A layne,

Longard : m.-A delayer, lingerer, protraéter, prolon-
er. .

Longe : f.The loyne; or flanke; (fème name fothe flefbie
part of the necke, backesand reines,cut along the back;
others more commonly,the peece that extends from the

kidney to the end of the rumpe; and others call both

thefe parts together, lalonge ; ) alfa, a bawkes lune,
or leafh; and bence,any long (ring, or line of leather,
dc.


Longeaftre : com. Longifh,ov fomewhat long. |
Long encollé: m. ée:£ Long-necked, necked like a
Crane,
Longiere :f. 4 long narrow towell. ;
Nis: m. A dungis; a flimme, flow-backe, dreaming
_ laske , drovofie gangrill ; a tall and dull flangam, that
bath no making 10 bis beight nor wit to bis making; al-
Soyone that being fènt on an errand is long in retur-


ning.
Lon zi tude: f. Longitude, length, longneffe, extenfion,
| L siguest PES loyne; See Longe.

ongue :f. H Jain

Longuement.Longly,tedioufly,at length long time af

tingly,of much continuance,a great while,

Longuement proceder eft à I advocat venden-
| ger ter, Long pleading is the Lawyers barueft,

| Longuerie. as Longueur.

Long-ueftu. as Obole de Gueldres.

Longuet: muette: f. Lorgifh,or fomewhat long:
Quarré longuet. 4 fquare that is more long then
broad,

Longueur: f. Length, longne(fe ; extenfion, tallnefe,
bewht,

Laure :f. Amatch to keepe fire with,

Loo. The loofe of a fhip.

Bouter de loo. To goe by a wind, to fayle neere the
| wind,tolay tacke aboord.

| Looh; ou, Loot. as Loch.

| Lopin:m, A peece,gobbit,luncheon,lumpe, cantlenun-
cheon,big morfell,or parcell of.

Lopin de laine. 4 locke of wooll, ;
Qui fuicles lopins. 4 parafite, fmell-feaf, trencher
iend, >]
a bons lopins mange bons logins le fuivent:
| _ Prov. Prowifion followes them that loue to fare well,
Lopiné: m. €e: f. Cut into gobbits, parted into can-
À des, diuided into lumps,


into lumps; alfo,to munch, or nuncheon it, toeat Bree.
dily in a corner, ae

| Lopinet: m. A bit, mammocke, finall gobbit, litle
peece,or parcell of. rin

À Loppe. & Lopin ; or, 4 lumpe of mettall rugged and
Hs no Ed con G Mt elièe mine salfojtbe bale


| ling, babling, Nb
Loque: f 4 rag,or talter : Pic.


F Digitized:by Go. gle


Dy Some 7 à


Lopiner. To cutinto gobbits, part into cantles, diuide |


l mettall a} ing, rate
qua pi aan, a


Paguence :f. Speech,talking,


et d’ yne huis. The latch,or fnecket of a doore, *
Loqueteux: m.cufe :£ Ragged,tattered’ poore etm
ic


die, beggerhe in array : ic,
Loquette 4 little rag.or tatter.


Lordault.as Lourdaulr.
Lorderie: ESeeke Lourderie,


Lorgnant. cer mestactin askaunce or askew at,
Orgne. tique,toque,lorgne. (Words expreffing a lis
beralland free dole of. blowes) thvoicke thwacke ; alfo,
€ and there,at sandome without difcretion.


Torche lorgne. The fame.


Orgner. (Sowerly)to leere, looke ashaunce, or askew,
at 5 alfo,to knocke,or thumpe foundly, to lay à pon.
oricard:m, A luske,lowt, lorell, flow-backe; anvn-


bandfome,or mifhapen fellow.
Loricarder.
like a maiflerleffe man.


Lorion :m, The bird called a Witwall; Tellow-peake,


Hickway.
Loriot. as Lorion.


Lorinerie:f. Small yron-Worke,as nayles;fpurres res |


ora Spurriers trade,


Lorinier : m. 4 worker in final yron, a mäakcrof final
Jron trinkets, as nayles, (pur res érc: a word moft uftd
for a Spurrier ; who is aljo tearmed Lormier fellier,
becanfé hee may retaile Sadlers ware as well as


[purres.


Lorry. An auntient tovone within the Jurifdiéiien of


Orleans.


I eft dele Lorry ou le bâtu paye l'amende, He


gets the blowes,and yet payes for the bloudw


thing was done,


Lam de l'enfantemene, At the time of chldbirtbr oun
« ay Im, inn hele: Coe

Los: m.Laud,praife, commendation : ec asLoz; al |.
fr, willingne(]e,confint,agreement,good Wilks: NUL €
Telabon los qui l'a 2 tort;tel l'a mauvais qui n'en
peut mais: Prov. Some are vniuftly praifd, fomie


: blam'd unmorthily,


Lofenge:f. 4 Lofenge; the forme, où a-thing of the
"forme, of an ordinarie quarrel of glafe, &c; as in


Lozenge;


Lofengi Em, A flatterer, cogeer , foifter , picke-
thanke, prater; coufener 5 guller, beguiler > de-


CEcr.


Loffec : m. Thesinke, or wellof the pumpe ofa fhip.


Lot: m, A l0,portion, part, har
Poor veffell containing (about)our pottle, +
Lote: f. The Lote, or Nettle tree ; aifo,a fifh;


Eele.


Lote-de mer: A finall-ftaled fifhs that bath one
wattlein the cad of her lover chap, and two.on her
vpper lip; otherwife refembling m fome partsa Cod,
in others the Lamprey , but ta(ting more like that
then this ; and feldome caught , or feene on: our


coaft,
Loti. as Lory:
Lotie; £4 diuifion, partition, fhating,


Mave.


ao To caft-lots fr ; alfa, ta dinide, part, tabpertion,
Lotizé:mée:f Diuided, parted, apportioned fhared,
RE À


Lots. Fines of alienation 3 Seeke Lods.. : 14


Lotte :f,.4 Power Eele powt ; See Lore, [a
: Ddd :


iar “4 :
os . M f


OridifA fra
THE-ORKO STATE UNIS


eee =. f t= FF


£. To luske,lowt,or lubber itz to ler about


pe.


LOTS. Then, » ilome, the webileft that, in shat time, in
_ that feafen; Ors que cela fe fit; shea when that


[A allowance ; alfè;a
whence ;
Lote d'eau douce, Th’Eele powt; or alittle wind.
die fifh thats headed , skinned, and finned like an


| shlis>


te


+ ra qe
Dix
L


4
;


L O V


——


ato # .


Lottir. as Lotir.
Loty: = ye:f. Diuided by lots; parted, apportioned,


red,
Loüable : com. Laudable, commendable, praife-wor-
thie,appronable.
La chair loüable. Holefome, found, or good ffs
Et,vne felle loüable; vrine loüable. 4 good, or
bepefil floole , Gc; fuch as promifes, wich of,
ealth,
Loïüablement Laudably, commendably , praif¢-wor-
thily,
Loüade. 4s Laude.
Loüage : m. A hire, biring, farming, letting out; allo,
the rent,or a for things let out. fi
A chapt pafle loüage, One may law filly difpoffeffe a
birer rthe thing bethatb purchafed. ppb
Loüager,& Loüagier:m. Abirer, farmer,leffee; a
lodger, inmate, foiouruer.
Loiiange : f. Laud, praifé commendation; glorie, fume,
credit,renowme,reputation,
Loiianger. To laud, praife,commend,extoll renowme.
Ouangier: m. À prai/er,lauder,commender, E
Loubet. Secke May-loubet,
Loubine: f. The Jose, called a Bafe,
Louche: f. A little ladle, or great fpoone : Pic,
Louche: com. as Loufche.
Loucher. To lade , emptie, or take vp with a ladle, or
great fpoone. ;
Louchet : m. 4 fade, or (hade-like inftrument, balfe
beaded with yron.
Les louchets d’vnebale, The corners of a packe.
Loudier : m. a Lodier; A Counterpoint, or Quilt;
alfa , a finell-finocke, haire-beater,leacherous knaue.


Loudiere:f. vne grofle loudiere. À filthie laftini-”


ous queane,a common hackney,er bedge-whore.


Vne vieilleloudiere, A beldame, old trot,ouer-vid- |.


deniade,


Loiié : m. ée:f. Lauded, praifed,commended,extolleds ‘


alfo, bired, rented, fumed; letten, or taken , vpon
rent,

Louer. as Loir ; 4 Dormonfe,

Louér. To laud, praife commend, extollveport or peake
well of; alfo, to bire, farme, rent; let, or take, upon
rent,

Louéreffe: f. A praifre[fe,commenderefe.

Louéur : m. A lander,praifer,commender,extoller,
Een me ene ST pe Ore

oup ; m. AW olfe; alfo,a Bafe 3) alfo, akindo
Kit ; afo,sbe fin-dehenting pile MAS A malignant,
and remedileffe Vicer,or Cranker,in the legs, which in
th’end it wholly confumes ; alfo,arauenous , greedie,
cruel. uniuft, fell,barfh companion.
up marin. À certaine wolfe-like beaft, which
fayes Belon) lives altogether of fifh, upon aur fea-


le B x
~ Couille auloup. Wild Prickmadame, great Stone-
crop, Worme-graffe.


Ain (la queuë entre les jambes,) Le-


Herbe au loup.1rolues-bane,zwelfe-wort (a kind of A
Oeilde À An eye of an uncertaine blackifh co.


lour sa duskie,or darke eye ; al/o,a leering eye.
. The Theffalian loue-prouoking
Catanance, gi) ;


bearbe


Veffe du loup. À fiffe-ball, puck-fufe, wolues-thifile,
puffe-fifle, bu

ntre chien &loup. At twie-light, or cocke-fhoot-
time; in th'edge , or foutting vp of an cuening; al.
2 ti of a mans fufficiencie ) indifferently , ordinarily,


Perfonne ne luy demanda és tu chien , es tu loup.
He man refpetted bim,no bodie tooke beed,or notice of


m.
Contrefaire le loup en paille. To eaue-drop it ; or,


to lie skowting,and leering in a corner,or between flees
ping and waking in bed,and undevftand, but take no
notice what perfons doe palfe, or what things bee done,
round about bim. :

Faire le loup à la carriere. Of the fame fence.

Faire le Joup plus grand qu'il n’eft, To make,or i-
magine a mifcbiefe , or daunger to bee greater then.
it is. ; ;
Garder la lune des loups. Foolifbly to cave for that
which cannot doe amiffe, or looke to that which will
not goe aftray. ; ;
Dieu gard Ja lune des loups. God keepe the Moone
from wolues ; an ironicall anfwer vnto thofe bragga-
dochioes, which threaten farre greater plagues then
they ave able to infliit(or promife greatcr matters then
they can effeét.) à


“Hurler avec les loups. To play the rude companion in


rude companie,

Marcher en pas de loup. Totread like a theefe, pri-
uately, fab ginger faire and foftly.

Prendre vn loup par laqueué, To performe a bard,
or hazardous exploit,

Regarder en loup. Sowerly to leere, or looke askew
at.


© Tenir leloup par les oreilles. To bee in danger, or


.


‘hard fèt,on euerie fide ( for if you bold him be bites you
«  bythe:fingers;if you let bim goe,be will goe neere to de-


uoure yar.)
Voir le loup. Some fay of one whofe voyce is growne


\ “boarfe ona fudden; Wa veule x à Otbers,le loup
1


l'aveu: from a vulgar opinion, that if a wolfe get


. fight of aman before be fee him, be will aflonifh him,


and make bim {fo boarfe (by the force of bis eyes, and

vigour of bis breath ) that be fhall bardly bee able to
eake.

loups mangent bien vne brebis : Prov,

Two knaues with cafe deuoure (or deceiue) one fillie


foole. |
Le loup alla à Rome, & y laïffa de fon poil mais


rien de fes couftumes: Prov. The wolfe went to
Rome,and left fome of bis coat, but none of bis conditi-
ons, bebind bim. ;


Le loup emporte le veau du povre : Prov. Vnfaci-


ate crucltie preyes moft vponthe poore,


Le loup mourra en fa peau qui nel efcorchera vif
Prov. A keane will dieina knaues skinne, if bee for-
mer ly loofe it not. |

‘ feait bien que male befte penfe: Prov.
One lewd is well acquainted with the purposes,
or fleights of another,


Va loup ne devore iamais vn autre loup: Prov.
Thofe that are like doe féldome difagreejone knaue will
euer beare witb another. ’

A mauvais chien ne on monftrer Je Joup :
Prov, 4 bad dog hates to looke vpon awolfe.


>A mol pafteur le loup chie laine: Prov. A gentle
ard os the wolfe with woolls LES
A petite achoifon le Joup prend lemouiton : Prov,
when
| Ofiginat from
RAE OHIG*S TARE UNIVERSITY


eS


à


À


"£ ov


When Tyrants will oppreffe th'innocent, a fleight pre-
text is made fufficient..

Au chairde loup fauce de chien : Provavolues flefh
mufi be eaten with dogs fauce.

Bien a crié le loup qui fa proye refcoult : Prov.
He followed the wolfe to purpofe that recouers bis


Pree I :

Brebis contces mange bien le loup: Prov. The
Wolfe eats count ed(and uncounted) fheepe; All’s one to
bim that loues to baue bis will.

C’eft vne bonne prife que d'vnieune loup: Prov.
He bunts full well that catches a young wolfe; bad
plants would be plucked up while they be young.
Depuis que la brebis eft vieille le loup la mange
bien : Prov. The bungrie feed well om tough,and drie
meats,

En efperance d'avoir mieux tant vit le loup qu'il
devient vieux: Prov, The Wolfe growes old by boping
Jill for better; o the Wolfésthe wbileft be bopes for bet-
Ler ,is grow old.

En finles loups tuent le chien qui tue les loups :
Prov. The Wolues at length kil dogs that killed
Wolues,

Enla peau ou le loup-eft luy convient mourir:
Prov. The Wolfe muft dieinbis owne skinne ; or, the
skinne a Wolfe bath preyed , let bim perifh, in.
Homme feul eft viande aux loups : Prov. The foli-
tarie man becomes Wolues meat,

Jeune en fa croiflance avn loup en la panfe : Pro.
Young (pringalls bane Woluifh, or great appetites.
Il fait mauvais aller au bois quand les loups fe
- mangent l'un l'autre: Prov. It is not good to gee to
“the wood when Wolues deuoure one another, :

Ine faut eftre loup, ny en affubler la peau : Prov,
One muft neither be,nor feeme,nanght.

Le dernier leloup le mange: Prov. Delay breeds
danger; lags come tothe Ua,

La faim chafe les loups hors du bois: Prov, Hws-
ger makes men forgoe their [afeft bolds.

La mauvaife garde paift fouvent le loup: Prov,
AWolfe ill lookt to oftentimes growes fat.

Mauvaife eft Ja faifon quand vn loup mange l’au-
tre: Prov. Hard is the time when Wolues doe feed
onwWolues ; or, tis.a bard time when one Wolfe eals a.
nother.

On crié toufiours le loup plus grand qu'il n’eft:
Prov. Report makes dangers preater then they be.
Peu à peu le loup mange I Oye : Prov, Looke
Oye. QE

ui a le lo ur com rte le chien

oe F hoéton Prov.He dob ent 2 ta abet
bad need ofa dog tobismam, * , , T
Qui parle du loup on en voitla queué: Pro. 4p-
pliable (as Lupus in fabula) when one thats fpoken of
as abfent faddenly appeares,

Qui fe fait brebis le bin le mange : Prov. He that
_ makes bimfelfe a foeeve will be ufed as a fheepe,
Tandis que le chien chie leloup s’en va : & ; Tan-
dis que le chien criele loups’en fuit: Prov. wbi-
eff men attend onneceffarie, they loofe neceffarie ad-


wantages. rel € . |

Tandis ue les chienss’entregrondent le loup de-
vore la brebis : Proy, While the dogs iarve the wolf
> denontsthe fhcepe. > 0 vito b
Tandis que le loup mufe Ja brebis. entre au bois:
Prov, "hileft the wicked confult th'innocent efcape
: them ; (Hereby alfo is meant, that Opportunizie pon
s », Beeletted,or aduanlages loft yby tedious. confultations,)


; block? 34 little clownifh, lumpi 1, ude sfinelling of


: Lourpidon:£ The name of anold witch or. An
: oe Dia hice Seite 8


LOV


Loup-araigne. Any kind of Spider th ;
pra fi ots ny kind of Spider that bunts,or wat


le +m. A final, or young Bafe ; a little fea

Loup-cervier : m, 4 kind of whiteWolfe, or beaf in.
gendred betweene à Hind anda Wolfe, whofe shinne
4 much efleemed by great men ; yet fome(not belecuing
that thoft beafls will , ov can mingle) imagine it ra-
ther to bee the fpotted Linx > or Ounce; or a kind
thereof.

Loup-chat: m. The (rauenous, and {potted) Linx, or
Ounce ; or (as Gefner thinkes s)tbe Hyena,

Loupe :£ 4 flegmaticke lumpe, wenne, bunch,or fivet.
ling of flefb vader the throat, bellie, ec; alfo,a little
one.on the wif), foot,or ctber ioyat > gotten by a blow
whereby a finew being wrefled nifes and growes hard ;
alfo,a Weauers clotb. beame; that about which bis web
rowles as be weaues it,

Loupeux : m,eufe : f, Full of wennes,or troubled with
a wenne,

Loup- OU: m. À mankind wolfe; fuch a one as
once being flefht on men, and children will rather

flarue then feed on any thing elfe ; alfo , one that,
poffelfed with an extreame | and Strange melancho-
lie, beleenes be is turned Wolfe, and as a Wolfe be.
haues bim(ilfe; alfa, a Hobgoblin, Hob-thrufh , Ro-
bin-good-fellow; alfo, a might-walker, or flie-light ;
one thats neuer feene but by Owle-light ; allo, a fitte
ule fellow , flie companion, wilie fix, crafiie knaue.

Loupie :f, 45 Loupe,

sobre: f. a6 Loupe ; And, in a horfé, tbe water

aicie. >.
Lourche:f. The game called Lurche ; or, aLurch in


game. :
Idemeuralourche, He was leftin the lurch,
Lourd:m, lourde: f. Dull, fosifosblockifos clumpfe,
numme , beauie mettalled; rude , lumpifh , lowtifh,
rte lob-like ; vnbandfome » Vacinile, vnman-
“A paroles lourdes fourdes oreilles: Pro. Locke
Oreilles.
Lourdaut: m. as Lourderie ; and hence;
a a fe Jourdan, He 15 in a furlie mood, or
churlifh bumor; be is fiche of th, 5
Fa 5 be is ficke of the mumps, or fullens ; be
Lourdaut:m, A fot, dunce, dullard, otaoll, iober-
noll, blockhead; a low, lob, luske, bore, clowne,
- churle, clufterfift ; a Proud, ignorant, and unmanner-
i lie apse. '
Ourdement, Sortifhly, dully, bluntly, blockifbly,bea-
“il; rudely,gr offely,cloremifbly, churlifbly 5 un
nbandfomely, vamannerly,
Bien lourdement chargé de debtes, Farreindeb.
ted,ouer head and eares in debt ;


Lourderie:f, Sottifinesfe blockiflone(fe ; lumpiftineffe
clownifhneffe ; furlineffe chuilifbonefee ; per he

rudeneffe,unmanuerlinc fe. ;

Udine ms ine: f. Lourdaine ; blunt, fomewbat


the chur lesor lobcocke.
Lourdinet, 4s Lourdin, ..
Lourdife:£.4sLourderie, bn st
Lourdois. enfon Jourdo bluntly, groffely, rude-


y safer hisrude, clovonifh, bomelic, or flouenlie man-
Loure:f. 4 bagpipe: €PoiGevin
Lourette: £ 4 final! hee Secs


2 Original-from
THE:OHIO:STATE UNIVERSIRY


sd ati ler Guns 2: ee


RS


ry FS OTe oe ee ee <“— Y= ts


Em fal he


Villes de loy. which bane their peculiar lawes,and)
cuflomes ; oad wherein there is a feat of Juftice,and |
Officers of lurifdittion. ~ i

… Faire les loix à l'heure de midy, en ’afsize. ceft

_ faire fa demande en iuftice pour avoir droit &
iugement: @Ragueau. ‘
Pafler par la loy. To wage,or make bis law ;to fiveare

_ in Court that be bath duely paied the rent,or Cens de-
maunded of him.

Venir à laloy. Tobe admitted unto fuch an oath.
De mefchante vie les bonnes loix font venuës:
Prov. Bad lines haue bredgoodlawes.

Que veut le Roy ce veut la loy: Prov. What the
King likes the Law allowes of; er, lawesare expoun-
ded as the King thinks good. .

Loyal: m. ale :t. Loyall, faithfull ; truflie, fare unto;
alfo,law fiull uf? allowable reasonable,
Loyaulx Aides. Looke Aide,
Monnoye loyale. Current money.

Loyalement “Loalb, faithfully sruplily; alfo,lamfully,
inflyrighifily.

Loyaulment. 4s Loyalement.

Loyaulté : f. Loyattie, faithfulneffe, trufine[fe; truth,
and confiancie in promifes ; bonefiie , or finceritie in
all manner of proceedings ; iufine/fe , uprighine(fe ;
lawfulne[fe; alfo, the firickle vfed in the meafuring of |
corne. pn
En grande pauvreté n'y a grande loyaulté : Prov.
Where pouertie is, loyaltse 15 not,great,

Loyer : m. Hire giuen for a boue, or countrey farme ;
or unto feruants,or workefolkes ; bence, a fipend, fa-
larie wages ; alfoaveward, guerdon,recompence, 1e-
muncration,

Quibon maiftre fertbon loyer en attend: Prov.
Afranke Lords Pages, looke for good wages.

Loyette :f. 4 Marlin. .

Loz :m. Laud,praife, commendation; credit, fame, glo.
rie,renowme.veputation; See Los.

Lozange,& Lozanger.s Lozenge;&Lozenger. |

Lozenge:f. 4 Lexenge ; a littlefquare cake of prefer-
ued bearbes, flowers crc; alfo, a quarrell of a glaffe-
“window ; any thing of that forme; ad, guile, deceit,

~.. fraud confenage. ean

| Lozengé: m. éc:f. Loxengéd, Loxenge-like ; alfo,

mocked, gulled, beguiled.

A er coufen,deceine,beguile, gull.

uu. Lights 12 À al
de aera ne feu he lu. (Of a darke,cold or uncomforta-
ble place ; ) there’s neither fire, nor light to be bad.

Luberdine : f. Az old maid. Pe

Luberne : f. The female Libbard ; a Panibers |

Lubin: m. 4 Bafé,or Sea-wolfe; aljo, a nickname fava
‘Monke,or Frier; whence, Frere Lubin ; the true

_ name of a certaine Monke,who loueda neighbors boufe
better then his owne Couent. te

Lubine. as Lubin(in the firft fence :) «Bourdelois,

Lubre: com, Ludbricke, plibiesfurnle,


madis ; bence , any fuch decrepite, and diuelifh crea-
ture.

Loufche:com. Skenning, (qninting, looking askew;
alfo,dull fighted, or wanting Sight; purblind, or balfe-


blind.
: Perle loufche. À fiule parle.
| Vin loufche. Thicke,or unfetled,wine.

Loufchement :m. Afquintimgor looking askew.

Loufcher. To (guint ,sken,or looke askew.

Loufchet. 2s Louchet.

Louffe. as Louche,

Loutre : £, An Otter.

Loutrier : m. An O:ter-bunter,or Otter-catcher.

Louve: f. A fhewulfe; alfo, awhore, :
Louve de fer. À Hammes bead ; 01, the (pinfer like)
baoke ofa Crane ec.

Louveau :m. 4 young Wolfe.

Louvet :m, A lutle wolfe,or young wolfe.

Louvetier: m. AWolfè-catcher ; an Officer appointed
in eueric forrefl,and payed for the taking, or killing of

-wolues (by cusrie inbabitant within two miles com-
paile of the place wherein he takes, or kills them) af-
the rate of i}.d. Tourn. for a dog wolfe, and iiij.d. for
a bitch, À

Louveton: m. A little young wolfe.

Louverte : & 4 ticke,or tike.

Louvich: m.iche :£ Greedie, sauenous. deuouring,
fivallowing downe whole morfells for ba.

Louvichement. #0/f-uke, rauenonfly, greedily, de-
uourinrly.

Louvier zig, as Louvetier.

Louvier : m.cre : £. #oluie, wolfe-like; of,0r belonging
toa wolfe.

Melancholic louviere. 4 frenxie which makes the
patient fhun all companie, upon a conceit that be is tur-
ned Wolfe,

Louvierc:f. AWoluerin; a gowne, o garment fir-
red,or lined through with Wolues skinnes; alfo,a coun-
trey fall of Wolues ; af, the denne, bole, or baunt of a
wolfe. :

Louvin: mine : f woluie Wolfe-like, of a wolf.
Patte louvine. Theyellow, or blacke wWolues-banes;
molt poifonous bearbes, and little differing but in the

: colour of their flowers. k

Loy: £ Law, the Law; Juflice, th'authoritie, courfe

or proceeding, of Fuftice; a Judgement in, a triall by,
Law; alfo,a Law , Statute , Or in Rule or De-
cree that bindes ; aif, Jurifdiélon, powers authori-

À vie; free choyce , hbere ; afo, the fe, or cuflome
~ ofa place ; alfo, an ordinarie or cuflomarie fine,

or amerciament of Law; alfo, the allay, temper, or

mixture of coyne ; the mettall, er matter whereof tis


made, - ? ;

Loy de bataille, 4 trial by combate. À
Loy de credence. A proceeding by witneffes, who de-

por that they beleewe (not that theyknow; ) like our,
As this Deponent verily


Vea.


a a


\ ar Lubricité :f, Lubricitie, fipperimefe, vacertaintie; le-
d = cherie incondimencie. à 1 à
L STolubrifie,or make flipperit. ne.


Ex des (1n the cuftomes 6) tbe Ind-
spree ane :
| teens Al ique: com. Lubricke 5 flpperie; deseitfill, un-
| a irring, faft-moning ; lecherous, tncomtment,
à wanton lefciuious. “We REP ys
uement. Sli ily 5 Uni e ,looffely,de-
i> Der er ri IS - épris
| : Pot) LR safes


i ncrenverté. à as much as Cul. REE, tu


Original from
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


7


Lv c


Lucarne: £. A garret window, or window in the roofé
of a boufe,erc. Saha.
Lucarné: m. ée:f. Hauing windowes in the roofe.
Luce: .(4 womans name)Luce ; and the name of a vir-
* gine-Saint regifired in Kalenders on the 13 of Decem-
_ ber; Hence the Prouerbe; ) |
‘A la Sainte Luce du fault d’une puce; ceft à dire,
le jour croift, (Or not fo much ; for that is beld the
Shorteft day of the year e.) À
Lucel,& Lucet. 4 young Pike, a Pickerell.
Lucheran: m. 4 Scrich-owle.
Luchet. 4 ade; or as Louchet : €Langued,
Lucifugue: £ A kind of Beetle, or light-hating flie.
Lucide : com. Cleere, fining, bright ight. |
Lucratif: m, iuc:f Lucratine, commodious, gaine-
bringing, whereof great profit is made.
Lucrative : £Lucre,gaine profit, commoditie,commings
| in; alfa, the profeffion of the Law (becaufe it brings im
flore of Crownes.) /
Lucs.as Lus. A1
Luétation :f. Awra ing, firugling, Rriningwitb.
Luéte. as Luiéte.
Luété :m.ée:f. wraflled, firugled, firiuen with.


gamefome. : ot :
Ludificatoire : com. Mocking , deceining , begui-


70g.

Lueil: m. Ray, Darnell.

Luet. Devoir deluets. 4 bufbell of Rie due by euerie
tenant, and houfholder that keepes a fire, and tillage
within a Parifh in Britanie,

Luette : f. The Palate , or Vuula ; à little peece
of fpungious flefh in the root of the voofe of the


Tete. Lith te te

uettes. Littl s F Fuorie caf! looffe

upon a table; the play isto age ra

king the reft,or elfe the taker loofeth, "7?

| Lueur:f. Light,brightneffe,cleereneffe lufter, (plendor,
littering, irradiation, gliflering, a cafling forth of

Ames.

Luéux: m. eufe:f. Light, bright, (plendent, fining,
glittering,gliftering. à

Luegubre : com: Dolcfill mourning, mournefill, for-
vowwfill, wayling, fimerall, À

Luiéte:f. wrafiling ; thexercife of wrafiling ; alfo, a

firugling.or ftrife with, \ peas :

Vn tour de luiète enprocez. A cunning tricke, trip,

or paffage in pleading, which will goe neere to ouer-

throw Paduerft es Sik.

Il emportade hauteluiéte, He carried it cleere,

be bore it away by maine forces be imployed bis vtmoft

firength in the compajfing of it. ~ .

Au fortbras la luiéte : Prov, See Bras...

Luiétement .m. A wrafllingor firugling with,

Luiéter. To wrafile,to flruggle,or firiue witb. :
Luiéter contre les ombres. To wraflle with fha-
dowes ; to be angrie without caufe,or purpofe 3 alfo,to
zeuile the abfènt ; alfo,to denife things and afterwards
raile at them. aya
L’abbatu veut tousjours luicter :Prov.No foile can


el an obftinacie. - A
Luire. To fhine, glitter,glifier ; to cleere,be bright,gine
light; yeeld a radiant lufter, ;
Ce qu'on donne luit, ce qu'on mangé pait:Prov,
what we giue fhines, what we eat [imells. ="
Luifans: m. Sparkles , or fierie and flarve-refem-
bling Meteors,in the middle region of the aire.)
Luifant. Shining, cleere, bright, beamie, luflerous,ra-


Ludicre : com, Light,childifh,toyifb,mocking, fportfull, -


LVM


diant, glittering, gliftering.
uifantement.Brightly,radiantly, Shiningly,gliflening-
Y,glitteringly.

Luisarner. To glow, glifien,glimmer.

Luiton: m. 4 Goblin, Bug, Robia-good-fellow,
poy dinell, that vfes to mocke, and deceine > fillie

eople.

~ ‘Luiton de mer, 4 Triton,or Sea man; a Sifh that re.
Sembles aman. à

Lumbaire: com. Of; or belonging to, the fanke, or
loyne,
Arteres lumbaires. Branches of the great Arterie
diftributed all ower the loynes , and giuing life to the
marrow of the backe.
Mufclelumbaire, One of the two muféles which bow
the thighes.
Veinefinibaine See Veine.

Lumbrique. 4 ground worme : €Rab.

Lumet. To fhine ; to gine light to yeeld er caft a light,
La chandelle lume mal. Burnes dimly,or burnes but


ill,
Lumiere: fLight; brightne(fe,cleerene fe,a fhinines al.
fo, light,candle, or Lampe.
La lutmiered’une haquebute, &c. The touch-bole
ofan inl i gah :
Metre en lumiere. To publifh, divulge, fet forth,
fend abroad into the world, si ÿ M
-Privéde lalumiere. Deprined both of light, and
life.
Qui n’eft point venu en lumiere . 4bf#4f8, ob-
[cure yvnknowne;that is not yet come abroad.
*A Foeil malade la lumiere nuit : Prov. Ligdt
oe eae eyes; or,a fiche eye is offended with the


Lumignon im. The weeke or cotton of acandle; the
match of a lampe.
Lumillette: f The hearbe Eye-bright.


Luminaire: m. A light, a candle, a lampe , ec; al-
fo, aBooke of the compofition of Phyficall receits, —
peer f as Tin ui
umineux :m.eufle: £ Shining, gliflerineymoft bright
full of cleereneffe, yeelding a Es light, at
Luminier: m. 4 Vefterer, or Veflevie-heeper; bee
that hath the charge of the lights, and ornaments of a
Church ; alfo, an Agent, Atturney, or Solicitor for a.
whole Townelbip.
Luminon. a Lumignon.
Lunaire: f, Lunarie, Moonewort,
Lunaire majeur. ; ou grande lunaire. Great
Moonewoït, Pennie-flomer, Money- flower, Pricksong-
wort, Honeflie, Satin, white Sattin; (Alchymifts call
water Fearne Lunaria major.)
Lunaire mineur ; ou petite [unaite, Small Luna-
vie; fall Moonewort, © ’ :
unaire: com. Lwiarie ; of , or belonging to, the
Moone,
Ciclelunaire: The Golden number ; Looke Cicle.
Lunaifon : f. 4 Moneth, a Moone , or the feafon
continuing a whole Moone ; alfo, the fhining of the
Moone, ;
Lunatique : com, Lunaticke, ina Lunacie, franticke,
wood,no wifer then be fhould be,
Lundi: m. Monday.
Lune: £ The Moone; one of the feuen Planets ; alfo, fil-
uer (called fo by Alchymifts ;) alfo, tbe Molebute


une de mer.The Molebut ; alfoakind of afh-colon-
red Starre-fifb of a bard,and Fe Pres
D dd iy


Original from
THE OHIO STATE, UNIMERGERY.


2


Labosne Lune. The later end of September and be-
ginning of October; the beft time to fow Winter-cerne
in,and therefore fo ‘tearmed by good busbands.
Abbayer contre lalune. Secke Abbayer.

Avoir vn quartier de la lune en Ja tefte, To bee
half franticke, or bauc a {pice of Lunacie; The like


Tani lue: He is a foolifh , bumorous, bare-
braind,giddie-beaded fellow.
Coucher al’ cn de la lune. To lie without
dooves all night,
Garder la lune des loups. To waft indeuors upon [ub-
iets that need them not; or [pend time in watching of
that which of it [elfe is (a fe ynough,
Dicu gard lalune des loups. An ironical anfwer
unto a bragging foole,that threatens to killtbem whom
be cannot burt,
Le fourrier de lalune a marqué le logis. Said of à
woman ibat hath her flowers. -..
Prendre la lune aux dents. Te-daë jmpofible mat-
ters.
Tenir de lalune. To be inconflant, fickles mutable,
giddre,vnfetled, wauering,
Les biens de fortune paflent comme la lune : Pro.
What fortnne gines vs for a booneyis quickly wafled like
the Moone.
Luné: m. 6e: f.Rourid, scampafesounded,or bored like
a bal fe- Moone, Sayt;
Luner. To rnd om aaa ès ; and hence ;
Lunervn are. Ted ow.
Lunette : f. The mertie-thougbt ; the forked ler
of a bird, wbichweufe yin ports to put onour nofes,
Lunettes: f, SpeGacles.
Il n'y a pas bien afsis fesluncttes. He hath not ob-
feraed. the matter fo neerely, he bath not looked into
it fo narrowly as be might,or foould,baye dane,
Lupaffon. 2s Loupaffon,
Lupege: £ The whoope or dung-bill Cockes
Lapis m. The pulfe veers alfo , the Bafe , or Sea-
Wol
Lupoge. 45 Lu
Lurré:m. ee: f. SE AN D SE au
Les: m4 Pike(filb.)
: marin, A Cod,or Cod-fifhisfome alfo call the Had
dècke fo.
Luk De £, A Gloë-worme ; alfo,as Luzerne: :
Luftre : mt, 4 lufter, or gloffe ; a fhining, or gliftening;
a gracefull bright colour ;alfo,a terme of foure yeares,
or fiftie monet 5 ales a eae GS
xens eflates, and bebau
Donner luftre à. To sb be illufirate, a
dorne ; fleeke,burnifh, brighten: shag hig mea
lufter ole,
- Lustrer. To looke round AY Liew , or fre on
 ¢ach fide, behold enerie way ; toweigh diligently, ex-
amine tBroughly , ferioufly confider of, prie narrow-


103. a ta purge, or clean D Sacrifices alfiyas


£ PA par’ | r |
PS es je
+ CT +)
a AT pee


bara,


Luth:m. 4 Late.
Lutin: m. 4 Goblin, Robin-good- fellow, H rs
fpirit which playes veakes in mens boufes anigbis
Lutiner. 7 Teper tte Goblin, or night-[pirit ; ta kee 4
fiule rumbling,or terrible racket up and abet a
in the night, }
Lutiz:m, Clay,loame; durt. |
utre. #5. Loutre. {
Lutrin : m, 4 deske in a Church.
Luxation : £.4 luxation,looffenefe or looffening ;-a b be
ing out of ioynt, 4
uxC : m. Exceffe;riot, fuperfluitie.
Luxer. To oofe, or put out of ioynt ; alfo, to beet
ioyntor out of due place,
Luxure: f. Luxurie, P enfualitie concupifcence, fel
pales 3 any fuperfinitie , or excelfe à in carnall de>
lights.
Luxurieux: m. eufe : ELuxurions,voluptuous, fleflie e,.
Bufifull, fenfuall; exceffne,riotons
.He,bim,the fame than, ‘
Luyren as Lairon;es Lua,
Luz: ni: Lus. |
Luzerne: £ 4 Luferne. ; 4/6, Medicke ei Spa-
nifl Tr efoyle porned. Clauer, fnaile aile Clauer,
prope Peg gliminer:(v.m.).
Rae A clef, fel ld, or plot owed with Me-


Ly. 1 | AGafton. |
rre:m.lvie; Seeke Licrre.
Île. as Liafle.

Lÿcanthropie : f. A frenzie,or melancbolie, which cau-
Jeth the patient (bo thinkes he is turned Wolfe) to
_flie all companie , and bide bimfelfe in dennes, and
corners.

Aqees £..A bitchsénc as in Lice. * :

Vne fauflelyce. A lewd queane, fulfe tyull, ungraci-
ous whoore, wicked hailot..

chnobien : m., The weeke ofa candle; or one who
‘in flead of. Heda, ges Tha night; doing all bis bu-
foe by candle-li

Lyc oc ol Tr The i hg lanterae of the |


Lychnon: m. 4 light, candle, or linke; alfo, the
op dé a candle,or match of a lampe; alfo,a laaserne:


Leo A kind of the(red-rooted)bearbe Orchanet.
Lycopthalmie: £. 4 pretious flone of ais fundrie co-
7 lours igke
e.
ivene he Ivie ; Si Lierre: |
Lymitrophe : com, Bordering ch, adioyning, or ty- À
img necre unto. s
L hye a Limon, nid ; i
mphatique : com. 4 rye or mixe wil. water;
Mie medion sbefiranght; giddic,fantafiical. à
Lyncée:f4 Linx;a Wolfe-refembling wah thats fill of


pots. …


rt quiche piercing eyes.”
Lyncurie :f. A pretious ftone bred of the = v-


‘rime eferuing the eyes fiome,

ARS : @Rab. +
on. Seth

Lyonceat =a Lyons helper young Dyan.


aire D Fopent,lowt, lune beng hei, a


bila or about torr * ret =.
RE id ré x PER PET
c:£ Alas Harpe 4


VENT € eo eg OS


Original-from \


al HE OHIO:STAFE UNIVERSITY


MAC


ipié, & ipion, as Liripipié,& Liripipion.
ryrpipis pre. ; va og i to re
Bip sey


Eade, Seeke Lifarde. *
yfimachie : fawillow-bearbe.; La Pri, wae
ae - '
Lyfimachie rouge. The red, or. codded Willow.
eavbe.

Lyfteau.as Lifteau.

Lyturgie, ou Lyturgue: £ A Liturgy or forme f


Serie ufed in’ Churches,


MAC


Machelier : m, ete: £ Of, or belongi i
74 to,aiaw.
sabes ah The € cheehe-tecsbyte grinders.
+ a Mafcher,
fhc-rave. A Turnep-eater: An Epithete for a Lymo-
: | MEL 0 feeds much on Turneps.)
ivet. A Cobler,or Shoomiaker.
M heron, rs Maceron,
aches? fT: 8,07 boles 0 a net between thre d
pe à al ad af du
one :f. The Owle,or Madge-bowlet ; as in Che-


Macheure:£. 4 blacke.finutch,or fimeare ; alfo,a erufh,
or bruifé,which leaues a blacke,or blew (pot after it,
Macheure de fer. The droffe of Fron...
acheuré: m. éc : £, Smeared, finutched, begrymed ;
Moe blacke and blew by a crufhere.
Machiavelifine : m. Machiauellifine ; fubtill policie,


cunning roguerie.
Machiavelizer. To Machiauelige its to practife Ma-


chiauellifine.

Machicoulé: :m.ée: £, Fortified with Mafchecoulis.

Machicoulis. Looke Mafchecoulis.
achinäteur: m. A machinator, framer, contriner,
* deuifer (efpecially of bad things.)

Machitiation: f. 4 machination, frame,contrivement,
a fubtill plot or con{piracie; a craftie inuention, fhifiing
Aratageme,circumuenting tricke.

Machine rf, 4 regen atoole infriment,i inuenti-
on,deuice.

ésmiée : £: Framed, contrined denied ; plot:
| ores 3 prabtifed again,


er. To machinate, frame; contiine, deuife ; 15


Mic pink ate She: gr ému ce,


a a,
Mach 0. co iy oration ”


Machetes: : € The iawes. s


Mc 3 roman
A. The feminine of Mon; My. Ù ant
Mx a dia. Seeké Mada. qRab. .
Macabré, Danfe Macabté, Death. : yh
Macaleb. The baftard Corall, or Pomander, Prinet;
whofe (weet, and fhining blacke berries, chaynes*a
bracelets be made,
Macalep,& Macalet. as Macaleb.
Macar: m. 4 mate,matchmareow, fellow;
Macareau: m. A Mackerel fifh.
Macaronique: m: 4 Macaronicks a confifèd beapesor
huddle of many feuerall things.
Macarons: m. Macarons; little Fritter-like Bunnes,br
thicke Lofenges compounded of Sugar, Almonds, Rafe-
. Wwater,and Muske,pounded together and baked with a
À 8 fre; alfo,the Ftalian Macaroni ; tampssor gob-
sta hae any mes br butters and ed 0:
mer with fpice,and grated
Macault : m, 4 Sri emma fe che led with
prie fuffe, and hidden, or boorded ‘up, ma me }


Mack: m. (A proper name foreman) Mathew.
le fuis Preftre Macé . An. equinocall: afin to
Maiftre paflé. A fivorne mai fer, or freeman of a
Trade.

Mace. Iuge Mace. as luge Mage (in Mage: )

Macée: £. Mat, or Macte ; (a proper name: for a wo.
man,

Mae m. Is not Mace (as mary imagine)but a reddi[y,
aromaticall, and Ce rindé of a certaine Jndian
root.

Myceanon f. A maceration, macerating, making
leane ; a mortifying weakening,or taming of the bodie
Fe ablimene, oc; alfo, a foaking, or fleeping in Li


Mace? m. ée : £ Macerated,made leane; weakened,
mortified,brought low, tamed, fubdued ; alfo, allayed,
foaked,or fleeped in water. :

Macerer. To macerate,or make leane ; 10 mortifie, wea-

ken, bring downe, punifh or pull uniter the bodie 3 to

Sipprelfe, orfubdue the lufts thereof by abftinence; or

hard fare; alfo,to allay, (oake, or fleepe in liquer. .

Maceris. 4s

Maceron: m.Tbe hearb Candie Alexanders ot through-
bored Parfély.

Maceronne: f, 46Maceron,

Mache: f. water-torch,Cats-tayle, Marfh peftill, Dowch


gure with blacking.
Le chauderon machure la poifle. One re a
"_ graces,or,one neighbour detracts fiom anoth
acis:m. The Spice called Mace,
Macle : f.the Mafh of a net; alfa (inBlafon) a Mafile,
or fhort Loxenge, bauing a [quare hole in the midde/?,
+ com. Raw, Rab,
Macles: £. Pot-bangers ; the Jems whereupon polsare |
ung. aed
Maçon. as Mañlon. 4 5
Maconné: m, e: F.Wrought y PAR of, snes
+. hewed, [quared; A her bya Mafon. >
Maçonner. To play the Mafon,to build with,or of fone,
to.hew, si worke lay flonés,as a Mafin to morke
Maw


Maconnerie. Seeke Maflonnerie.  . : x
Macque. 4 Lozenge,or Net-mafb. pes


Macquignon. Looke Maquignon.

Macreau: nu. 4 Mackerel fib, ; Looke Maquecéa ©

Macreon: m, Az old,or long-liued,man. ÆRab.

Macrobe. Of old life wet nee er APE
bad a long time,in this life,


done; (an hearbe,) Lx J3SbiE M Macroule: f. A fea-Coot, = Sa Morte
Machecoulis. Lente Malem ots | re A en A af PR

acheter: The drofse of Fron. ; Xiti acule: f. À eck, fpeckle; ch
Mache-foin. A nickname fir [uch ludge dr Maculer.70 Ts blot; fpeck,fpeckle,befpattersbe finear,


~as takes of chentsthe bay bis tel ier om; ty as


om: Madan f, Madame,( ‘The title or file of. 4 mo


| iginal from
Diditized by C5 OK a e THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITÉ


Ya. y > te vay


Machuter. ro blace, near, finch, begryme, wifi .


Macquereau. as Maquereau.. pat | F


%


M A D


Madame du guichet. The Ladie of the Wicket ; (a
by-word for a Midwife.)


M AG


TE ——__—_—_—_—_——————————"——————— —…—"—"—"—"…"”"…" —…—


Magiftrat: m. 4 Magifirate; Ruler,Gouernourludge,


or principal Officer in the Commonwealth,


Monfieur vaut bien Madame:Pro.Lesk Monfieur.
Madamoifelle: £ (The title,or flile of a Gentlewoman;)

Miftre(fe.

Madamoifelle d'un’aulne de velours. A mechani-

call,or upflart Gentlewoman; the proud wife of a fhop-


Magiftrature: f. Magifiracie; gouernment, fray, rule
sttveritic s Nate of shite in ve eat
wealth,

Magiftronoflralement. Danfically.€Rab,

Magna gna. Marry gip fir; true Roger. (Rab.


keeper that will needs be a Gentlewoman.
Madamoifelle de la boutique. (Of the fame ranke,
and ambition.) J

Madamoifelle de cinquante pour cent, The fame;
or may be applyed to the lofiie-bumored wife of an ex-
torting Vfürer. .

Madant. wet,moift ; flowing ; alfo,drunken with.

Madefier. To wet, moilien,liquifie.

Madia. 7n good footh ; as true as 1 line; or (in flead of
Ce n'ait Dieu) /o God belpe me.

Madia no. No forfooth,or,in (ooth fir no; youfball be
fo good as to pardon me.

Matte Madienne. A cholericke old wiues oath
importing as much as,Mon Dieu, or, par mon Dieu.

Madier: m.Tymber.

Madoure : m, A dull,or fencelefe loggarbead.

Madre: f. A thicke-fireaked graine in wood,

Madré: mée : F. (Of wood) whofe graine is full of croo-
ked,and Speckled flreakes ; (of aman) fubtill, craftie,
shifting, fill of fetches; whence; 3
Te fuis plus Madré en ces affaires. J am better ex
perienced in theft bufineffes.

Madrer. The graines of wood to be full of crooked, and
(peckled flreakes,or veines.

Madreurc. as Madrure,

Madrier: m. 4 planke,or peece of timber, whofe graine
us full of crooked,and fpeckled fireakes.

Madrure: f, zs Madre,or Madrier; alfo,a fpeckled, or
diner {ified flreaking ; whence , Madrures; Speckled
flréakes in the grame of cut wood; or the menild coat
of fome Hawkes. .

Maeut. À maker of fallads,or May-farvces. ERab.

Mafé,or Mafi. Much uféd in [lead of,Par ma foy,

Magagnat. Maymed,ert as Mchaigné. Langued.


Magaigne. as Mehaing. qLangued; or,as the fralian
; Magsana (ene comes) i ion,want,
' fault,corruption, putrifattion. eX:
Magault. as Macault.


Magazin :m, A Magafin, publike floreboufe, or ware.


oufe,
Magdaleon: m. A Langate,a rowler, à
M daleon d’entraét.A falue {pred vpon leather or
linnen, and bard rowled vp, ss TE
Me f, or principall ; whence, luge Mage. A
chi ‘uftice, : | .
: Place The chiefefi,or moft frequented place,as
the are rad ja a nr Ed
icien: m. A Magician, or Negromancer ; one that
praëhifes the blacke Art ; a Coniurer.
> ay Magicke,Negromancie; Coninring,the blacke
hs


wa
Magifter e:m. Mai > itie, fvay, $
rule ; al, mailerie 3 a maiflers part, on maifer-


:male:f Magifirall; of a maiffer. as
lags magico weer, alae


Magnan: m. A boore, clowne, binde, yeoman, coun-


Magnanime: com. Magnanimous,genevens,of a great


qHourg,
Magnificat: m. The Magnificat ; (part of the Euen-


Magnificence : f. Magnificence ; flatelineft,gorgeouf-


Magnifier. To magnifie; exalt,extoll; commend bighly,
Magnifique : com, Magnificent,of high atcbiewement,


gr a
Le pe ai Magnificently,wmagnifico-like swor-


Magnigoules: m. Wide-mouthed knaues, €Norm.
Magot: m. A Baboone,or Ape,thats faced like a dog;al-


M
Mahaleb. as Macaleb
Maheuftre: m. 4 fivaggerer, fwafh-bucklerdeffevate


the galliaffe.
Mahutte: f The pinion of a (birds)wing.
Mai. as May.
Mai: £ A butch,kneading trough; falting tub.
Maidin: m. 4 Turkifh coyne worth about a pennie.


trey fellow,


mind; flout-bearted, gallant-bumoved,of a lofiie Spirit,
of a noble flomacke.
animetnent. Magranimion exo À
leash vabantl. $ ie 00
agnanimité: f. Magnonimitic, generofitie, great-
neffe of mind ; gallantne[fe of bumor noblencfie of fpi- |
rit, floutnefe of heart. v
agniaux: m, Silkewormes. @Langued.
nie: f A meynie, companie, mamber of people.


Song; whence)
Chanter Magnificat à matines, To doe things dif:
orderly,or ufe a thing vnfeafonably.


neffe, fumptuoufüefe ; bigh atchieuement,great per for-
mance; noble proufien.

iflé: m. ée': f. Magnified; highly commended,
mightily praifed,much bonoured..


praifé mightily, bonour much.
acting great matters, performing worthie atts; baugh-


tie, loftie, flatelie, fumptuous , maicfticall , folemne,
ue.
Vs


ily, honourably, baughtily, fumptuoufly ; folemnely,
red a maieflie, with much granitie, with great
ate,


ny Magna. Twitle twatle; or,as in Magna,


fo,the (Scottifh) Coote,or Moore-benne.
6 Mg 8 ;


or careleffe yonker. ‘
ahonne: f. A kind of great fhip fomewbat refembling


Maie: f. The greatefi kind of fea-Crab; round Jong-lega,
"and verie rough-{helled ; fome call ber,a Frill,
Maiens: m. Timelie Hay; called fo becaufe tis common-
ly gotten in May.
jelté: f. Maieflie; royaltie, foneraignetie princeli-
- neffe, high dignitie, bighelt authoritie; a kinglie pre-
fence or prerogatiue; a mot honourable grauitie; alfo
(in Painting) [uch a radiant circle, or a8 is
__ made about the bead of a Saint. ;
Majefteux: m, eufe: f. Maieficall, hinglie, princelie,
- imperious, royall, foueraigne, fupreame ; of great gra:
uitie, full of maieflie. . re
Majeul deroué:im, Thenaue of awheele,
Maieur: m. The Mayor of a Towne ; or,as Maire; al-
fi, be Major, or Hf rain of a Sie
alfo,


Original fron
FHAOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


2.


M À Is {


alfo,one that is of füllyeares. ae
Nos maieurs. Our aunceflors,or firefathers.

Le maieur d'un mefticr. Th maifier of a Companie of
artificers. ‘ .
Majeur. as La majeur partie ; the more; the greater
part,or fide. si) :
Maignan. as Magnan. €Rab.

Maiguc: com. Great; as,Charles le maigne.
Maignen: m, 4 (opper-{imith or Kettle-maker.
Maigre: m. A great,and skalie fi bauing a wattle on
bis chinne; two holes on the top of bis beake, neere bis
eyes; and two flones within bis bead, of fome vertue
(as is fuppofed) againft the cholicke : The French doe
tearme him thus, "rl eae heis leane, ca ate
by the whiteneffe of his flefh be feemes fo, bowjoener,
and east be Le , be x reafonable good
meat.
Maigre : com. ar ne Lo flefhlefe;thin,
fender, gaunt,lanke ; bungrie,barren; peore.
aigre chere. Cold,or beartlefe intertainment.
Maigre mine,Small countenance,a refpecilepe looke,
& [carce a good looke.
Maigre propos, Dry,barren, faint, hallow, or care-
dee i(courfe; talke whereby the bearer cam profit but
HLle,
Jour maigre, 4 fifhsor fahing;day.
aigre en cuifle d'heron; &,
Maigres comme pies. As leane as ‘Rakes (we fay.)
Maigrelct:m. ette: & Somewhat meagar,thia, flender ,
fomewhat leane, . :
‘Maigrement. Meagarly, leanely, feraggily 5 thinly,
lankly, flenderly; bungrily ; barrenly ; dryly; poorelys
Maigret. as Maigrelet, ae pi kber EAST
Muigreté:f, Meagarneffeleannelfe ; 2, lanke-
| mele aay Ma ues a Jew
Maigue: m. Whey. at lh
“Mail: m. 4 Mall, Mallet,or Beetle; alfo,as Marne. +
Maille: € 4 (French) halfepennie; the balfe of a pen-
nie (in weight,or money;) alfa,looke the next margimall


wora.
La maille Billeron. A toll taken of eutrie one that
ells wares at certaine Fayres. 6 :
“Maille de Lorraine. À coyne worth about iij s,Tour.
Droi& de maille d’or. Looke Droit, pe;
Faire la maille bonne de. To warrant,undertake or
anfiwer for, mare good. . NC
| Bonnelamaille qui une le denier: Prov. el à
the halfe-pennie ({pent) that [aues a pennie. y
Milles € are lake 0; ean (whereof coats of
mayle be made;) alfo, a Hauther; or, any little ring of
| mettall vefembling alinke of male; alfo, a mafb of a
net the fquare bole that is between il ead and thread;
alfoa web in the eye. ù


whichthelatclet palfes:) Mere
Mille à maille on fair les haubergeons:Pro.Logke


+ Haubergeon. Hire.
Mill: me de: € Armed with a coat of mayleo prie
| . coat; alfo,marled.as ground. | Soon

| Perdrix maillée.  maylde, menild, or Spotted Par-


. cotridge. 2 ut ea ;
! Mailler, To arme,or firnb with a coat of mayle ; alfo,to


. marlea peece of grounds... pert
Muillerie : € 4 marle-pit, or marlie foyle ; the place
. whereinmarlets gotten. ke
Maillet: ms 4swallet,or hammer ; alf0,4 battlea al,
ws Encueur.


Faire defon poing yainaillet. To make bard poi 3


Digitized: by Go: gle 7 :


Maille de boucle. The loopé ofa buckle ; (through


Mailleton: m. 4 fall twig, or fhoot [pringing from


Mail ttes Small ifhes,or links of mayl

ettes: f. Smai majhes,or 50 le
Maillol: m:4 Mailleron, ui
Maillon: m, The knot a Gardener makes in binding,


ufe.
Maillot: m. 4 /wadling clout, or fivathe-band ; (fome-


Maillotant.Powning,braixing,beating or breaking with


Maillotins: m. A faclious multitude wbich,in old time,
Maillotonnerie :f. Any fatlious crue, [editions compa-


Main: m. The name of a Saint, whence;


Main ferme, A fleadie hand; alfo,as Main-ferme.


or be ignorant of the right ufe of things.


Main, Pour Marin. The moraing;whence,Demain,
Main: f. A band; alfo,the forefoot of a borfe; alfo, the


fee


"Main pleine. Sufficient goods taker, or land ynough
fed upon anexecution. oun TRE
Main ain fouvcraine, .Authoritie ropall 3


re ©


M A I


Pefcher au maillet, Faolifbly to talke mitch,or make a
great bruit,of a proicét, thereby difcouering,and difap-
posating it.


Fee a of aVine, oc; a young branch fit to be


with willow-twigs,the fiakes,and vine-branches of an
arbour together.

L ue: fas Tierce ; or the 24 part of a Seconde;
and the leaft weight that Jewellers, and Goldfinithes


times) alfoya cradle ; alfd,as Mailleton.


amallet, ~


_ ter. To powne,beat bruixe or breake with a mal-
1,


did much mif[chiefe in, and abont, Paris ; whence;


nie, tumultuous rifing of people.


Mal S. Main. The wild /cab.


le of a hip; alfa, the yron hooke that bolds the bue-
ae, a fae alfo, a certaine three-fold booke vfed by
j ers; alfo,a quire of paper ; al/o(im Law)pub-
Licke authoritie, or power. \
ain bafle. A bad band,ill chance,courfe lucke, hard


Fa mere ras bal.


Al : Oy 20 À CN
Main burn, iad, ard efi ce a Man. |


Les mains du foye. (ertaine branches of the part-
veine, which conuey the iuice of concotted meat vato
the liuer. re : "

Main garnic. An armed band ; viz. that bolds a
flone, ox weapon to firike witball ; (Hence, Excez de
main non garnie ; a blow given with the (onely)
hand; a cafe duft saith the fils) alfo, asin, Garnir |


à main. . : . st
Main de Iuftice. The band of Inftice; viz. the autbo- |
Berg mnt à thereof in any kind of exe- |,


cution, or feifure ; alfo, an yuorie band vm the top of a
Rod, (a marke of Royaltie "Soueraignetic, aswell as


‘the Scepter,Crowne,or Sword.)
Maïnlevée, 4 discharge releafe, delinerie from fuit ;
-alfo, arefioring, or gining backe of things w ch mere |
Sifed by order ; a putting one in pofeffion of a thing be.
come by acctdent,or order cleerelybis.
Main mife. Seifare of the perfon ov of poffe/fions, by
the Magiltrate, or a Lord, vata whom they are by law,
or in right,or by the omiffion of duties and due feruices,
efcheated,or forfeited. RARE BM
Main morte, à much like the Mortmaine of our Law;
alfisvillenage,or aferwiletenure,
Gens de main morte condition, Looke Main-


morte.


Original-fram
THE QHIOsSTAGE IGN IVR RES


ré + S eat HN"


eee


M A I


prerogatiue, or power. :
Se faire recevoir par main fouveraine. Looke Re-
cevoir.

La bouche &les mains. Homage,and fealtie; or, the
ceremonies vfèd in the doing thereof’, for which looke
Hommage. ;
La derniere main. The laft touch, worke,or att, which
giues a thing it full perfection.


two {heaues upon bis tenants twelue ; viz. one for
bis tythe, another for bis Terrage.

Garnifon demain. See Garnifon,

La grande main. The whole arme and band together.
‘A main. Readie,neere,at band,

‘A main armée. By force of armes.

“A main forte, By maine force, or great power ; with
might and maine,


loffe,dammage,or danger.
‘A la main. Nimbh, readily, attinely, at band (quotb
ick-purfe.)

aut à la main. Proud, flatelie, (urlie, fulen, flub-
borne, a firiker, like ynough to lay about him.
Homme à la main,& Homme de main. A man of
execution or Valour ; a man of bis hands,
Leger à la main. (Of a horféjlight borne.
‘A pleine main. Vne bouche à pleine main, 4 bor-
[es mouth which is neither too bard , nor too fenjible,
and thereby gines a full reft unto the band.
Delongue inain. Of old, long fince,of great continu-
ance,a great while agoe.
Tout d'une main. Hard after, all together, all under
one,
Les mains derriere le dos ; &,les mains penduës à
leur cein@ure. 12 an idle,or carelefe fafhion.
Avoir les mains crochués. To be alight-fingered, or
lime-fingered filcher; euerie finger of bis band to be as
good as a lime-twig.
Avoir les mains fb ues. To baue hands, or


fivetches verie farre. :


ruptable,vpright, ‘ e
Avoir la main feure. To be fleadie handed (as be tbat
would be a good workynan mul be;) alfo,to be bonef,


- bis doings. .
Bailler la main. To reach 4 band ; alfo,aw
ber confent,before a Notarie,unte the fale, or mo
of ber inheritance. : PES ae
Changer demain. To fhift out of one band into ario-
ther ; alfo, to change the Lord, or Poffeffor; as land is
{aid to doe upon fales gifts exchanges de th or
Faireinain forte à, To ioyne fir


winall.


Cards.)


— ce of the other,
mana. 7e


Difine, & terrage à deux mains, A Lords taking of


‘Amain fauve, Safély,fecurely, without any manner of


large iurifdittion : applyable to Princes, whofe power


Avoir les mains nettes, To be boneft, fincereuncor-


loyall, triflie, faith iull,true in bis veckonings, int in all


Faire lamain. Te make a band,or make vp bis mouth;
taget a rich purchafe, or great flake ; to gaine much; to


Faire, & lever la main..7¢ takeup the triche (at


- Faire d'une main Pautre,To patch up one : ing with
* ; to fupply the defects of the one with the ex-


real she fh sis a bribe


M AI


Jouër des pares To fight. ‘ |
Iurer es mains d’autruy.To fivearevnto
to take an oath; for the old fashion was, thal beste :
tooke an eath held bis bands within bis that receiued À
it,
Laver les mains de.To purge,cleere,iufiifie,or ex
himfelpof purge,cleere,inftifie,or excufe
Mener les mains. To beflirre the fingers ; (and par-
ticularly) to deale blowes, fall to bandie firokes , lay
bard about bim,
Mencr les inains baffles. To put unto the fword.
Mettre la main au bafton. See Bafton.
Stan la main furle collet de, To arreft,or take pri-
mer.
Mettre la main iufques au coude, Ly a mis la mm,
He bath flept verie farre into; be bath deepely ingaged
himfelfe in ; be bath founded the depth of, the mat-
ter. 5
Mettre lamain à heritage. To fall to the ground vp-
on bis bands,
Mettre la main à la pafte. To affif,hbelpe, further, (et
forward.
Mettre lamain à la verge. Looke Verge.
Partir de la main.7o part from the band; fuddainely,
or baflily to paffe,or flart,forward,
Prendre la main. A Notarie-to take the confent,and
ton the oath, of parties that agree to paffe a con-
tr
Se fcigner de toutes mains. To be horribly afraid,or
grienoufly diftreffed; or,all-te-be-crofe themfelues in a
time of affright,or extremitie.
Tendre les mains. To aske for mercie.
Tenir la main à quelque affaire. To haue à band in,
be medling with, beed or looke unto, a matter.
Tenir la maina vn en quelque affaire . ‘To fürtber,
fauor, belpe, or affift one in a matter.
Tenir la main pour l'un & pour!’ autre. To bea
newter,or equally affeéted to both fides; alfo,to vnder-
take both for the one and the other. ° .
Tenir fous main. To keepe in fecret, in primate, in a
corner, in bugger-mugger.
Tirer à Ja pe A borfe to prefe upon the hand, or
Sitine to get fone » 07 to goe fafter then bis rider
would baue him.
Tomber en main tierce. Looke Tiers,
Toucher en la main de. To fhake bands with,or take
by the band, in figne of friendfhip. s
, Itoucha la main entre leurs mains. He layed bis
bands betweene theirs, or gaue them bis band that be
“would be theirs.
Venir aux mains. To come tobandie blowes; to buc-
kle,graple,cope,or fight togetber,
Venir es mains de. To be at the mercie, fall into the
laps come into the power,or under the inrifdittion,of.
Main lavée moins levée: Prov. The more good parts
one bath the leffe be fhould boaft of them,
*Amain layée Dieu mande la repeuë : Prov. God
fends th’ upright all necefarie food.
Vneinain lave l’autre: Prov. One band wafbes the }
other; applyable to fuchas gine upon affurance,or bope, À
to be giuen unto; or unto fuch as any way ferue one a-
nothers turne. fe ; Scie
Pour laver fesmains on n'en vend pas fa terre: |
aes A cleane-wafht band makes no man fell bis


De mains vuides prieres vaines: Pro, Emptiehands
bad Orators 237 soda 5 ele
i hain sec la mata: Pros Chair.


Main-


MAI


Maino-bonne. as Main-bournie. ei

Main-bournie:f ward, gard; gouernment, admini-
Jtration,ouerfigbt of ; charge, power, authoritie oner ;
alfo, the patronage, defence, or protection of a Soue-
raigne.

Main-de-gourre. 4 Hogs-foot ; or, one thats banded
like a Sow. €Rab.. SRE

Main-ferme: f. Farme, or fee-farme ; a title in, or the
polfeffion of, an inheritance (either for a time certaine,
or for euer) lyable unto rent.

Main-ferme: com, Held in farme,or fee-farme ; Tous
Heritages,& biens immeubles qui ne font fief, font
communement — reputez, &tenus herita-
ges mainfermes, Couft.de Cambray tit,2.ar.2.

Main-mettre. To manumit, or difinife ; 10 affranchife
a villaine.

Main-mis: m. 4naffranchi[ed perfon ; one thatis freed
from feruitude,or flauerie,

Main-mortable : com.Holding,or held by villenage,or
by a feruile tenure, whence;

Main-mortable envers fon feigneur.Slauifhly fab-
ieGé unto the impofitions bis Lord is pleafed to lay on
him while be lines ; and at bis death not able to be-
queath,or giue away vj d without bis permiffion,
Heritages main-mortables. which are charged, at
the Lords pleafure,with taxes ; and of cuflome with an
yearelie proportion of flefb,bread,or corne,payablevato
him; and wbich come cleere into bis bands, if the te-
nant thereof dye without lavefull beires of bis bodie.

Main-inorte : £ Mortmaine; alfoyeillenage; or,a fer-

~ uile,and flauifh tenure. À ak
Gens de.jnain-morte.


an Hofpitall; freemen of a ate Towne,or Trade;


the fellowes,or members of all Corporations ; alfo, vil-
laines,or feruile tenants. r
Mainotte: f. A fall hand,or childs hand.
mer apn Looke Main.
it


Mainfine. A bundle of grapes; or fome fix or feuen bun-
ches tyed up together; as Moifline.
Mainfiné: m. À younger brother.
Maint: m.te:f. Many,a number, flôre of.
Maintes fois. Offen,efi(oones,or at fumdrie times.
Maintenance: f.. Maintenance ; protection, fupport,
countenance ,affifiance. ut Et
Maintenant. Now, prefently, at this inflant,in this ve-
rie.moment,
Pourinaintenant. For this time ; for this once. —
Maintenir. To maintaine, x Support, proted,
countenance, defend, backe, beare out ; fland in, or
unto.
Maintenir de faux. To affirme, and offer, or fet bim-
JSelfe,to prouesthat an euïdence produced by bis aduer-
farieis forged; Looke Faux.
Maintenu: m, ué: £ Maintained, upheld, fupported,
defended ; flood in,or unto ; countenanced, backed, or
borne out.
Maintenuë: f. A maintenance maintaining,vpbolding,
defence, countenance, affifiance. ;
La pleine maintenué. The full poffeffion of a thing ;
or,a pofeffion adiudged, and giuen afier the full trya
of a fuit vato bim that bath mofl right, ‘
Maintien: m, Geflure; bebauior, demeanuor, carri.


age. 3
Maiïn-tourner. din, Ja the turning of a hand, infant.


ly, fudddinely.
Majorité: f Maioritie ; fall


Maire: m. 4 Mayor; the high Officer or Magifrare


Be church-men ; Abbots,
Monks,Fryers; Deanes,Prebends, Canons ; brothers of


M A I


of an incorporate Towne ; alfo, the Fudge, or Steward

ofa Lord tafticiers Courts. 10, the Judge,

Maire de Chaftel, as Merc.

Maire du Palais, w/2s,in old time, the principall Offi-

cer of the Crowne, and Steward of the Kings boufe;

fiace;he hath beene called Senefchal de France; now,
the Conflable, and Great Maifter of France dinde bis
authoritje betweene them.

Le Maire du village. The Fudge thereof.

_— (on The full-grown fleece,or well-combd wooll

Of a Jheepe.

Mairerie: f. A Maiordome ; the office, or place of a

Mayor ; alfo, bis iurifdittion,or the precinéts thereof.
Mairgue: £ as Maigue ; Wbay. €Auvergnois,
Mairie: f. À Maiordome, or Maiorfhip; the office, or

place of a Maior, or of avillage-Maior ; alfo (in fome

old bookes,and cuftomes) bat, or low iurifdiétion.
Mais. (Adverb.) But ; alfo, more, any more; (whence,

Mais de; aboue,or more then;) alfo, rather.

Mais que. But what ; alfo, when that, fo that,

Plus mais. Iene puis plus mais fouftenir. F can
beare no longer,or not a whit more.
“Atoufiours mais, Eternally, euerlaflingly, for euer

euer.
le n’en peux mais. 7's not Lits no way lon,
of me,1 ae doe withall, a pit:
MERE Not this day, or not as long as this day laf
teth,

Maifné: m. Ayounger brother, =~

Maifne. Argent baillé à maifne. Let out to uf for the
needle of younger brethren , being infants, or or

ans.

Malena a Meneaux. ° ae

a 1€ Younger {hi er brotherbood ; the
Pr mr

— £, A boufe, or manfion; alfo, a race, or fami-
La maïfons de Monfeur Boyau. whofe
fe and backe-parts ses ere

aifons au ciel, Circles drawne from the one pole to

the other, to feperate the twelue fignes of the Zodiake,
and diniding the whole Sphere into twelue equall


arts,
Maifon de defpens. A Roome,or Side(of extraordi-
narie expence) in Prifons, wherein a condemned deb-
tor that will not pay,is to be kept. i
Maifon Dieu. Aa Hoipitall , or Spittle, for the

oore.

aifon de la Paix, À Court of ludgement or luflice ;

a iudiciall Court, SE
Toile de maifon. (Courfe) Hufiviues cloth.
De vieilles maifons bruflées il {Cait virer des cuil-
liers neufves. He can picke new {poones out of old
houfes ; (Applyable to aneere, and cunning ee

re :


per. AS
La maïfon fait cognoiftre le maiftre : Prov. ‘The
boufè diftouers the owner ; or, looke into à boufe, you
difcerne the owner.

En bonnemaifon l'on a tof apprefté: Prov, 724
good boufe all things arequickly readie.

En; De mn D OR part: Prov, God
hath a great {hare in a finall boufe.

‘A l'entrée de la ville eft le commencement des
maifons : Prov, The buildings begin at the towne-
gate; One may gheffe at a mans ech by bis
Pannes and by bis firft courfe what will be bis whole
proceeding, A ee
“Achete paix, & maifon fairte : relent:


a CT EPS RTE 2 CRUE


M A I


and a boufe (alveadie) made; like whereuntois;
1] fait acheter maifon faitte,& femme a faire:Pro.
Purchafe a boufé readie made, but let thy wife be of
thine ovone making. ,
Chafcun eft maiftre en fa maifon: Prov. Euerie
one is (or fhould be)maifter within bis owne doores.
Qui fait nopçes, & maifon, met le fien en aban-
don: Prov. Much building,and often bridalls make
bare paflures, and naked fide-walls,
Qui veut tenir nette maifon il n’y faut preftre, ny
pigeon: Pro. He that loues to bane a neat boufe mujt
heepe neither Priefl,nor Pigeon in it.
Maifonage: m, Timber-trees cut downe for the buil-
ding of a boufe.
Maifonnages : m. Houfès, boufing; lodgings, del
lings,
Maifonné m. éc: f. Honfed ; fiwnifbed, or flored with
ul eS.
Maifonnée: f. 4 houfefull boufehold, familie.
Maifonner. To build houfes; to (mb, or flore with
houfes,
Maifonnette: f, A little boufé ; a lodging,acote,a crib,
a cottage.
Maifonnier:m.ere:f, Keeping a boufe ; alfo,belong-
ing toor feruing for,a houfe.
Maiftraille, The maine [ayle (of a fhip.)
Mailtral:m, The Nortb-meflwind.€Rab.
Maiftre: m. 4 Maiffer ; pat a
fident,Principäll, chiefé Ruler ; a Teacher, 1afruétor ;
Ouer{eer ; alfà,an Ovoner ,Proprictavie,Pofselfor ; alfo,
one that hath (or fhould bane) (ifficient skill in the fa-
cultie which be profelfes; whence, Maiftre es arts,
&c; alfa,a title of honour (fuch as it is) belonging to
all Artificers, and Tradefmen whence, Maiftre Pi.
erre, Maiftre Ichan &c ; which we gine not fo gene-
-rally, but qualifie the meaner fort of them (e(pecially in
countrey townes) with the title of Goodman (too good
for mam.) te
Les deux Maiftres. The two principal ropes of a
Fifhgrs Draw-net. : >
Maiftre des bafles œuvres. À lakes-farmer,or Gold-
nder, Lune Sami et
| Maitires de la chambre aux deniers. The principall
officers of the Exchequer,calledfinéldiime. 7
: Maiftre des Comptes. Looke in Chambre des


Comptes. ARRETE |
Maitre des eaux,& forefts. The Lord chiefé luffice,
or luflice in Eire, of the Kings Forrefis, Ot. su
Maiftre des hautes œuvtes, 4: OUEN

~ Maiftre d’hoftel. The fleward of a (great) houfe-


bold. à :


Molise ah otis.


~ Maiftres du Parlement. So were the Confeitlers

1: du Parlement called in old times: 2:

= Maiftre phy phy. 4 Fakes-feyer (bo hath often oc-
cafion enough to fayphy.) fia

| = Maiftte des Ports. An Officer that ouerfees theleny--
_ ingof the Impofition foraine, Refue, & Haut paf-


tba |


oO. gle |


Qigitizeq.0y G


à au
Pin


“Zita. “0 . 7


M AI


iniag vp of Gunnes, and holding the fame ranke, and
author itie that,at this day, belongs to Ne
Le grand Maiftrede l'Artillerie. The Maifler of the
Ordnance. | '
Vn fecond Maiftre. The ufber of a Schoole. :
pr fon maiftre. To purge, vntiuffe, goe to the
oble. ;

‘A pere, Amaiftre, & à Dieu tout puiflant, nul né
peut rendre l'equivalent: Prov. Looke Dieu.
Ce que maiftre donne, & valet pleure, ce font
larmes perduës : Prov. The groome that wayles bis
maiflers gifts may well enough {pare bis.teares.
Chafcun eft maiftre en fa maifon: Prov.Ewerie one
rules in bis owne se a
De grand maiftre hardi valet: Prov, Said of afer-
uant,that bearing bimfelfe on bis maifters greatnelfe, is
move bold,and confident then otherwife be would be.
En pont, en planche, & en riviere, valet devant,
maiftre derriere: Prov. Jn places of danger,or dif:
after,the feruant muft precede his maifter. :
Fortune n’efpargne ny ferviteur ny maiftre: Prov.
Looke Fortune, ‘
Iamais ne gaigne qui precede à fon maiftre: Pro.
He neuer gaines that {lands in fuit with's maifter.
Il eft plus d’ouvriers,que de inaifttes: Prov. There
be more workmen then skilfull workmen,
ILfe peut bien feoir à table quand le maiftre lu
commande: Proy, He needs not wait thats bid’ fit
downe by his maifter.

~ La maifon fait cognoiftre le maiftre : Prov. we fay,
the feluidge makes fhew of the cloth.
L'oeil du maiftre engraifle le cheval: Prov. A horfe
is fattened by bis maifiers eye. ° 5
Les derniers venus font les maiftres: Prov. Thofe
that come laft (aft) get the maiftcrie.
Nouveau apprenti n’eft pas maiftre: Prov. 4 #0-
nice (or new-come Prentice) is nd maifler ; viz. muft
neither looke for the refbeët , nor baue looked from bim
the skill of, a maifter.
Qui a compagnon a maiftre: Proy.He that hath a
mate bath a maifler.
Qui bon maitre fert bon loyer en attend : Prov.
He that waites on a good maifter waites for a good

| tuyne,
Qui fert Dieu il a bon maiftre: Prov. The fernant
of God hath a good maifier. 3
Qui fert le Roy il a bon maiftre: Prov. Noferuice
to the King.

Tel maiftre tel valet: Prov. Like maifler like


man,

Maiftre: com. (Adicëliuel}y)chiefe, principallwbence;
Vn maiftre cable,ou chable, 4 fheat-cable,

. Lemaiftre doigt. The middle finger.… ve

Maiftre-garde: m. 4 chiefé Warden,or Maifler-war-
den in a forrefi. ke ’


Ima Le iftralement; (an old word.)

Malte-pie : mJ ke, ov principall armeof a
Plant, fae insane

Maiftre-fergent : m. 4 Maifler-Sergeant, orchiefé


Matte égenenie: tie of fice, or walke ofa Mai{-
gt tr i mae d
La re Eni, A ictal Church shelve
 trèfe Church,or chiefe Churchin a Towne (wherein this
word,as well as Maiftre befores used Adicétiuely.)


Maiftrier.as Maïftrifer. | (3 4606
Maiftrite: £ cMaifierie,,tiguiaric, € Ù


ape


Oeurral from 1


ear STALE UNIVERSITY


MAL


…_ ritie, dominion rule, fivay ; alfo cunning, skill,artifici-
allneffe,expert or excellent workmanfhip ; alfoya ai.
flerfhip; the ofe, or place of a Maifter; whence;
La grand maiftrife. Tos afice of le Grand maiftre;
(for whom,looke under Maiftre.) dists à
Ily aeude la maiftrife à faire cela. That matter
bath beene cunningly,or warkmanly handled, "|
Maiftrifer. To maifler,gouerne,rule, (way ; to bridle, or-
der containe,or keepewithin compafe.
Maiftroqueux. À maifler Cooke, (Rab,
Majufcule: com, Somewhat greater a little bigger 3 of
good flature.of a reafonable age. NT OU
Maiz : m. Maïs, Turkre ve wheat;(the graine
whereof the Indians make the moft of their bread.)
Mal: m. 42 exill,mifchie hurt oarme,domage,wr ong,
halen 3 alfoya grief, paine  fickneffe,
teale, ÿ {
Mal de S.Acaire. as Acariaftreré, -
Malaigre, A kind of wormes that breed in the gorge
of 4 H, \


Mald'Alcide, Hercules euill the foule, or falling
will


euill.
… Mal d'amarry, The füffocation of the Matrix.
Maldes. Apollonie. The toothache.
hs « deS, Avertin, Dixxitefle ; or any difeafe of the
aa,
Mal caduc. The falling fickneffe.
alchaud,ou chaud mal. A contitiuall (or violent)
burning ague ; (whence the Prouerbe, De fievre en
chaud mal, Out of the frying-panne intothe fire.) :
. al de S.Claire, Red eyes; or,a painefull redneffe of
tbe eyes. A
Mal des comices. The falling ficknefe. .
Mal de coat, He JSitt aft; @ bornie Swelling on the
acke of a . ; : ini
Mal de craye. The flone-cray; a Hawkes difeafe,
Mal de cropion. The rumpe-euill ; a diféafe where-
with all birds (e(pecially fuchas be kept in cages) are
Sometimes troubled,
al aux dents, The toothache; alfo,extreame hunger,
or famifhment by reafor thereof, Looke Dent.
al feru. A Malander in the bought of a borfes
knee,
Mal S. Fiacre, An inflamed fcab,or ge wartin the
findament,the which it makes to fwell,. ]
Mal de flancs. A Pleurifies or,as under Flanc.


S. Francois. Want of money, or, not 4 croffe in |


the pure (for thofe of bis order muft carrie no money
about them. Ë 1

Mal des. . The Gowt.

Mal de S.Gilles. A Fiflulasor Canker.


Mal de gofier. The Squinancie,or Squinzie,
Malde Sean. The fall re. |

Mal de Mahumet. ‘The falling fickneffe (whereunto
Mahomet was verie (ubieét.)
Malde$.Mammard.Sorene{ft,or chaps,in the breafts
of women, :

Mal de S.Mathurin, Frenxie,madne[e.

Mal de S.Medard, Looke Medard.


Malde S. Mein. The wild (cab, er manginefe; a


kind of (moft itching) 574 bred of a falt


re ial

rt, A running cab, or thicke morphew,which
pe apr er cn ype ity faemes
wholly dead : Some Northerne people call it, the Rig-
.__ruffe (in beafts.) 6 < -

: Mal de Naples. The French Pocks; or, the es


tane diféafe, firft gotten by the French : (of the


sg ) at the fege of Naples , Anno Dom,

1528.

Mal du pantois, Difficulsie of breathing ; See Pan-

tois.

Mal du pion. 4 ficknefte that comes by exceffiue drin.
in


ra
Mal de pippe. Drunkennefe,
Mal deS.Quentin. The cough.
Mal de S.Raphine. The wild Scab,
Mal de S.Roch. Seurfé, or Séabbine[fe; an itching
manginefe.
Mal facréc. The Kings euill.
Malde S.Sebaftien, The Plague,or pefilence,
Mal fubul. The Prificke, or confumption of the
ungs.
Mal de terre. The falling fickneffe.


. Maldetefte. The bead-ache; (and Sometimes) alfo,


iealoufie.


~ MaldeS.Valentin. The filling fickne(fe.
‘ Mal de ventre, The wormes ; or ide 34 painfull


Vars ed fretting in the guts.
al dever. The Farcie in a horfe.


. MalS.Vitus, A pleafant difeafe, wherein the patient


pas daunces, and laughes all the while his fit is on
su


Chaud mal. as before in Mal chaud,

Gros mal, The falling ficknef ; the foule euill,

Haut mal. The fame,

Le hauc mal de la corde. Hanging; twitching vp in


a pee
Mal deffus mal n'eft pas fanté: Prov, Jil upon ill is
no health,


De mal eft venu l'agneau , & à inal retourne la
peau: Prov. From ill came the Lambe, and to ill


Goes it skinne ; goods euill gotten are commonly ill


peine endure mal qui ne l'a appris: Pro, H.
can be brooke miferie that neuer any bore. “4
I eft toftdeceu qui mal ne penfe: Prov, He that
thinkes no barme is foone beguiled, :
Telfe plaind qui n’a point de mal: Prov, Some
though they feele no harme unquiet ares,
al:m, ale:f. 7 bad, naughtie, lewd: feurnie; mi
chieuous, burt full, barmefill, fyrewd ; vafeemelie, vn-
D RES 3 ficke, difeafed, craxie, pained, fore,
ateafe, |
La male bofle, 4 peflilent byle, or bunch; a plague.


ore.


Mal. (Adverb.) 7il,euilly,badly,zaughtily ; mifcbiewon-


fy ord, uneafily ; vnband[imely , ill-fauouredty,


. Seurnily.


Que bien que mal. Indifferently, fo fo; alfo, bittie
milfie,one way or another.
Te fus bien mal de mon pere, Fhad my fathers an-
ape got bis difileafure,1 was hardly v{ed,ill intreated,
Ch


Il me fait mal de luy. 1 am forrie for him.
Ils me veulent faire maldevous. They would bane
me fall out with you.
Mon cœur luy eft,ou faitinal. 1 beare bim a grudge,
y heart cannot abide bim.

Mal bat longuement pleure; &, Autant pleure
mal batu qui bien batu: Prov. Looke Batu.
Mal fait qui ne parfait: Prov. He does ill that does
notall; the end crownes the worke.

al iouë qui fiert la joué: Prov. Looke Tous.
Mal penfe qui ne repenfe: Prov, Bester not thinke
at all then not 10 weigh the thoughts,

Ece Mal


Go: gle


| MAL


Mal poife qui ne contrepoife: Pro. pipe but
ill that weighes not one with another.

Malfere qui ne parferc : Prov. Hefèrues but il that
throughly fèrues not.

Mai foupe qui tout difne: Pro, Of ayoung fpender
comes an old beggar; of a riotous youth a ruinous


age.
Qui mal entend, mal refpond: Prov. He that un-
derftands ill anfiwers vafitiy.
Qui bien void, & mal prend fait folic en bon efci-
ent: Prov. He ‘that ‘difcernes well, and chufes ill, 1 a
true coxcombe.

Malabatre: m. Malabathrum; aa aromaticall Fndian
leafe, which (as Plinie and Diofcorides imagined)
frvimmes on pooles and ditches, without any apparent
root ; but our Gerard (of'another opinion) fayes it is
the leaf ofa great tree growing in Arabiajand Cam-
baya, fare from the water fide. ”

Malace: £. 4 fiorme,tempeli,or il weather pt fea.

Malade: com. Sicke,difeafed, craxie, out of temper, ill
ateafe.
Elie malade. Said of a woman that bath ber
flowers.

‘A l'œil maladela lumiere nuit: porn Oeil.
La mort n’a point d'ami, le malade n’a F4 ’un de-
my: Prov. The dead man bath no friends ,t ficke no
: true ones,


© Pointne Suidera dé libaldie s'il pricelté :


: Prov. Ananfiver for thoft bufiebodics,that caft many

“ doubts,and make many queftions in cafts alreadie ve-

falued om. :

aladeric: f, An Hoïpitall, or Spittle for the difeafed ;

: alfo,the ficke-mans ward in any Hospital.

Maladie: £. A maladie, ficknefe,difeale.

Maladie de S. lean, The falling fickneffe.

Maladie S, Main, Mangines,an itching leprofe; the
: wild Scab,

Maladie de S. Mathurin. Frenzie, extreame follie,

madnefe.

Les maladies viennent a cheval, & $ en retour-

nent pied: Pro, Diféafes come a hesitates re-

turne on foat,

Ds rande maladie vienton bien en piaai

rov. From a long fickneffe a lafting bealrb,

Tard medicine eft appreftée à maladie entacinée:

Prov. Sickneffe once pete, all Phificke comes too

late.


Maladif m.iuc: £ Sicklie,craxie, mé states,
, ft oe ns ee


Mall. :m, ée: f. Jnfelted with «fore leprofie


Maladroict: m. Cte: f. Vvieldie, aubourd, un
wbheeme ; vnapt,improper unfit; Onfeemelie, unband-
Simesuncamelieswitbout any manner of grace,decorum,

‘or decencic.


| Maladvis: m. Mifaduife, unaduifedaeffe, indiferetion,
N oe ai rafhneffe.
vile ere i adui éd umaduifed, Pre CSS
_prouident beedleSe,niconfiderate,ondifireet.  ""
er. To mingle, nonin te ate: feuerall'things


“À


MAIL u's


Malaife : m.ée : £. Vneafe,troublefome, di ult,bard,
gr or fler. Intricate, prepa à in-
[4


Malaifé defa perfonne, Wmwfeldie.
Malaifement. Pneu, difieulr, bardly, not lighth,
with much paine with great adoe
Malaifer. Todifeafe,trouble,difquiet, perplex.
Malandres: m, The Malanders; (a borfés difeafe.)
Malandrin: m, A cafed fouldior without pay,or im-


ployment.
Malernet: m, A kind of rough-skaled Gurnard which
being aline is red,but dying, of another colour.
Malart: m. 4 Mallard,or wild Drake. :
Mal-avenant. Vacomélie, ill fitting, vnbandfome, ill
at 0 eh rude, vncinile, vnmanterlie, ill
bebaued.
my rre 3 f. Mifaduenture, misfortune, difafler,
bance.
et mer chal malaventure : Prov. Hee that
euer be well pe euer looke well about bim.
eran 5 | -
Malaxé: m.ée: f. Mixedblent,and beaten togetber;al-
fa A amende oa ti the bands, vntill !
it be fi
Malaxer. ‘To blend,and beat together, as egges ; alfo, to”
Soften, work ov knead unto a ‘[ofineffe,to bande a thing |
untill it befoft. i
Mal-bafti: m. An ill fauoured,or vnfrfhioned fellow ;
one that hath neither manners,nor good making.
Mal-cindré: m. ée : f. I fupported, weakely vnder-
propped (by a weake, or ill-made eme
Malcontent. The name of a game at Car |
Malcontent. alecontent,moodie, difcontent, melan:
cholicke,angrie,difpleafed.
al-contentement: m. Malecontentedneffe, difcon-
rente grudging, vnwillingnefe,
Malcus: m, 4 Fauchion,Hangar wood-knife, -
Male: f..4 Male,or great Budget. ;
pr Es il rs trouflé en male, Without that be
a e tr vor twitcbt eo:
Male:com,as Malle. bs
Maieable. as Malleable.
be £ A. peftilent byle , or botch ; a plague-


Mileidicence:£ Detrattion, reniling, ill fpeech, bard
-cenfure, opprobrious words.
Mase — A maledittion, curfe,banning, impre-


fie | Malefagon: f, An abfir ditie,i Ifauoredneffe, ill man
Malefacons des procez. Faults committedin plea-


diaz.

Malefice: m. 4 mifchieft; offence, great fault, naugbtie
deed, ill a6i, lewd is fr qu
(whereby ats is done;) mifchienous witcherie.

eficié: m, ée:f. "Deformed, disfiganed, maymed,


weakened, difabled, defééline, by nature, enchaunt-

ment, or other accident ; unable to per ame"

rites
Male grace. Loo ke Malgrac * OP 222
Maleir. as gr ve a alé >

cab bard ta vt pice
vdly,
pp Mifchance, misfortune mifhapsmif.


mme rip. pbadfucceffe.


Fete OF IOrS TAFE UNIVERSITY


— 7 7!


CT ES NT TT TT 7 vor


EE an Sparen


MAL


Malendurant.Tichie,impatient. Bea cae

Malengin: m. Fraud,guile,craft; fubtiltie deceit,cou-
Senage,trumperie,cautele, treacherie, circumuention,
ouble-dealing ,ill- meaning,

Malengineux: m. eufe: f, Deceit full frandulent,con-
Sening,ouer-reaching, falfe,double, trecherous,

Malengroin : m. Sullenne([e, powting, firlynelfe, a
foure looke. ;

Mabenthalenté: m. €e: f. Malicioufly affeéied, il-
m .


. Maleole, as Malieole, 7

Malefuade: f. Hunger (becaufe it perfuades but ill.)

Malesiiade: f. Afiveating paine,or ficknelfe. =i 3h

Maletoite : f. An extraordinarie tax,or fubfidie leuied
the yeare 1296 by Philip le bel; viz, (at firft) the va-
lue of the bundreth, (and afierwwards) of the fiftieth
part of all, either lay-mens, or clergie-mens, goods ;
hence alfo,any impofition,exattion, taxation,

Maletote. ‘The fume; or,as Maltote.

Maletoulte. as Malerofte ; (called fo, becaufe beld as
Mal tollué.) L

Maletoultier: m. 4 collector of taxes, or fubfidies; a
toll-gatherer,

Malette: f A little male ; a budget,or fevip.

Malette de bergier. A Shepheards fcrip; alfo, the
bearbe Shepheards pur{e, pouch,or ferip; called other-
wife Toywort, Cafeweed, Pickpurfe, and poore mans
Parmacetie,

Malfaiét: m. A mifdéed, fault offence, tre[pafe, tranf-
greffion,abufe,bad act, lewd tricke, foule part, naugh-
tie pranke.

Malfaicteur: m, 4 malefaétor, offendor, tranfgrefor,
trefpalfer, guiltie perfon. ;
alfaifant. Lewd, wicked, offending, faultie, naughtie,
culpable ; fhrewd,mifthieuous harme fill Jourt full.

Mal-feable: com, Weake, or in whom there's no good
trufling.

2 Ma A maiflerleRe man; or, fuch a one as hauin
no home to take unto,is oflen [ped with a very bad k
ging; alfa, a fellow of ill bebauior, or lewd conuerfati-
ont; a naughtie-packe, 2

Malgrace: f Dufauor,difpleafure, bad acceptance, ill
opinion; anger,blame,or bate incurred.

abile: com. Vnable, vmvieldie, vnapt, unfit,
fleight,weake,difabled,without vigor, _ |

Malhardi: mie: f. Daflardliecowardlie, faint-bear.

‘ted white-linered,unmaniie, fearefüll,timerous.

Malheur: m, Mifhap misfortune ynifcbance,aduerfitie,
difafter,calamitie,mi(erie.

Malheur ne dure pas toufours : Pro, 1 lucke doth
notalwayes laft.

Malheur ne vient iamais feul: Prov. Mifthances
newer come fingle; one misfortune fitcceeds in the necke
of another, »

‘A quelque chofe malheur eft bon: Prov. Tis an ill
wind that blowes no man to good,

Pour neant recule qui malheur attend: Prov. x
vaine be giues backe that lookes for ill lucke.

Vn fol cerchefon : Prov. The foole by pry-
ing finds bimfelfe unbappie; or, The prying foole meets
with bis ovene mifhap.

Malheure. à la mal. Valuckily unhappily onfortunate-
ly,difafferoufly,in an euill houre, seer:
Malheurer, To mifchicue, afflict, make vabappie, init

miferies,lay calamities,on.

1 Malheureté: £. as Malheur. ;

Malheureufement. nbappily,onluckily,unfortumate-
by, finifterly difafteroufly miferably.


ea COO) gle


a


Malfeance: f. VacomelineRe, unftemelinelfe, unband


MA


Malheureux: m, eufe: f. Vabappie,untuckie, fmifter,
croffe unfortunate,unpr ofperoua,di[a rons miferable,
wretched,

Plus malheureux que le bois dont on fait Je gibet.
More vnbappie then the wood of a Gibbet.

Malheuftre: f. The pinion of a birds wing,

Malice: €. Guile, deceit,coufinage, trumperie, treache-
rie, knauerie, falfebood, fhifiing ; malice, mifchienouf-
nelfe, ill meaning; a bad fetch, wicked fleight lewd de-
nice,

Homme ne connoit mieux la malice quel Abbé
qui a efté moine: Pro. No manis better (eene in kna-
uerie then an Abbot that bath beene a Manke,

Malicieufement. Deceitfully, craftily, euilefilly,fulfely,
treacberoufly ; malicioufly, de/pightfully ymifchiewoufly,
knauifhly, with an iil meaning with a bad intent.

Malicieux: m, eufe:£. Deceitfill,craftie, coufèning,
Salfe, treacherous; defpightfiull malicious, knanifh m=
chieuous.

Malier: m. 4Male-borfè, Trunke-borfé, or Sumpter-
borfe; be that carries the Cloake-bag.

Malipne:f. 4 Spring-tyde ; called fa by the Salters of
Xaintonge.

Maligne. The feminine of Maling.

Malignement. Malignantly, malicioufly ; lewdly, wic-
kedly naughtily, fhrevdly, knauifhly, mifcbienoufly ; of À
(et (and with a bad) purpofe.

Malignité:£. Malignitie ; malice prepenfed, purpofed
villanie ; mifcbiefe intended unto; ill-will, grudge,de-

Jpigbt ; wickedne fe, levedneffe, naugbiine(fe, knauifh-


nese.

Malin: i : £ Malignant,jll-willie, grudge-
bearing, defpighifill, malicious ; knauifh ,
fre ie
in


al - Pomme demal. Afwrifh apple, tearmed,

e ar apple.

Malingre : com, Sore, feabbie, owglie, loathfome.

Malivele: com. ‘Halebolensnattooloers ft sb eh
Licious,defpightfull, churlifh, do, ed, curvifh, repining
al, Lens vato, fraught with rancowr, full of ba
trea, '

Malleable: com. Mall:ble, traflable, bammerable,
Plyant to the hammer which may be wrought or beaten |
with the hammer.

Malleation: £ A hammering.

Mallece. Moloflus; the dregs,or courfeft,of. Sugar.

Manet Greatly, much, mightily, a vile or filthie

ale.

Malleole: £ The ankle, or ankle-bone ; alfo,a veine that
runnes along upor the ankle,

Malletier: m. ere: f. Bearing, or belonging to,a male,
budget or wallet.

Mallette. ‘as Maletre. -
almené. as Maumené. Mifufed,cre.

Malobatre: m. as Malabatre,

Malot : m. A little Boare,€Norm,

Malotru: m.ué: f.Forlorne wretched, wofiill,miferable,
Va povre malotru, A pore fnake.

Malpatient de, Impatient of.

Mal-plaifant. Vapleafing, unacceptable, rude, lumpifh,
unmannerlie,witbout grace,witbont fafbion, -

Matter m.ainc : £ Pnbolefome ; ficklie, crazie, vn-

ealthie.


fomenefe ,illfauoredneffe. ;
Mal-talent: m. Defpiche il will; anger gotten,disfanor


incurred,
Eceÿ Mal-


î M AM


Mattaffé: m. ée:f. Judigefied, ill-piled, ill fanoure
made vp,vnorderly budled or wmbled together.

Mattaulte. a Maletofte. |

Maitaultier: m. 4 Colleëler of the Subfidie, a Toll-
gatherer, |

Maltote. as Maletofte; o7 as;

Mal-toute : t..42 exaction,impofition,toll; a new,or ex-
traordinarie taxation.

Maltraidtement: m.Hard dealing,bad intertainment,
rudenel[e,barbneffe,inciuilitie, crueltie.

Malvaific: f. The wine Malmefie. g

Malubec: m. The falling Jickneffe ; tearmed fo in fome
parts of Languedoc.

Malvedi: m, A fmall Spanifh coyne, fix whereof are
(carcely worth an Eugli{h pennie. |

Mal-verfation:. f Mifdemeanor, misbebauior, ill con-
nerfition,lewd carriage, gs

Malverfer en fon office, To bebaue bimfelfe ill im bis


once,
Mal-veltu: m.ué: f. Ju-clothed ragged, or bare, in
array.
es male devers Je vent: Prov. (Like our) \
the weake(t to the wall ; thofé that worfl may are ener,
put to therworfl.
Malvoifie: fMalmefe.
Malvoifin: m, ine: f. Of Malmefie.
$ Malufité: m. ée: £. 7ll-fafhioned,ill-mannered ; rude,
= » that hath not beene in much goad companie ; alfo, raw,
unexperienced,ignorant,a nouices .
Malvucillance: €. Malice,ill-will ; hatred; pleafure ta-
henin the mafortunes of another.
Malvueillane.Aaleualent malignant, malicious ; that
… beareth a grudgr,or oweth il will,unto ; that ioyeth in
the mifèries of another. fe
Mamaluc: m. À Mamatuke, or light-borfeman (in the
Syrian and Arabiantongues;) The Mamalukes were
an order of valiant borfemen in the laft Empire of
Egypt.
Manages f. A great ladian Peach whereofa kind of
Marmalade is made. : ’
| Mambour,& Matnbourg: m. A Captaine; alfo, the
~ Gouernour of a Prouince; alfo, the Gardian of an ia-
fant, protector of a widom@c.  ., ,;;
Mambournie: f.as fain-bournie,
Mamnelue. See Mammeluë.
Marnie: f My friend, lowe, deere.
Ma belle m’amie, My prettie Pug (fo fooles bugging
their bables,tearme them) = = 7
Par fain&te m’amie. fa flead of, Par fainéte Marie,


Rah. ; ae
| Millie: com. Of, or belonging to the breafls,paps,


. or dugs. : er

Additions mamillaires. That part of the braine
which lyes next to the nofè, and where the fence of

Smelling begins. |

Procez inainillaires, Looke Procés,

ammal: m, ale.: f. Belonging 10 the breafis, or
_ Veinemamimale. SeekeVeine.
“Maminam (rhe voice of infants) Mam, ©.

Ux! m, A hind of Panick. jreictalal

Iclette: £ À Little dug, breafvdder,

ncleu mule bn eds
le: pit , alt. pe + wdder. = MS +

SRE QE LATE A “i JET. i


nk! vtt + Oe 7 J


M AN


Mammelons. Be certaine little,red, hard, vleërie,
and teat-like fwellings which breake out of the skin of
the head,and yeeld a wbayifh,or waterifb bumor.

Mammelu. 4 Mammeleux,

Mainmeluch, as Mamaluc, x 1

Mammielué: f. A fooles bable; fo tearmed, becanf? er-
dinarily it is made to refemble a laughing, and fat wo-
man.

Mammeron. as Mammelon,

Mammillaire. Sceke Mamillaire,

Mammuque: f. À winglefe bird,ofan unknowne be- |
ginning and after death not corrupting; fle hath feet à
band long, fo light a bodie,fo long feathers tbat fhe is |
continually carried in the ayre,whereon fhe feeds; fame
call ber the bird of Paradice, but ervonioufly ;for that
bath wings,and differs in other parts from this,

Manable: com, Habitable ; which may beinbabited,or
dwelt in,

Manance:f. A dwelling abiding,inbabiting in,

Manant: m. 4 dweller, abider, inhabiter, or inbabi-
tant; properly {ich a one as dwells where he was borne;
pg boore;clowne, binde,husbandman, countrey fel-


Manat: m. A monftrous Fndian fifh that refembles an
Oxe,and bath a flat backe, and a verie thicke skin,

Manbourg. as Mambour. :

Mancelles:f. Great Fron rings whereby the thill-borfe
ec, is faflened unto a cart.

Manche: m. The baft,belueor handle of a toole ; alfo,

- the necke of a muficall Faftrument; alfo,a mans tole, -
Lemanche d'une charruë. 4 Plough-tayle,or ban-
dle; the Plougb-bale. ,
Le manche d'un efpieu, The flaffe of a Bore-fpeare. |
ps manche d'efrille, A dwar fe,elfe,dandiprat low

rub.

Manche de rafoir, Vn nez faiét à manche de rai-
foir, A Hawke-nofe. ;
Branfler au manche. To fhake in the belue, tobe vn-
Setled in heart. ;
Jeéter le manche apres la coignée. To increase a
misfortune by oe, carelefneffe; vpon tbe lope of
fome to forgoeall, :
De l'arbre d'un prefloir lemanche d'un Cernoir:
Prov, Looke Cernoir. 4

Manche: f. A fleewe; alfo, a long narrow bag (fuch as
Hypocras is made in; ) alfo,a flat, and lorge furnace,
made fomewhat like an Ouen, and vfed für the melting
of mettall new come out of the Mine ; alfo,a fleene-
net, a narrow and long fifh-net ; alfo, a flecue-like
narrowing of the (ex belweene two.laads; whence; —
La manche d’ Angleterre. Saint Georges chan-


ne . Li
Manche de coufteau, The Pitot; a long, and round
* fhelt-fifh. :
Manche Lombarde, Seeke Lombard, :
La manche delaparece. The Bellfey. &Poï@evin. |
Manches de deux paroiffes. Sleeves of two parifhes;
‘viz. whereof the upper part is of one fluffe, and é
ther of another. : Ant?
Ceft bien vn autre paire de manches. This is ano-
ther manner of matter. iar
C’eftoitdu temps qu’ on fe mouchoit encor à Ja |
manche. 7: was in the dayes of fimplicitie, or igno-
vance; it was at atime when people either knew nit,
or cared not for aid
Re res Ori ARR
è is cue 5 a but
Tsoi the belpe 'bsremeemamns, Ceca
5 anf


Original fro
SPL HEOHIO STATEUMVERSITY


*


ws


MAN


Manché: m.ée: f. Hafted,belued.
Manchereau: m. 4 little baft,or handle.
Les manchereaux d'la charrué. The plough-ban-
dles, or plough-bales.
Mancheron: m. À bracelet, or bracer ; alfo, a balfe-
Jleeue, or wrifi-fleeue; a flecue that couers the arme
om the elbow to the wri .
ns de robbes, The banging balfe-fleeues of
(ome fafbioned gownes.
Manchette: f. 4 cuffe,or band-ruffe. ÿ
Manchon: m, as Mancheron; alfa, a Snuffkin; alfo,
a fcarfe, bracelet, or other fuch like favour worne vp-
on the flecue, or arme in publike 5, and affem-
blies.
Manchon d'hermines. 4 Maniple charged,or pow-
dered with Ermines.
Manchot: m, otte: f Lame, that bath bat one band,
Mane wanteth r limme. bim(ife to detner the paf
anciper. To dispoffefe bi , to deliner offe ffi-
on, oF make Pata Seifinof ; to fell, paffe away,
gine up,
Mand, # Mandement, 4x old word.
Mandat: m. 4 Mandate,or Mandamus for the prefer-
ment of one toa Benefice.
Mandataire: m. 4 Mandatarie; one that comes to
a Benefice by a Mandamus.
ande. as Manne; a Maund. Pic. ,
Mande: m. ée : £ Commaunded; fentor called forsbid
come; diretted ; appointed, charged.
andegloire: f Mandrake; See Mandragore,
Mandement: m. fending,or calling foryalfoya charge,
bidding,or commaundement; a Mandate,Mandamus,
Commiffion Warrant, Appointment.
Mander.To bid,or command; to call by commandement;
10 fend, fend for, fend word of; to charge,or appoint,
‘A rien mander il ne faut point de meflager; (a
flowting anfiver for fuch as fay, Me voulez vous rien
imander:)
‘A main lavée Dieu mande la repeuë: Prov. The
beauens powre downe their bleffings on th upright,
‘A toile ordie Dieu imande le fil: Prov. God für-
thers their indeanors that take paines.
Mandibules: £ The iawes.
Mandication: f.2s Manducation.
Mandil: m. 4 Mandilian,or loofe (afocke.
Mandille: f 4s Mandil.
andole: f. 4 Cackarell (fifh.)
andore: f. A Kitt, fmall Gitterne,or inflrument re-
fembling a {mall Girterne.
Manda jane: f 4 broad (and old-fifbioned) fhort-
ford.
Mandouffiane. The fume.
Mandragore: f. Mandrake, Mandrage, Mandragon;
whereof there be two ee
Mandragore femelle. The female, or blacke Man-
drake,beares a darke greene leafe,and a long apple;but
is otherwifé like unto;
Mandragore mafle, Male Mandrake, white Man:
drake which beareth a round apple.
Mandre : f The Cell of a Monke,or Hermit; al, a bo-
ee pees 3 4 fall, or foddeving place, for beafis, in
t lds,


Mandregloire. «s Mandragore, ?
Manducation: f. An eating,or chawing, a grinding,er
champing with the teeth.


anducité: £ Great eating. qRab.
Mangest 4 (incl ef est mberenf 96 make


but one Minot. /


Go gle


Mangemerde: f. The mame of a fifh thats otberwife


Mangeoire: f. A manger alfo,the pullet,or (wallow.
Manger: m. Meat, food, fiuflenancebelly-timber viélu~


Manger. To est, feed, take fuflenance or nourifhment,


M A N
Droiét de manée de fel. That meafure- on eue-
rie bor[e-load of {alt brought into Bour gee | ofeue-
rie one that fells any falt in Bourges; due io the Abbot,
and Couent of S.Sulpice.

€: m. The manage,or managing of a borfe.

Maire m. A little,open, Male, ed nar-
row- ottomd Panier, or Maund, vftd for the carrying
both of vittualls, and of earth ; alfo, à Puppet ; (See
Mannequin;) alfo, a rude inflrument of Mufic ke;
whence;

Touér des cymbales,& manequins. To /eacher,
Touér des mañequins à baffles marches. The fame.
anequin €: m. Aaticke ingrauerie, or Caruing in
Wainscot, or Stone-worke, '

Manette:f.4 fmall band;alfo,a manacle,or band-fêtter.

Maneuvre. 4s Manouvrier.

Manganele: £ A certaine minerall which being melted
with glafe, amends the colour thereof there js alfo
good blue oror blacke enaviell made of it,
angé: m. ée: f. Eaten, fed on,.
Hainangéle lard, He onely is guiltie of the theft, or

coufenage.

“Ada fin fçaura on qui a mangé le lard. The thee
will at length be difcoucred, É
Qui a mangé le lard ronge l'os. He that bath eaten
the fweet fhall taf of the foure: or, let bim that bath
gotten the be} goe away with the worft.
Ceft trop mangé d'un painen vn licu, we bane
flayed too long in a place,or flood too much on one mat-
ter,
Ila mangé dé la biche blanche. Looke Biche,
Ilatnangéles pigeonncaux. Said of one whofe voice
being boar fèshath fome vefemblance with their cry,
Il ee ue vache enragée. Looke Manger.
se caille: f. Meat, food, (uftenance,viftualls.
Shgeal le es pourceaux. Swillings, wafh-
ins 4 ag ann i RER RE
uy a baillé logis pour mangcaille. He bath affie-
ned bima pp de & (pend bis ae

Mangeant. Eating, feeding, falling to bis viflualls,

En mangeant l'appetit fe perd : Proy. Eating and
drinking will take away any mans ftomacke,

En mangeant l'appetit vient : Pro.(Sometimes) the
more one eats the more be may,

Bonne befle s'efchauffe en mangeant: Prov. 4
good beaft heates it felfe while it eatcs; viz. eates hard,


dats heartily. ;
angeatif: m. iue: f. Eetable; which may be, or is fit


to be, eaten, p


called,Saupe.


alls eating fluffe.
Chair de mouton manger de glouron ; Prov.Looke
Mouton,


fall to bis viétualls.
Hmange bien. He 1.4 daintie feeder, or, be keepes
ood meat in his boufe. :
anger fon avoine en fon fac, as in Avoine ; or,as
Manger fon pain en fon fac,
Manger fon bled en herbe, To waft hisreuenue be-


ge it comein,

anger le cochon enfemble. To complot, conspire,

ioyne in a praëlife, conclude an enterprifé, together : |

(Belike from fome notable meeting of con{pirators,

whereat Pigs-flefh was their be/t, ov onely fare.)
Eee iy


14


*s


| sans


! - Mangerles doigts. ; a sly vos doigts
“à forts de tale) You would licke your lips after


them, UT .
M avec vne faim debifeuir, To ranine, or eat


D. |
pale od vn grain de {el. To eat a man at a mouth-
tracke of abraggadochio;) alfo,to eat his meat
“hafiily, or greedily , without flaying for any fawce,
: md other then a corne of salt will yeeld


verie greedi


Manges fon pain blancle prémier.To (pend bis bet

abilities Cimeflate, or bodie) on bis youth, and leave

» naught burwants, and weakenefe for old age.
Manger fon pain en fon fac. To Jaudge it or munch-
ion alone in a corner; to conceale obfcure, or pend pri-
nately his goods, good things, or parts, that others may
baue no part of them with them.

Manger des pois verds au veau. Looke Veau. ~
Manger de fa vache enragée. 11 a mangé de la,
&c. Heisreduced vntoa great neceffitie, or extremi-
tie she is ina miferable taking, alfo, be bath endured
much bardnelfe,or(as we fay) drunke of many waters.
Donner àinanger au chien, & au chat. To main-
taine hofpitalitie,to keepe a plentiful boufe. ”
Heft arable,& n’ofe manger; (Applyable to à mife-
rable Spare-good.) ;
Il feait plus my fon pain a He is no child,no
nource, no: babe; be knowes: “wayes to the wood

bay ei oe : chapon luy vient:Pro.Spend

à chapon mange chapon luy vient:Pro.Spen

and God find > re HEART 7
Aller & parler peut on,boire enfemble & manger
non: Prov. Such as defire to continue a friend, muft
not feed on him; or,tis better to vifit a friend sometimes
then to dell with him euer.
Brebis contées mange bien le loup: Pro.See Loup.
Ce qu'on donne luit, ce qu'on mange puit : Prov.
Th’ effects of bountie [bine of eating fmell.

| 1 fait mauvais aller au bois quand les loups f
mangent l'un l'autre: Prov. See Loup. '
Ine faut pas manger des Cerifes avec les grands
{eigneuts: Prov. Meane men are not to eat cherries
(vizi ave not to be uerie familiar) with great Lords ;
leaft the ftones of the beft five fafler at their eyes then

© (their portion) the worft into their mouthes, (Much a-
like whereunto,is;) à

_ Jlne faut pastnanger des prunes avec fon Seig-
neur: Prov. Fe Mf RR

__ Les gros poiffons mangentles menus: Pro, Poore
men ave (eafily) pure by the rich,the weake by the
firong,the meane by the mightie.,
Manivaife eft la faifon quand vn loup mange l'au-

-ktret Prov. See Loup. : Ef

Onfe faoule bien de mane tartes: Prove A man
may take too much of a g00 hing.
Peu à peu le loup mange l'oye: Prov. By little and

: tittle the Wolf eates vp the Goole. 13

“Qui mange l'oye du Roy il en chie la plume cent


as Prov, Looke Oye. ! ani
“Qui home dermang ahonte de vivre: Pro. He
=xthatsafhamed to eat is aff at!


medtoline. 7"


en staat


Leates Pearéswilb bis


hould not,pick fuch as
= Que Fa brebis loup ler ‘ Ce peor Beha
age a en


wi
Mar


_ Manier en bifle. Look


“Maniere : f Amaner, felhion,


PL ee er *


Mangetie: f. Gluttonie, rauening, devouring, baflie or
grecdie feeding; alfo,a roome,or boufe 10 eat in, M
Faire mangerie avec, To eat,or keepe houfewith. —

Mangefon: f. Az itch, aux.

Mange-fujet. À fit Epitbite for aTyrants 2 M

Mangeves: f. Mafle, Akornes ; any thing that wild
Swine vfually feed on. POLIS : Ya
angeur: m. Am eater, feeder, glutton, ranener.
Mangeur de charrettes ferrées: notable kill-c
monfirous buff-(nuff, terrible erér ; One that:
Rill all be meets,and eat alle kills. = 7 M
Mangeur de crucifix. A notorious bypocrite ; one

‘who to feeme the more holie, is ever kiffing of a Cru


cifix.

Hardi gaigneur hardi mangeur: Prov. The bet-
ter = falls to bis meat, the better ‘be followes bis |
ar ke. 370 418 iy

ngeure: f, The feeding of wild Boves, Oc: y
angeurs. Qui eftoient (jadis) ordonnez, & en-
voyez en garnifon pour contraindre vn obligé au
payement de fon deu, ou vn condamné à foufttir l
execution d’un Areft, ou d'un mandement; & int
“ques. ce Pon vivoit en fa maifon,& en fes biensya |.
es defpens. @Ragueau. Berar: ly woe 02
Mangonel: m. as Mangonneau.


Mangonifme: m. The craft of pampering, trimming,or ae:


- fe tting out of faleable things.
gonne: £. A Brokers wife, or brokerlie woman:
Mangonneau: m. Aa old-fafhioned Sling, or Engine
whereout flones,old yron, and great arrowes werevibe ‘
lently darted. ed
‘Mangonner. To pamper, trimme, fleeke, or (et outun-
to the eye fale things; alfo, to mangle, or disfigure by !
mangling. | na, |
Mangouri: m, A bafè Turkifh coyite, whereof fixteene
doe little more then counter uayle our jennie, :
Manguiere: f. 4 great-beaded,and ‘hort-falked nayle
ufed about fhips. mat by |
Maniable : com, ‘Tvattable, wieldable , bandiéable,
handfome,tollerable, paffable, ©” LE,
Maniacle. # Maniaque. Esp le
Maniance: f, Amanagingsbandling wielding,
Maniaque : com. Mad, franticke,raging, firious out
ragious braime-ficke,bedlam-like. | if
Morelle maniaque. Seeke Morelle. -
Manicles, atanacles,band-fetters,or gyues.
Manicordion: m. An (old-fafhioned) Claricord. 14
Manie:f. Madnefe, firrie,rage(by too great abundance
of good bloud intoxicating the bead.) ;
Mani: m. de : f Handled,banded wielded, ynanaged,
often touched,or vfed. ee
Manié de fortune. ffited,or perfecuted by fortune,
fallen into miferie,come to decay.  : Be sa
Maniement: m.A handling ynanaging swielding,ufing,
- (often ees SuSE TO LU iM
~ Maniement de fa perfonne, The carriage of bis


erfon. €
snier. To handle, band yhanage pvield oft touch.) ©
Mie rebond nd phanee weld ft


Ve


‘ harpes: To i 2 de . éy
jor, to-play a clenlie Pre ne
formes Kind, forts à
~~ cuflome, ofe,rvont, guile ; fits oe tics al
tion. Rt Shit rt
Parmaniere dédire. As it were,as one fhould fi
à RME se


MPOriginal from
pre OUiOsSIATE \NIVERSILY F


or prints in fand.


certaine.


wrayed,


parent,


king ina matter,


Tr


Paradife,


Manjore. Ama.


: but raw,poifon,


beame is turned,


labrian,
Mannequin: m.44mle,
: row- ii ica
wig}


sit JIUZEC


M AN:
- Manieur. defable. Moulder or air of Medals;


uet ; m. The ey called Graine, gas


Maniguette : f. 2s Mani

Manille: i The bandleafe pot, sr) ob 9:

Maniller : m, Abraceler makers. me tatin Pe
pifls Churches gathers for a poore Pa eacher,


nues m. A gripe, fill pan dl of; ; bundle 3
bottle ; alfoa wrift-band ; or,as Manipulon. - |...)
Manipulon: m. A Maniple, or Fannell; a-fcarfe-liké

ornament worne about the left wrift of a {acrificing


Prie,

Manvel :f, An inflrument that goes witha vice, ba: .
uing at it end a booke, whereby difioynted bones are
à fetin their former places ; alfo, the ‘bandle whereby a
grindleflone css turned; and bence;
Manivelles, The braces wherby a windle(fe,or wind-


anne: f.4 mauad, flasket, open basket or pannier ba-
uing handles ; alfo, aucine of earth, or. fand whith gi-
ueth fome bope of gold to be founds, alfo,Manna,or the
deaw of beauen, gathered in bot countries from plants,
and trees whereinit congeales,and sefernediag 4 io
tle purger of choler.; whence; à
Manne de Calabre,calabrian Manns; the be end
moft lafting Manna ; the graines wherof befinall;hea-
uie wbitecleere,trag/parent, and verie meets
Manne de Cotton. Great graines of Manna refem-
bling lockes of woall,or bumbaf; the worfe cm of Le-
want Manna,and the worft of all others,
Manne d Encens. Graine, crummes, or} pt
of pr Ling from it while it is in
c fucilles..The beft kind of =
73, | re from off t the leaues of bearbes, ond te
Manne de Levant, £euant Manna; afecond
rail) kind of Manna, infeciaur in goodneffe to. os


Mania Hy anifcare,woremaip bande |
NT nie sm éerk Wraaght, or done with 7 M


Manifagtarer. 70 wor ama withthe bands, shy
Manifefte : re tle fl declaration; Ares
Ja partie honteufes wader Honteux, .
Ci com, «Mayifeh, apparent, euident, notoyi-
ous, open, ton pablcke pla


ine,eleere udoubleds.


Manifelté: me : £, Manif ed, made apparent, pub-
lifhed, Geng Poona pe be:


| Manifeflement Mon apparent pent ident
ly,publickly, undoubtedly,certa

Manifefter. To manifeft; publifh, declare, detre, res |

weale, bewray,diftoner, make Plaines cleeresopen; ap-


Manigance:f. An ill-fèt countenance,an unfetled fa-
foion, an vnflaied or unfcemelie, behauiour; alfo,to-


wert dealing,priuate [ou ffiing, fecret prathifing or pac


Manivotter. To bandle,or finger much; bufly to trim,
dreffe, or fold up with the bands, as children doe their


Maniot: Et bs beget, |


nel D D:
Pannier ; alfoya little


M A N


ore ‘eape-bead,or mecle, made of bullrufbes., and
ued by ffbermen ; alfo,a Puppet, or. Anticke 5 bate
anequin.
oti €. as Manequi
Manneux : me eufe:f, acongng e a mannd, Ly


Manoir: m. 4 Man anion, 4 annor,or Mannor-boufe : the
Seite of a Mannor; a place,or chiefe diveling place; als
fo,a reome in a boufe,


| ava rae f, A hind of long Gauntlet ; or 4 Manipu-


Manotte: f,.À dite band a childs band.
Manottes, Manaclessband- Lfêtters,gyues,
Manouvrer.7o bold, 50 cupie pale fes (an old Normand


| Manouvrier : m. 4 mechanical perteman, ney


vey jan. artificer,or bandicrafts-mate. ..
Manque : f, Defedt,lackewant. |
Manque: com. Deféélinelacking, wanting; mained,
lame ; declining in the wane; salfo,leffes whence; Va-
demanque. Goe leffesat Primero, :


| Manquemnent : m,Want sackesdefeti,need ; or aan


Mantelet: m, 4 little mantle; alfo, a: ge


tings lacking; declining ywani
Manquer. To want, lacke, need, fuile of, be defeélie.
Manquer à fa parole. To breake bis werd.
Manquerot. À maimed, or lane creature; one that
wants fome of bis limmes.
Manfais. Deniers, & folz.manfais. Be! double tbe
worth of Deniers, and folz Tournois. ~
Et: m.4 Clue, Cons Ringdoue : : Pic
Man antelies ee Mancelles,
onnier : m, A dele nbabiten bide one
go bath a manfioninap


seagate! Sp Fah urine


ble ; tame,traéia


Mani yee Gen, meek mildly, comteoufh, :


Sprig A


Manfucide: EGenileneft meetenef sabe on


neffèstraltableneffe, bumilitie; tamen
Me +f, rhin alfoyas Menthe, fe


Mante velué, 474 ug,rough mantle, dione a


Manteau :m. 4 cloke; alf the neutres chit.
ney.
. Lemanteau @ yn cheval. His baine,or
Les blancs manteaux. 4 antient Order.of begeing
Friers, for whom S, Lewis built a bonfé or Conent in
Paris; afterwards giuen by. Philip the Faire. vate the
Guillemins (an Order of Hermits inflituted. by
laume Duke of Guienne,and Earle of. md
yet retaine it,and with itthis title...
Droiét de man teaux, Cloke. png
Pendre fon manteau à foib crie
. aduife of a foole,or almes of a be er; vainelÿ torclie
ps meake belpes, or feigle bis. refolution on. a. tottering
Ha dation. on.
Coeur content, & manteau fur Fefpaule : :Pro,See
Coeur ; ou,Content,
Fy demanteau gl faiét beau: Prov, 4 Acte


is but a comber in faire weaiber.


. Mantel :m.as Manteau,..:


Mantele: m. €e: E Cloked ; conered with lé ie
ed,ar fhadewed vader a mantel, .

mnie Tacloke; tocpucr with a cloke; te Les
Shroud,or fhield,as Under a mantelet.


… boufà,or fhed of boards onder’ which eo alias
. ¢bing & rampire are h fhrowded , cade
wbaifoeuer is Hot — by tbe hé 5 a


+


COS


THE OHIO STAT EL IE ER


tie
esr.


* ihn +5


sw, See CO, | 4 PET Bon * oa


M AN


MAR


Manteline :£. 4 mantle, fleight robe, or cloke, worne
looffe about the fhoulders ; alfo, a Friers weed, or ba-
bi


it.

Manthe.# Manre velué,

Manticore: f. Arauenous,and mankind Indian beaf,
that hath a face like a man, a bodie like a Lyon, and
three rankes of verie fharpe teeth.

Mantil: m. 4 table-cloth, .

Mantin :m. 4 kind of Prawne,

Mantonel: m, The catch of a doore,


Mantonniere : f.4 chocke,or bob under the chinne; al-


fo,the chinne-peece of an belmet ; alfo, a chinne-clotb,
or the little peece of fine linnen wherewith a masked
Ladie couers ber chinne.
Habillement de tefte Ainantonniere. 4 caske,or
an belmet bauing achinne-peece.

Manuel: m. 4 Manaell ; a portable(prayer)booke.

Manuel :m. elle: «Manuel! , bandie , of the band,
wrought or done with the bands.

— manuel. Prefent money readie coyne.

Juftice manuelle, That rights it feife; Looke Tuf-


tice.
Seing manuel. Ones band fubfcribed marke or figne
put to,
Manuellement: bailler m,7o give in band, pay readie
money ,deliner prefently.
Manufacture: fas Manifa@ure,
Manumiffion: f 4 manumiffion, or difiniffing ; a free-
mi infranchifing, jetting at libertie, deluering from
onaage, 4


Manutenteur: m, 4 maintainer, vpholder, protector,
conntenancer.

Manutention : f. 4s Maintenance.

Mappemonde : f. Amap of the world.

Mappule : £.4 little peece of Lawne wherewith the(Sa-
cramentall) Pix is couered.

Maqueteau: m. A Mackerell (fifh;) alfo, a (man)
b


Maquereaux. Redftorches, or (bots on the legs of

fuch as vfe to fit neere the fire.

Maquereau baftard. The baflard Mackerell; fome-

what lefJe,and le[fe good,then the right one.
Maquerelage : m. The practife, or trade, of bawderie.
Maquis :f. A (woman) bawd; the folicitrix of

lecherie. 1


Maquerelleux: meule : f Full of bawderie, ufing the .


trade of baderie,belonging to the bawdie art,
Maquignon: m. A Hucfler, Broker, Horfe-{courfer,
coujening Marchant. ;
Maquignonnage : m. Deceitfull brokage, bargaining
for, or felling of; things ; bence,alfo,the trade of berf-
Stour fing.
sdsenipinenoer. To play the Broker, or Horfe-(cour-
fer, to deale deceit fully in bargaines ; alfo, to play tbe


awa.
Mar: m.harenc demar. 4 great, faire, fat,and full-
rowed Herring.


Marabais. 4 kind of baft cqne. -

Maraine :f..4 Godmother,

Ea ae
ee heaton in the bi n |

irom pda eat


Go gle


Marafmé : m.ée:£. wholly confumed, wafled, withe-
red,exbaufled or drained of moiiure. :
Maraftre : f. 4 flepdame,or flepmother.
ui a m: ea le Diable en I’ atre: Prov, He
that bath a flepdame bath a Diuell to bis dame.
araftrefque. Stepmotber-like.


Maraud :m, A vogue begger vagabond; avarlet,raf- |


call, fcoundrell bafe knaue.
araudaille : f. 4 packe of lowfie rogues,a crue of beg-
gerly vagabonds; alfo, rafcallitie, feoundvelli(me.
Maraude: f. A begger-woman,great laxie queane,vo-
guifb bedge-whore, Tinkers-bitch.
Marauder. To beg, to play the rogue,er idle vagabond,
Maraudife: f. Beggerie, roguerie, idle knauerie, bafe
vaga bondrie.
Maravedi: m. A little Spanifh coyne, whereof 34 make
but the Royall,ov v3,d.fterl.
Marbre:m. Marble,
Marbre gentil, The bard white marble whereof fla-
tues,or images be commonly made.
arbre grené. See Grené.
Marbre Parien, A marble of a whitifh colour, which
indures all weatbers,and being polifhed bath a refem-
“blance of flefh.
Marbte ferpentin. À (potted marble, the ground
whereof is darke greene,the (pots light,
Marbre TT Whereof there be two kinds; one
of a grayifh groun
re another blacke , and beautified with golden
ops.
Le marbre de foy n'a que faire de peinture: Prov.
A beautifull thing needs no lufler , an excellent thing
no commendation,
Marbré:m.ée : f. Marbled,of marble,with marble,like
unto marble,
Pierre marbrée. Any bard, or grained fone, which,
as marble may be finootbed, or polifhed.
arbreux : m, Full of;or abounding with marble,
arbrier : m. À marble-cutter, one that worketb in


marble,

Marbriere :f. À quarrey of marble.
arbrin :m.ine:£ Of marble,refembiing marble,
arc: m. Marke (a mans name; ) alfo, the mother,
| erage lees, bottome, or fetlings of liquor ; al.


which baue beene Saucexia, or firained ; alfo, greura

manured,or-dunged for the next yeares tillage, (Locke

the next marginal! word.)

Mare des raïfins. The mother of the grapes; the

busks,bullings, or skins of grapes ofter the laft prefing.

Faire vn marc.To put grapes into the preffe ; to make,

or make readie, a preffing of grapes,

Marc: m. 4 Marke; balfé a pound, er eight ounces of
gold, filuer jor Billon,

arc d'argent. Is effeemed at 10 1, Parifis by the

cuflomes of Melun; and is duevnto a Lord fir the
right of Reliefé, and Rachapt, over and befides a
peaves reuenew, ifthe land be valued at aboue 20 1.


Droi&t de Matc. 4 Sol upon eerie Mare of gold ;
iij.d. vpon euerie Marc of filuer; and j.d. upon enerie
Marc of Billon perfeéily coyned, is the Prouofi of tbe
Mints fee,befides bis ordinarie intertainment.
Chargé a poids de marc. Soundly charged throughly
loaden ; (appliable toone that bath taken in bis liquor

ee

iens de chien,& marc d’ argent feront tour yn au
iour de jugement: Proy. See lugement, M

ar-


{potted with two ov three fundrie |


0,the groffesar thicke fubRance that remains of things ‘
cb


7


a ah dm


.
- a he


| ah das


<


M A R°


rare mm. A kind of viner fowle,

peer & afsite. |

Marcaflin:m..4 young wild boares ‘afoot y orgrice;

alfo,a kind of minerall; whence;

Mar v jaulñc. Red vitriol or as Maxcalsites

Boy Ite if. The Marcafite,or fire-flone ; wae

wah brimftone sand is of two kinds; the

a as gold; and the white (the purer and A


ofthe two)like filuer. |

| ee che: 248 corne, Summer Bari, Summer

“corne. A»
| Marcez: m. March corne, Summer corne ; fucb as is
1 fomed Seated ler ent
| Marcgrave: m. À Marqu

archage. Droid de inarchage Lu onde Dei
Marchal, 4 Marefchal,
| Marchand: 1. À Marchant a traderya traffickersal-
2 yar occupier or tradefinan ; any Shopkeeper that re-
tailes or fells wares of the better fort , as filkes, good
clothes or fluffes ; whence; ,
, Marchan defoye. ASilkeman.
| Souper de marchand 4 /arge,or great fupper. \
Vn matchand qui prend l argent fans compter,
B ne pefer. aibeeh
. Se faire inarchand de poiffon la vieille de Pal
" | ques. To enter into a proféjfion when there 1 ee of
À it; ta doe any thing vafeafonably,or tao late.

Marchand qui ne gaigne perd: Prov, The Mat-
| .. chant that gaines not loofis ; antd yet ;
… In’eft pasinarchand qui toufiours gaigne: Prov.
He trades not well that alwayes is a gainer.
=: Marchand quipérd ne peutrite: Prov. A Mar-
LE : _ Chant loofing cannot laugh.
À. Aujourd'huyimarchant demain imefghant: Prov,
| To dayaTradei to morrowa Traytor,
.- Oumarchand où larron : Prov. Either a tvader,or
a flealer ; See Laxron.
| : Bonne marchandife trouve toufiours fon mar-
d: Prov. Good chaffer cannot want a chapman,
| Marchand m.ande :f. Of, or belongngte, a Mar-
» chant,or Market; well traded ynuch vfed,verie com-


- mon,
7 Livre marchande. sre Livre.
4 Papiermarchand Browae,or blotting paper.
* Placemarchande. The market place, or place of ot
_dinatie bargaining ; and paiments ; any free place
where men may mect on eusn tearmes ; whither any
man that sa may comesor mere 4 man,while he lifts,


may flay
: Poids and. Looke
te im.éc: f. prod en’ bought and fold bar-
paye agréed for ; ale, bouered, or flood a-
- looft from; braued, affronted,or dealt with afarve of’;
ellesAtlened,or trifled out, as the time, for an aduan-


it. Asa Marchant, Marchant-like, :
Ta trafficke, trade, play tbe Aarchant,


— ‘alfo,to delay,or trifle out the time; alo, to houer or
© ffand'aloofé from; to braue, or deale with, dy off
_ = (before a clofing.) either : chrcumfpcély and for.


Hmtage or covirdly and in
Marchande la reed To bireone 16 due
: Ils ral sandent àfe tourner. They bereediogr a.


u bout, 10 turne,


’ * Sans marchander, Prefently, inlantly, readily, out
ee hand, without any peur bagsines or flan-


ai


buy pe 3 to cheapen, bargaine, cope or agree for? 5


MAR


i, eon on thé matter. M
\ | Marchandife:€ Marchandifé, commodities , ware,


chaffer, fluffes alfo,trading,tvaficking bargaining pc=
cupying, buying and felling , mechanical commerce,or
negociation,
archandife de gueule, vidtualls,

Merduecli(c Latine. The beft ware, or choicef
Sluffe,called fo by Marchants.
Demenerinarchandife. Totrade, or tumble ower
commodities,
Marchandife n’efpargne nuls: Prov. The Mar-
chantsware bids men beware, for he will gaine by bis
father ; or, Mavchandife bolds no friendfbip,yeelds no
fauour hath no confider ation but of gaine.

Marchand dife qui plaift eft à demy vendué: Prov.
ne the eye,and picke the purfe ; or, content the eye,
your bargaine is ait made,
Bonne marchandife trouve toufiours fon Mar-
chand : Prov. Good ware is euer farnifhed with chap-
men; or, finds euer flore of cuftomers.
On n’a jamais bon marché de mauvaife mar-
chandise : Prov. One cam neuer baue ill ware cheap
ynough; or pis bargaine is not cheape that bath ill ware
for bis money,

Marchant. as Marchand.

Marchant. Marching, fle ‘pping,treading, going, walking,

pacing, footing it,

Marché: m.4 Market; Marketflead,or Market place;

alfo,a bargaine,or match.

Bon marché; & grand marché. Good cheape, dog
cheape, a low rale,a veafonable price ; whence s

Bon marché tire argent de la bourfe : Prov, No
pickepurfe toa cheape commoditie,

Il n'aura ia bon marché qui ne Je demande:
bh Thofe that require not, bane not, things good
cheape.

On n’a jamais bon marché de mauvaifemarchan-
dife: Prov. For naughtie ware no price is low y-
nougb.

Le vin du marché.Looke Vin.
*AT hoftel prifer,& aumarché vendre: Prov.a-
lue at bome, but fell in the market.

On ne s’en va pas des foires comme du marché:
The cafe is not glike; for at Fairesthey pay toll, in

‘Markets none...

Si le fol n'alloir au marché on ne vendroirpas la


mauvaife denrée : Prov. If fioles spent mot 10 Mar: |


kets bad wares would not be fold (se fle are fime-
times good for fomething.)

Marche: f. kis ape ion coaftjer quarter; alo, “amarch,
Dr erst
of a flaire ; alfoya flep, or print ofa foot 52

> fea mañch,or mar chi Rnb er a Unga,
or Organ key; alfo,the finger-boord of | aVioll.
Baffles marches. Pedalls; the low low eres of fome Ore
gans tobe touched with the fect ; whence;
Touér des manequins à bafles marches, To lea-
cher; a
Tenir des baies marches, To bold of the Pace, or,
bis wife to be his maifler.
Doubles marches.Refis,or breathing fepsthe broad
ee ofa _~ peck flare,

jamber fur les matches d'autruy. To vf pe, à in-


croach on,or meddle with, another mans right,


Marché: m. ée:f. Marched, walked, paced ; feed, s


mes proceeded in or on.


die ce m, À mar chingyroalking, pacing, fee j


ping,treading,proceeding. eM
i ar-


a.countrey  alfoya greecesthe flep |


*
&
n

À


=
S


“ge
se


MAR


Marche-pied: m, A foot-floole ; alfa, a flep, low floole
or bench,that belpes one to get vpon a bigher thing.
‘A marche-pied.4fafbion of ] in in ome goes
 Pamping in the water and carries before bim (or ano-
ther for bim)a bal fe bow-net, y
Marcher: m, 4 pace gate walke;tread, flepping,going,


ing. :

M afl mp 2d swaike,tread flep,footit,te

proceed; alfo,as Marchifer.

Hunt cela laquet.Tread out you flattering rogue;
a phrafe ufed in contempt of a bafe obfernant parafite,
who ferues for nothing but to applaud enerie doting
fpeech,and to tread out euerie dot of (pit, bis fond pa-
tron deliuers,

Marcher en pas de loup. To wag or se, lites
thee fe, cunningly,couertly, gingerly, faire and fèftly.
re tip en cae Il ne marche de &c.He

. &vapt or rani{ht with pride or 10y 3 be knowes not the
ground be goes on, x
Marcher à quatre pattes. To ereepe on all foure like
a beaft.

Cela marche à quatre rouës. That goes very round:
ly forward.

Marchette :f. 4 Little flep,a finall fogting,

Marchettes. Small Organ keyes.

Marchir. as Marchifer. '

Matchis : m. 4 thicke trace, or traét of men, or beafis
frequencie of fleps,many footings together; alfo,a pat
beaten out by often patting,or treading.

Marchifer. Toborder, adioyne, or lie fo ncere together
that one touch another ; 10 abutt, or bound one on ano-
ther,

Marchons: m.Stilines fir wine veffells to fland on.
Macnte :£ Amarching, walking, pacing, treading,
epping, footing, proceeding, |

Mae eee de mar. Looke under Droiét,

Martciew To receive the rent, or fine, Marciage,

Marcoter. as Marquotter.

Marcotte.as Marquotte,

Marcou:m. Anoldmalecatagibeate

Modeste . Looke Mat de cathene , i# Ca-

ene.

Mardelle d’ vne puits. The briake,or brimme of a well;
or,more properly,the round, and bigb border of wood,
or flone,that compalfes beautifiesand keeps whole,the

top of that brinke,or brimme.

Mardi. Tewfday.

Mardi gras. Shrowe-tewfday, =
Cela fent fon mardi Le That is a mof} licentious
at; or (in matters of diftourfè) that is a moft bread
beech ; (from the libertie taken by many, that day, to
tax men,and talke at their pleafure.)

Mare:f, A flanding poole, or water neerea boufe fit for
the watering of cattell, and other ufes of busbandrie;
alfo,a little fifh-pond.

Maré: m. ée : £ Moored; falened with cables, beld fapt


À - byankers, as a fhipina Ce


Mareant. Mooring. : ;
est Seis alfa mates alte tides or
a; o7 rolling o
; DA br as blowes from fea, "Lai
Sentirla marée. be oke like a whore (Venus the


eat: ip was bred of the fea-
Manta Mn M ;
arelle :£ A/quare ina


of


ov on the bachfde
a paire 0) rf a ip; and
Fd ely 9 a '


| Go gle


MAR


Marenge : £ Our(ordimarie)blew Titmoufe. :

Marer. To moore,or be moored ; tolie faftened with ca-
bles,or bold faft by ankers, within abarbor, or neere to
a es

Marefcage : m. 4 great marfh, fenne,or moore ; a fen-
scat serie place,ground,or countrey. :

Marelcageux im. eufe: f. Fenaie, moorifh, marfh-
(1


Marefchal:m, 4 Marfhall of akingdome,or of a camp,
(an bonourable place; ) alfo,a Black-finith ; alfo,a Far.
rier ,Horfeleech,or Horfe-finith; alfo,a Harbinger;and


chence;
Marefchal du corps du Roy, The Kings chiefé Har-


binger. ee
Marelchaux de France. The Lord Marfhalls of
France; (wbereof;in Francis the firfis time there were
bat two,now there be ten) who baning their feuerall !
Prouinces affigned them by the King, vide circuits into
them, tobe prefènt at all genevall mufters ; to fee bow
militarie difcipline is obferued in garrifons ; to view
the fortifications and reparations of frontire towncs ;
the munition,and vittualls of Arfenalls and flore-hou-
Ses; and laftly,to prouide for the punifhment, and fup-
preffion of all vagrant idle,and lewd rogues : Us doi-
vent fe rendre aux armées les premiers en bon e-
quipage; Et font fous le Conneftable (fayes Ra-
gueau) Vader whom as they commaund all Dukes,
Earls, Barons,Captains and Genfdarmes ; (0 may they
neither gine battell,make proclamation,nor mufler a-
ny men without his commandement (fayes a good En-

lifh Author.) |

arefchal : m,ale:f, Of or belonging to,made ov done
by,a Smith,or Farrier,
Main marefchale..4 Smithes band; a fifi that works

Suekchanebes 4 oi fhall.fé of
areichaucee: f. A Marfhall-fbip ; the place of a
Marf(hall; alfo,the Marfhall-[ey,or PL

Marefchaucées: £Timber,or fluffe to build withall,

Marefchauflée, & marefchauflées. «s Masefchau-
cée,& Marefchaucées.

Marets: m. 4 Meere,Fenne (finall)Marfb.
Us'eft fauvé par lesmarets. Said of one that bath,
with fhame ynough,cleered bimjelfe of a difhonor ,diffi-
cultie,or danger wherein be was ingaged.

Marez. as Marets.

Marfil: m. Fuorie ; 07,the Elephants tooth vawronght.

Margaigne. a Mortgage.

Margaignon: m. A male Eele. @Langucd.

Margaite. 4 Sauoyan bird of fundrie colours.

Margariton: m, Pearle; or the powder thereof.

Margafin. as Magazin.


Marge: f.The margent of a booke;al/o,any edge,brinke, |


er brimme.
Marge du dos.The inner margent;the [pace left white
betweene the letters and binding of a booke.
Margelle. as Mardelle, :
Marger. To make a margent; brinke,edge,or brimme.
Marcon, (fir Marguerite, er, rafical déni
‘ot. Marguerite; or, a7 iminutine
thereof) Mego Pee
Tieu ticumargot. Come beaf? come; a call for a Cow,
uféd by countrey wenches.
La iument ot qui fe bride par la
cue, ASbip,or Galley ; alfa, a certaine engine vfed
D fall coyners.
Marg
M
Siac


- Fr pea
:m. ée:f. Dreffed, or made toyeeld flore of
Mar-


———-_f in Nad a D:

Fes: + = ER

ns 5 ON
+ . ez
iy M A R


‘ 2 À Margotter, Looke Marquotter.
he | flead of kiffing to bite

| Margoutc: fas Marquotte. sin
Margueilliet sm. 4 Churchwarden. fx


‘ | : Aargarite)pearle; alfo,a Daifie.
as it


wild Daifie, called (otberwife)Bruifewort,:: ;
“Ala franche Marguerite. Afier the plaineft fafhi-
~ 02,in 2 homelse manner,ewem as one thinkes,
| Marguillerie :£. 4 Churchwardenfhip.
| Marguillier: m, 4 Churchwarden. 10
ar guy : me À Fanchion,Cartelax,Hanger. (v.m;)
| Mari :m. A busband. i” 19
Mari cocu. An Hedge. (parrow , Dikefmowler*Dun-
} > necke ; See Cocu, qu
Femme bonne qui a mauvais mari,a bien {@bvent
le coeur marri : Prov. The good wife of an ill busband
hath often a forrewfüll beart of ber owne, ma *
| Mariable: com: Mariablesweddable,mariagéable,
| Mariage: m. Mariage mmatrimonie wedding wedlock;
ts alfo, the mariage 2004, ov portion which a man bath
_ «|e witbbiswifes alfo, a game at cards refembling (fome-
what)our Saint, |
Aide de mati age. Looke Aideschevels,  ;
Brefdernariage encombré. which a woman may
bring within the yeare and day after ber husbands de.
«|. ceafè, for the recouerie of ber goods and po[feffions ali-
= | ened,byhim or any other without ber confent or by ber
|. felfe without bis permiffion,and autboritie, "+ |
Mariauletsm, 4 man ofnoaccountefeeme,or credit ;
| | ene thats not woribie of belief; an infaffcient wit.
| meffe,whether it be becaufe of bis yong age, ot finall bo-
nefliés or, as Marioler. F ;
| Marie: f. Marie. - des
| © BaindeMaric. Maries bath a cauldron, or ketile
| fill of bot water.
| Herbe de S. Marie. Looke Herbe. i
_ | SeaudeS. Marie. Maries Seale, our Ladies Seale,
__ blacke Brionie, ihe wild Vine. eM:
_  Violettes de Maric.Marians Violets couentrie bells,
Couentrie Rapes(of the qualities,hind, and (almofl)tbe
| formesof Canter burie bells). - b fiat
Marié sin. ée:f. Maried, wedded, e(ponfed.
Lamariées Bride,a Spoufe,
_ | Aujourduy marié demain marri "Prov: T9 day
= wifefill,te morrow wofill... : emo
| Mariée: f The caule,or kell ofa beaf. a
Aariement : m. A marying wedding, efponfing,
Maricr, To mavic,wed,beflow in mariage, gine in wed-
locke, ioyne in matrimonie. Saars\dn
+ - ne 2 To marie, wed, efpoufe, enter into wed-
. locke, af a
~ Marier lacave, & le puits: To mingle wineand wa-
ter together, ww
Mariets:f. Mariets Marians Violets, Coentrie bells.
| Maticur:m. Amatcher, amarier, a maker of mari-


Matilit A Regiller.o+ Matricular


Nim, Marine; ofthe fea; weere to thefeay borne
eo ea, REAMAN He à 1723022:


_- Herbe marine. Slanke, wake, Lauer, Sea-grage


ei > Æ weed | TPO ve ii thd
|» Paille'matihe.tookeSagnie, © +:
| POA A nos 1 es SNM;
a “a.


= LR : 5 Go gle


a


Margouiller. To qua; to mumble with the teeth, in


| Marguerite: £ Margaret (awomans name 3) af, a
arguewite blanche. The great white Daifie called


4
Marguerite des prez.Th'ordinarie, little ywbise;and


MAR
Marine: flami@gr. The fea; or things of the fea ; as a
tide, dre.
Grandhomme de marine. 4x excellent Mariner,
or Saylor ; a great Sea-man.
Marine noire. The name ofa grape.
Matiné :m.ée :f Poiffon mafiné, That tafls much of
te water, or of the pannier af, drefjed,or handled
“bike fea-fifh. ai
Marinefque, ‘Ala nar. Mariner-like ; afier the fafhi-
on of Mariners.
Marinelques: f Long Mariners flops, breeches,bofe.
Marinette f The Load fione ; (anold word.)
Marinuer:m, 4 Mariner Saylor, Ship-man,Skipper,Sea-
Man ; alfo,as Nautil.
In'eftfibon marinier qui ne perifle : Prov, The
skilfille=! Mariners feed Haddockes. .
arinier: m. Of, or belonging to,a Mariner.
. Pierre mariniere, The Adamañt,or Magnes flone, -
Marin-onfroy. The name of an apple wbich is round on
Wone fide and flat on th’otber.
Marjolaine: f.Marierome fiveet Maricrome fine Mar.
ierome, Marierome gentle,
Marjolaine d'Angleterre Time (called fo by meny;)
alfo,wild Origan,wild Marierome,Englifh wild Mar-
Jerome, groue Marierome.
Marjolaine baftarde, Baflard Marierome, Organie,
Spanifh Organe. ”


| Marjolaine de Curé. Male Kaot-graffe, Birds-


tongue, Swines-graffe.
arjolaine gentile. Marierome gentle, fine Marie.
* rome, fweet Marievome, é
* Märjolaine fauvage. as Marjolaine d'Angleterre,
La grande Marjolaine.The great fveet Mariereme;
talledthus(belike)to make a difference betweene it,
‘and th'ordinarie Marjolaine, which isle e,and fivee-
ter thenit. ,
Petite Marjolaine. Marierome gentlebfine Marie-
vome, fweet Marierome.
Primme Marjolaine, Fine Marierome, (weet Mar.
jerome ; alfo,Time,
Mariolement: m. Bawderie Ja/ciniou/neffe, a wanton,
or My cd tricheyas the groping of a wench ec.
Mariolet: m,.4 leacher wencher,wanton youtb, lati.
wious yonker; ov as Mariaulet,
Marioles : £ The waddles,and ones of a Cocke; (wan-
Maa be : , ia aN
arion: f. Marian (a proper name for a woman.) *
Robin a trouvé Mason. Facke hath met ih GU 3
a filthie knane with a fulfomie Queanes 7 :
Marionnette::f. Little Marian, or Mal; alfa kind of
\ finall German Ducket of bafe gold; alfova Puppet.
Marifque : f. 4 great ere Bes that vipening,opens
on the Vind difpoers ise GE :
Marital: m. ale: f. Belonging toa mariage or wedlocke
(efpecially om the busbands eS OT OE I


Maritime : com. Maritime; ncere the fea,bordéring on |


the fea, of the fea fide or coaft; of, of belonging to,the


a.
Marlane falé, Adried whiting, LE
Marïliere : f Amarle-pit. ‘ iinet yi lee
Marlotte: f. 4 fafhion of light gowne, or mantle for the
Summer, > | ~ TE €
Marmaille: £ Young raftalls or Scoundrells, rakebells


ipflrings the frie of the vulgar ; a troupe of lewd, |


or
idle,or unprofite hoberdiboyes,
Marm ide, Pierre mat. À kind of vetie bard gray
marble, . A : mee À wi Meg E :
Marmaux. Arbres mar. Hedge-tréess wild wees: |
Bourbonnois. ae Mar.


.


LS RCI SE


A


FT


a
a
¥
a


4
-
=
4

rs

3
2
‘4


MAR


| Marme rayée, 4 kind of findrie-colgured fès-ffb.


Marine. for mon arme,or, mon ame : qLangued.

Marmentau. Bois marm. 4 regret mae beau-
tifull tuft of bigh trees...

Marines. À rufticall oatb; as in Marme,

Marmite: £ A great pot,kettle, boyler,or boyling lead ;
efpecially fuch a one as is vfed for the boyling of bee cf

“an the kitchins of Abbeyes.

Marmiteux: m. eufe: £ Wretched, poore, miferable,
hear tleffe,that lookes pitifully on it,

Marmiton :m. A Scullion or kitchin boy; alfosa grea-
Jie,or flouenlie knaue ; and,a faucie, Mars or kna-
uifh fellow; alfo,a pettie,or young fèboole-boy.

Marmitonnage : m. Sculionrie,or th Office of a Seul.
Lion ; alfo,nafiine [ft ,greafineffe, flouenline[e.

Marmitonne:f. 4 Kitchin-fluffe wench, or Kitchin
wench ; a filthie greafie queane,

Marmitonner. To play she faucie vogue, the malapert
rafcall,to vfe knauifb or faucie tricks ; alfosto tend the
beefe-pot like a Kitchin-boy. . .

Marmno, as Denté.

Marmonné: mée:f. Dambté muette be.
tweene the teeth..

Marmonner. as Marmoter,

Marmontaitie, 4s Marmotaine,

Marmor: m. The Goldenie, or a kind thereof ae


Dente.


Marmorat : m. Morter, wherein, among other things,


little peeces of the befi marble are put.

Manmofet :m. as Marmoufer; 4//0,a lewd flatterer,
or vicious fellow, efpecially the bale flatterer of a
Prince,who to feed bis maifiers bumor, applauds, and
and imitates,bws foulet vices.

Marmot: m, 4 Marmofetzor little Monkie; alfo,as ;

Marmotaine : f. Th’ Alpite Moufe, or mountaine Rat ;

nee ed,great-eped,and fhort -eared; as big,but
mot GE aConie; berbaireis, asa Badgers, ms

of diners colours; ber voyce verie fmallaud.
ie taile but fhort ; sher caves Po fharpé, as wit them
fhe quickly digs ber a bole into the pont earth.

Marmotan.#s Mae © |

Marmote. as Marmoraine; aif, as Marmotte; aif,
the viuer Lote; alittle muddie "i. beaded, skinned,
and finned, like an Ecle.

Marmoter. To mumble ynutter murmure ; to [peake,or
utter a thing,betweene the teeth.

Marmoterie : f 4 muttering,or paniling fmerda ty,

Moet the bray N poe mile
armotonné : m.éc: to » Or; that
yeelds a grumbling found,

Martnotonner. To grumble, mutters or al, to
rumble,or make a rumbling noife
atmotte: £ 4 fhe Marmafiigafie Mankie,
armotter. 4 Marmoter, : -

Martnoufelle: f. À little puppiesor pug to play with,


: Marmouferic: £ fi ua ou Lif me:


Märirioufet: im. The coke of a efere or fountaine,


: Dr ae 3 any Anticke Image,
‘e teats pee tilleth ; ee 2,07 dntcks a-
fa, 107 Mini:
far dal haere Mas tees
Marnei€ 3
| “earth, aren toduft, and fat-
pyres wah gs
emia nen


D +): Pire


Go gle


rh 4 ard, and (common) bie Mar oe Coulter à
in froflie wi


ed, or manured | Mg Pmiées € op
cng | es


M A R'


ere, To marle , or manure (with a voice bard.


Marneux : m. eufe :£ Full of (white)marle.

Marniere : f. A marle-pit.

Marochemin: m. Horebound ; 07, as Marrubin.

Marolle. Tbe name ofa villagewherein a virgine of ff.
teene is bard to be found;*whence ; Pucelle de ma-
rolle ; Seeke Pucelle.

Maronne :f. whitewort, Fedder few, Fenerfew ; fome
alfo call | {weet Marierome fo.

pnier : m. Looke Marinier.
nnites :m, A fect of poo re Chriftians (in fome
oe Turkie) that weave great belts, or girdles of
Tr.

Marotte :f. A (Princes) Scepter; al/oya fooles babli(be=
cdufe made commonly like aScepter.) +
Il en eft plus afforté qu'un fol defa marotte. Heé
doats more on it then a foole does on bis bable, ;
Il luy en fit porter lamarotte. He made bimthe an:

r commaunder of,

re Ilamarotte: Prov. The foole would bane a
* bable,

Fol eft qui famarotte ne cognoift, &ne la maine
comme il doit: Prov, He # an affe that knowes not,
and cannot rule, bjs owne familie or affections.)

Sitous les fols portoient marotte , on ne fçait re «
de quel bois on fe chaufferoit: Prov. If all
fooles ave bables:; wore, of wood we fbould baue bat
Sinall flore, :

Marouque : £ The tough, and hard thorne, er forub-
bie tree, called Paliurus, Ram of Lybia, and Chrifts
thorne ; because (as it is imagined) bee was crowned
witball. . 3

Maroute : f, Baflard Camomill, falfe Camomill, ©

Marpaut:m. .4n il-fauoured férub, a little ouglie;er
fartie wretch; alfo, a lickorous ; or faucie fellow,
ae catches at wbatfoeuer daiaties comes in bu


Marquable: com. Markable , notable, af marke, of


Marquafin : num, A jong wild bare,

Marque: fi A marke, figne token; badge ; print, fanp:
3 ; al/o,a difiveffe,

Fe rare "es a2 Gare


quifdome. .

Droid de ue, Looke Droi&,

Faux marqüe. 4 tearme by Wood-men beftowed on
the head of ageere,which bath more rights,or branches
on 1b'one fide then on th’ other.

+ sep de marque.d renowmed ,or notable perfèns

man of mar ke,or note.

Mara ué:m. ée:£ Marked, noted, figned , potted,
pried: bearing the badge, fampe of ;alfo, eded,
obferued, regarded.

ae tharqué. Good, bonefi, vertuous, well incli-
ned.


Mal ts > ‘Lewd ,: naughtie vicions , badly à gi-


Marquer. To > ’ > ?
flampe on co 9 00m aan aes U no-


tice of,


pre re aetna. (Of a counter érc)that flands


aS Marqu
or couered
—


MAR


with{inall peeces of fundrie colours,
| Marqueté d'ftoilles.Srrrie, fet tbicke with flars.
| Marqueter.7o ialay; to diner fifie, flourifh,or worke all
ouer with finall peeces of fundrie colours ; alfo,to {pot ;
10 beautifie,or couer with fundrie-coloured [peckes. ;
Marge : £, Inlaying, or ialayed worke of fundrie
colours.
‘Marquette. as Marquet,
_| Marqueture:f. 4 Ponce (potting, or be (potting; al-
-: foyas Marqueteric; al{o,a marke,or fpot.
| Marquis : m.4 Marqueffe ; wasin old time the Gouer-
nour of a frontire, or frentire tevone, and (as th’aunci-
ent Duke,and Earle) but an Officer either for lifey ov
onely during the Princes pleafure : Then was hein{e-
riaur to th Earle of a Prouince , but fuperiour to the
Earle of aninland towne ; And therefore, now that all
thofe great Earledomes be annexed to the Crowne, bis
is, without quellion, before anyEarles,
leafon marquis. Saied of à woman that bath
her flowers. ; “4
Marquifat:m, 4 Marquifate, Marquifhip , or Mar-
‘SAOMmEe, :
| Marquife : £ A Marchioneffe. ,
Marquifotte. Barbe faite à la marquifotte. cut af:
f ter the Turkifb fafhion, all being fhauen away but the


MAR


gaping poe al; repining yepentant ; malecon-

ent ; angrie, frettin ng difpleafed, offended, on

Of patience,ina Fa 1
Anjourd’huy marié demaiti marri: Proy, Maried
10 day marred to morrow ; to day wedded, to morrow
wretched. :

Femme bonne quia mauvais maria bien fouvent
le coeur marri : Prov: Looke Mari.

Marrine :f, A Godmother,

se MarririTo grieue,or forrow fir take beauily,be fad or
vexed at storepine,repent,a fit bimfelfe about; alfo
to fret, fiune,chafè,be diftontented,angrie, difpleafed,
ont of all patience.

Marriffon :f Grief, forrow, Sadneffe,penfiuentife,an-
guifb,beanine pe; repentance; enniesrepining ; difcon-
tentsmelancholie;malecontentment ; anger dif nat:
mo fretting, chafing, fianing, vexation of
mind,


Martobe: im, The bearbe Horehound 3 Looke Marry-
in,
Mee f A mattocke, ar inflrument like a mate
tocke.
Marrochon: m. 4 little (French)mattocke.
Marton: m, The(domefiicall, tilledyor great Chefinnt,
Marronnier: m. The great Chefinut tree.
oe +n, They which in great fnowes make the way
pa) ane,
Martoquin : m. Spanifh leather (made of Goats skins)
= ~ inte leather not tanned , but drefed with
aus.


À" mullachoes,
Marquote. # Marquotte.
Matquotte : f, 4 Sucker ,or young plant that [purts up
{ fiom the root of a vinecrc,or is of it felfe rooted.
atquotter.To prune,or dreffe a vine foyas it may yeeld


flore of Marquottes or Suckers, Marroquin: m. ine: f. Spaniffisor Goats leather.
4 Marrabuis. es Marrane, Maman. as Mane
| Marrabaife, Bonnet à lanfar. 4 flat cap, Marroufle.vn grosm. 4 big cat ; alfo, an ouglie luske,
Marrain. as Marrein, x or elder fits alfo, a richchurle, or fat chuffe,
| Marraine :f. 4 Godmother, . . | Mar 3m, ds Marrubin,
| Marran. as Marrane; And mof properly, the chriftian | Marrubin: m. Horebound.
circumcifed,or turned Jew, Marrubin blanc, white Horebound,


| Marrane:m. 4 Kenegado,or Apoftata; a peruerted,or
"+ circutncifed Chriflian; a Chrifiian turned Turke, or
“Jew; alfo,2 connerted,or baptized Moore, Turke, or
few ; one that turnes Chriflian for feare rather then o
+ deuotions alfo,a lewifh, cruel, bard-bearted 3 or bo
 low-hearted fellow.
arranifé : m. ée: f. son wpa : ie 3 tur-
_ aed Turke, crowne miftreani, made a lew ; alfo,con-
‘| -merted pda to a(fal/e,or falfe-he drted)chriftian,
TL ant. Digging, working,or fetching up weeds, with
a (French) mattocke. à
 Marraflau :m.4 kind of {hort fivord or axe, for an Ex
ecutioner, |
| Marre: £ 4 (French) Mattocke; alfo, the Saligot water
= Calthrop,water Nut, -
Mairé:m,ée:£. Digged,wroughtopened, broken vp ;
= fotched,or cut-up,with a(French)mattocke.
rreauim, The token of lead, ec, giuen for a vemem-
ce, in Churches ; tofuch as meane to receive the
din Tauernes,drc,to fuch as cannot 0.
… therwife char di


[ee eoebinccce


Man Peau. Marfh Horehound, water Hores
ound.


Marrubin noir, Blacke,or f'iuking Horeb à
Archangel, pi - ie bite à
Marrubin puant, as Marrubin noir.

Marrubin fauvage. wild,or yellow ,Horebonnd,
arry. Seeke Marri. *

Mars: m, (The moneth) March; alfo-, (the Planet)

ro 3 alfo, yron (called (6 by Alchymifis ; ) alfo,conr fe

Aine; or as; :

Les Mars. March corne , or. corne fowne about
March.

Le flor de Mars. Looke Flot, :
Montaigne de Mars. The fleflie part of the band be-
tweene the thumbe, and little finger or the mifeles
whereof it confifis. <x
Violette de Mars. Th’ordinarie blew Dioler,
ate pour Mars, To fake bis markes a-


Quañdiltonne en Mats, ‘nouis pouvons dire he.
fe ë ‘esas a Jeu Pao) meuble) thunder Ÿ


Marfaul: m, The cane withie,or cane Willow,
Marts bled Marlés. Looke Bled,

Marlois, &;bled Marfois. Marchcorne.
Marre A fhoat ; a bog thats ayearé, or onder a
Jeare old, "AM. LA as,
Marfouin : m.4 Porpofè,or Sea-bog; alfathe ba-
| oo PO 85 oth fet,or
Marfipie: £. 4 pur/e,or pouch, | REA


AD


Up; ¥
\ On: m, The i 3! "#
fitted, Martagon : m, RH mes


ee Bs ERREUR A ATR


: wood then one; a7,as under Afney sen
. Pour vn poil Martin perditfon afne : &, oon vn
4. poinét Martin perdit fon afne : Prov. Locke Aine,
eus m, & Marte; 4 Martin. like abi |

rendremartin pour regnard. (In alike 1 ings to.
miflake one for eae ber. ad 4

Martiner. To quaffe, fwill,guxale(frem S.Martins dai:
when commonly the French parie begin to drinke - |
- wine,

Métcner: m, À Martlet or Martin (bird; ) alfoya wae
ter-mill for anyvoa forge; alfo, alutle woodden cañ-
dleflicke bauing on tl’ one fi ide a handle and on tb'oiber,

a hooke (mof in vfe among Tauerners ; ;) alfo a kind!
of great hammer ufed in the breaking open of doores 5
alfo,a Student, or Scboller, that lodges in the towne,
and: reforts unto Leélures and Difpatations in (elled-
) ges 3 «fo the game called Cat and Trap ;'alfo, a Saints!
- bell ox Anthem bell.
Martinet pefcheur. À Kings fifher.
Grand Martinet. The great blacke Martine 7

Martingale: f. 4 Martingale for aborfe.

‘A la martingale. Abjurdly, foolifhly, oneal
groffely,rudely,in the bomeliell manner.

artre. as Marte; 4 Martin; alfo, a game played with
buckle-bones, and alittle bal.

artroy : m, A place of execution , or punifbment :
( qOrleannois.)

Lord À vet: À Martyre; one that fuffers death forthe
truth,

Martyre :m. Martyrdome death fuffered for the truth:
extreame paine,rffhétion,torment. ;

Martyrément. Martyre-like. È

Martyrer. To martyr ; forment, afflict exttaaiaate ms
unto mightie paine. ‘

Martyriser. To martyrize,to martyrs \ |
artyrologic: £ A Martyrologie; a Relation, tie !
vie, or Booke of Martyrs. I

Mary. as Mari, - ‘

Marzol : m.as Efcourgeon ; called fo, : asit feemes,be- ;
caufe it 1s moft commonly fowne in March : Picd-
montois,

Marzolin: m.A kind of delicate 1ralion cheefe made of
fheeps milke not curdled with runnet, but with Arti- |
chock flowers. \ ~ ee

Mas de navire. Themafi ofa fhip.

Masde terre, On Oxe-gang, plow-land, or bide % land,

containing about 20 acres ; fond ns je boufe; be


longing to it.) ;
moire if. A Maske,or Mise. Pre
afcarer. To blot, foyle blurre, fullie dis figure.
Mafcaret d'eaux. A huge, and fudden venage, o init
datio of waters;(L’on appelle mafcaret vne grande
- Montaigne d'eau qui fe firent ja Riviere de Dès
donne, vers les contrées de Libourne; Au teinps
d'efté, ¢s faifons les plus paifibles,$tout en vag
ment elle fe forme, & fait vne courfe que is
bien longue le ees & guelqueste pes


coufte,renverfa nm 2:


= Martagon deConflantinople. The Lilie ind Coite
flantinople the Byfansine Lille, r
Marte:f. The beaff called a Martin, à
Martes febellines , & foubellines , ott foublincs.
Sables... io
Marteaul:m. A hammer; alfo,a fledge , or mallet; and
(among, Woodmen)a hammer that bath a flampe on the
ane fide, wherewith the Suvdeyors, and Verderers of
the Kings woods and forrefis , marke the trees which
ave 10 bee felled, and fold; alfo, the hearbe Reed.
mace, water-toarch, or Cats-taile ; jalfo,a certaine lit-
4e bone feated farre within the eare ; alfosthe Stitbie
(a beafis difeafe.)
Marteau de mer. The buge,ouglie vnluckie, flaring,
and wide-mouthed, Multet-fifh,
“A Preuve de marteau. Sound, currant, good right


ds. Op erie dE RS >


ist entre l'enclume&les marteaux. Seated

in the middcf} of extremities,or in a dangerous firait ;

di imbarked i into vnanoydable mifchiefès,or miferies.

. AP enclume le marteau: Prov, (Said when a con-
tentioks, or litigious fwaggerer meets, or 4 matched,
with a worfe then bimfelfe.)

‘A dure enclume imarteau de plume : Proy, By pa-
tience we quaileor quell al barf attempts sand now
_ adayes we fee bagsof wooll,and walls of foft earth op-

pofed io the fürie of the Cannon.
Martel: m, fealoufie, fufpition; throbbing, or panting,

upon palfion; a buxxe in the bead,a flie in the eare.
Martela ge:m, A malting or hammering ; a beating,
Fe a Le marking wit ahammer,
| Martclé: m.ée: f- Hammered malled; beaten, wrought,


1%


RE +. 2


a
à ormarked with a hammer ; alfo, fpottedsor fpeckled.
AE Marteler. To bammer,mall ; : beat sworke, or marke with
Bo ey a bammer; alfo,to fpot,or fpeckle.
Lesdents luy marteloyent de froid,His teeth chat-
tered through cold,
Martelerie: f 4 bammering,pr bammer worke.
Martelet: m, A little bavimtr ; alfo, a Martlet, or
2 . Martin,
ES Marteees m. Abammerer ; one that worketb witha |.


À


Mireille: € Afinall hewing picke, or paning picke ; a
Mafons banmer,or picke,
Martellé. as Martel.
Mattellement :m. 4 hammering, or malling; a bea-
tins, working ov marking with a hammer.
Marteller. Seche Marteler. °
_Martengalle: £4 ‘hind of daunce, as commoninPro-
vence, as the Branfle in other parts of France,
Mahe: : x Hartha(a womans name.)
rendre Mars pour Marthe. (Ia. sbings of fone re=
femblance)to miftake one for another, <r»
Martial: m.ale :£ Mantiall Dr vas valorous ; borne
- vnder:the Planet,or being of: the med them }
Martin : m. Martin(a mans name
Las. Martin, Malinao fa Wile s, Martin


»


ut. as 258 (3e EM.
aftelles: f. he 3 TE LE)
“a Malchaut :m.4| 7 Me ; Macault. à PE
oat Mafché:m, ola Such, 12e ee alo
eset and mie ff | their childrens


Mafché: m.ée:Echaredchewedhammed,champed. |


I! luy faut baillerJachofe toutetmafchée. (Said of
one thats-et le,or too laxie,to manag
roi


nada >< f
APP TEE HU
+ As Mat:


M AS


cS Maschecoulieh m. ye owen at the for of a Parapet
By Le prea ouera gate) vefembling a grate , through
which offentiue things are throwne vpon Pioners,and
other affnitants ; whence ;
Elle a les dents ama{checoulis Ichaut defendant
| Jebas.She bath a thin row of teeth, whofe rottennelfe,
|. and flench drine men from ber trench.
| Mafche-croufte: m. 4 gramzcruf bungrie compani-
natch-cruft.
chefer, as Machefer,. |"
Machetaya: ms A chufft,boore,lobcocke,lozell ; one
_— Brin to rt with cattell, ‘then to connerfè with


“Matchefrain : m. Abidlesbabper, a Layer (from


bis Mule,which attending while ber mafter is in Court,

bath leafiere ynough to champe onthe bridle.)
Maïchelier :m. cre: f. Belonging to a Jaw,or chap.

Les dents mafchelieres. The checke-teeth, Jaw-
_ teeth;grinders,

| Malchement: m. Achawing,chewing ; champing ; an
eating,a gnawing with the teeth,-


| Matcher. To ebaw,or chew; 10 champe ; to eat,grind,or


_ worke with the teeth.
Maicher en belin. To mumble like an old tootbleffe
-beldame,
* Avaller gros, & mafcher dru, To leap oner a block,
and fumble ataflraw.  *
 Mäfherivet. 2s Macherivet.
heur: m. 4 chawer, chewer ; champer ; eater.


s Malcheur . Chawing, chewing ; champing ; eating;


whence ;

Mufcle bleus. as Mafleter,
 Maftheure. ss Macheure.
Matchiller. To 2ibble,or chaw prettily.
Mafchoire: f. A Chap,or Faw.
Mafchurer. as Machurer.


“1 Matclon : m. The Cholicke of the flomacke.


| Mafculeyté: Manhood,or the male kind.
4 culin : m. ine :f. Mafeuline, of the afte gen
der ; male,mantlic virile.
¢:m. A male,or be creature.
Males. ‘The pintles ofa flerne ; the yron pinnes that
- enter into the rings,or gudgeons thereof.
Adjeé. Male mafculine, virile.
~Matfle-femelle: com. 4x Hermaphrodite,or one thai is
Le man and ewe ie
afpeton :m. Lg eran Maligarelan arb) «
| Masquarade.æ Mafcarade. ) ;
“Mafquarizé :m.ée :f. Masked, in a maske, bauing a
 -maske,or vifor on. :
Maïque ~ Amaske ; a vifor.
afque de Carefme entrant. The pictur


Led a guts, galcb, gorbellie, Ed mfr


le mafque À. 70 nb
oars wa D À na Se


4  Maiqué im. ¢e:f. Masked , diffé mening vi


Les à +03


livateucradeth 6 Maker Mammere.
à tie: as


Ver £.A difeui
3 on in de squier DIE


h
ri £ The an pond


acre: m. Amafictes “seg nie


M A S
‘Maffacte d’ vn cerf, The fall,death, or difmembrin
‘Of a Stag; alfo,bis bead, or bornes volt piled of


hew lead,
Maffacré : m.ée:f. Maffacred, flaughtered, murthe-


Maflacter To maffacre, flaughter murtber,
Manson: m. À mallacrer , flaughterer, murthe.


Mafle: f. Amafe, lumpe ; beape, loaf; round peeceof
ee 3 an ingot, or wedge of mettall ; alfo, a


are te er “onde ad
afle de chair, The mufcle which polfeffeth eo flleth
up all the bollow bought of the fole a ts Joh
fo by moderae Anatomifls.)
Mafled’ eau. as L’ herbe à mafles. ©
L'herbe à mafles, water-toarch, Cats-taile, March.
beetle, March-pefiill, Reed-mace, Dowcb-downe,
Sergenta masse. Looke Sergent.
Mafferotte :f. Awood=cleauers beetle ; alfo, the bead,
or but-end of a club,or beetle.
Maffeter. ne of the mufcles whereby the nether Faw is
drawne ean
Mafficor : m. .A yellow colour made of lead ; Or, as ;
Maflicot: m. Oaker made of Cerufè,or white lead.
Maflier: m. A Mace-bearer | a Sergeant of the


Maé: miue :f Maffi fue, folide, found, firme, clofé,
bard, firong, unbroken, not bollow, well knit, bhava.
packt, together.

Maffir.To make maffiue, Solide bard, found; to compat
to beat clofe,ramme hard in,

sr m. À kneader of br tad , or of paf:


Métre: f, Maffinenelfe, foliditie, fiurdne[fe.
affon : m, 4 Mafon; alfo, a kind of Mullet-fifh.
Pet de maflon, 4 farti in rep; the fart that brings
dure after it,
ke Wise truelle , bon iour maffon. Looke Pro-


tl In'eft pasinaflon qui pierres refife: Prov, The
cunning Mafôn workes with any ftone,

onné: m. ée: f, Built of flone; bewed. , fauared,
Satine en a flone by a Mafon; aff, fin Bla.


on) pur
Mai onner. To build of lone; to make, or frame flone-
buildings ; to bew, fquare, fa bien ay flones 310 ‘worke
Mafons worke, —
Massonneric:f. Mafonrie, Mafons worke, the Ma-
fons trade; flone-worke,or building; the bewing, [à
Be tant layingsor inft placing.of| sseioes
- inbuding.
affonnier: m.ere:f. Of, belonging to, fernin
pe pe ane > 10, fe ie for,a 54
Massoret : m. 4 Spirit, hol Hobeblin :
Maflorets. Such fewes as corretled the falfe-written
+ words of Seripture, not blotting them out ( for of that
they made a feruple) but noting them with a little O,
and fetting downe their correélions in the margent.
Mañluë: f 4 club; alfo, the name of a great feet |


apple.
Mase: im. The maf of «fi a


“Matter vn navire. CG fhip withrwn, PR
"| Mattel: m. sale or ay mal bt eo '


Mai: me dt ms ye cas ci
“on the top of the Calthorp,or re a


M: À S


Mattic de Candie. Yellow,and bitter Mafticke.
Mattic de Chiowhite Mafticke,better then the for-


mer.
Mattie d'Egypte. Blacke Maflicks more drying and
and leffe indy then ere, " ;
Mattication : f. 4 maflicationschawing,or chewing be-
tveene the teeth,
Mafticatoire:m, 4 Maflicatorie; a medecine for the
rhewme chawed,or held betweene the teeth,
Mafticatoire: com. Mapicatorie, cheving, cham-


Fawes receine their chawing motion.

Mañich. as Mañic.

Maltiché:'m. ée:f. Mingled,or clofd with Maflick;
wherein there is Mafticke,

Mafticine : f Manna in graines, Manna of the Lenant;
fotcarmed becaufe it refembles Maflicke.

Mattin : m. 4 Mafline, or Ban-dog ; @ great (countrey)
curve; alfa, a rude, filibie; currifh, or cruell fel-


low, ne
Oncques maf{tin n’aima levrier : Prov, Sée Le:
vriér.
Qui de maftin fait fon comer plus de bafton ne
+ doit porter: Pro. He that will conuer{e with clowns,
mult pale by rudene(fe wi Ses, etd
Maftine:f. 4 Mafline, or Carre-bitch; alfo y a fell


queane, ag y
Maftiné: m. ée: f Lined by a Mafline, or great curre;
alfo, rhdely bandled, filthily vfed, currifby dealt


with, 0. Een!
Maftiner. To line, as a bitchwith a Maflifé,or great
- curve; alfo,to vfe filthily handle rudely,deale currify-
~ Ly or crnelly with. ek
Mattiquer. as Mafticher ; Ai/a,to infüfè, or put Maf:
ticke,Rofen,cc,upon atbing before it be foldered; al.
{0,10 ioyne,or clofe with Maflicke,crc,
Mattoide. Apophyfesmaftoïdes. Proceffes.of banes
defcending from the fides of the bead bebind the eaves.
© Cavité maftoide. 4 hollow part of the bead where-
in ave certaine little cauës,or winding bollowesswbich
receiue,and yeeld back€ reuérberation of founds...
‘Mufcle maftoide. 4 mufele that bends, and bores
* downe,the bead.
Mafturbation: f, Filthie frigging.
Mature: fi An old decayed houfesor wall; the ruines of


a building,

Mature de terre. A quantitie of ground containing a-
bout foure Oxe-gangs.

Mat: m, 4 foole, fop,gull; mad-pafb,parebraind ninnie;
alfo,a mate at Sete, : '
Efchec & mat. Check-mate; alfa, an unauoydable dif:
after a vemedileffe mifcbiefe,or mifcbance. |

Mat. Deaded,mated, amated, quelled, fubdued, ouer-

pr ie ly F M

…. Qrimat. Vapolii old. M
drichin: po The Matachin daunce ; alfo,thofe shat
ce it. ; 4% Pre

| Matsgaélort A fhrike, ninmurder , wariangle : €Sa-

Matagot:m. A kind of Ape; alfo,an hypocrite : Rab.

Matassin. as Matachin. » adn hy

liner des mains. To moue, Kear maggle the

= fingerisike a Fugler Player, Fra, Ge.”

ate:£ Anumber offprigs growing together upon an
M ep ot I 194 té Aie)

Enfans j pat rrque 5 Cheaters Cut-

purfes,dres My rieté eu ht 6d au 1p dei xd ab?


LS


ping.
Mufclesmafticatoires, The muftles from which the


M A


Matelas: m.as Materas; A//0,a kind of Uioll,or botile,
Matelot :m, A Saylor, Shipman,Boatman Waterman.
Matelotage: m. ‘The bire of « fhip or boat, and of the
Saylors,or Watermen thereto belonging 5 the fraight,or
rey due for the vfé of a fhip,or boat.
ateologie : f. Vaine inquirie or overscurious fearch
into bigh matters,and myfleriés,


Mateologien : m.A vaine,or ouer-curieus fearcher in= |


tobigh matters. :
Mateotechne. Vaine knowledge,crooked Art : (Rab,
Mater. To mate, or giue a mate vaio; to dead, amate,
quell, fubdue ouercome. :


Materas:m. 4 Mattereffe, or Quiltto lie on; alf, a |


quarrell(or arrow) for acroffebow ; alfo;.as Hebe à


es. :
Materas defempenné. A quarrell without feathers,
or an vnfeatbered quarrel; alfo, a light-braind, gid-
die-bumord, fhittle-beaded fellow. *
Matereau. as Matz; or as Mafterel.
ateriaux: m. Any kind of rubbidge,or fluffe, |
Materiel: m. elle : f. Materiall ; flufiie , /ubjantiall,
well gone, well fed; alfo, dull, groffè, earthie, or
eartblie. ; tine
| Materien. as Marrein. An old word. |


Maternel :m.elle :f. Maternall,motberlieofamother, |


on the mothers fide. ;

:Maternellement. Motherly, like a mother ; tendcrly,
kindly, car efully. = 5
aternité :f. Maternitie, motherhood, the being a mo-
ther,

Matetoultier, Looke Maletoultier.

Mathelin. Mathurin. ss

Mathelinioux :m.eufc : f. Franticke wild veod,balfé
mada,

Mathetnaticien : m. A Mathematician;..a profiffor
or prattifer,of the Matbematikes ; alfo,a cafler of Na=
tiuities, .

Mathematique : com,Matbematicall,belonging to the

Mathematics. :

Mathematiques : £:The Mathematicks ; (comprebend
foure of the hberall Sciences; viz.) Arubmetiché,Geo-
metric, Muficke,and Aftronowie or Affrologie.

Matheothecne.crooked Art,vaine knowledge; €Rab.

Mathurin : m. The name of a Saint in Gaftinois, held
tobe the Pipfitian,or Patron of mad fooles; alfoya Ma-
churin Frier;(of th’Ovder of the Trinitie.)


Maladie de S, Mathurin, Frenxie, extreame folie,


madneffe. x
Sail de S, Mathurin. 4 foolifh triche, fond prank,
mad part. : :
Mené à S.Mathurin.Guled, groffely beguiled,ouer-
raughi,made a foole. £
Matiere : f Matter; J'uffe,fubflance; a matter, à thing;
an argument,or fubieët 10 write,or difcourfe of; a bu»
effésor affaire ; acaufescafeor Afton in Law.
aticre Dungexcrementordure, *
Matin : m. The morning ; the breake of day, beginning
of the


‘Desle fin matin. Vérie earlie > 45 fone as one can
Au matin les monts, au foir les fonds, &c. Looke
Mont. 1.

Le perneae foir ne refemblent pas à celles du
matin: . He that giues thee a good morrowymay
pet


j ure thy forrow,
Le x blanc nc resjouïr Je pele-
tint Prov. The evening red, and moraing gray presage
a faire fucceeding day. ¥


,


%
se fe. 4 mite FU ai
baie + «+ —-# du


PONS


cast ad tii in Die


re, ri
LS Bs


‘4
mt


LA


.
Dail, i Ge


4


CP sil. à à
CO AC RO EVENE


Lédahtr he)


|
|
|


M ‘A !T


Qui a bon voifin a bon matin : Prov. He that bath
a good neighbour bath a good morrow ; viz. gooc
words next his beart a mornings; or,asin Avoir.
Tel au matin rit qui au foir pleure : Proy,Somebe-.
|... gia the day with laugbter and end it with rekress)

| Matin. (Aduerbially.) Early, betimes in the morning ;

+ whence; 3 t ,

» Lever matin n’eft pasheur, mais deficuner eft le
plus feur : Prov. There is leffe bappineffe in earlie ri-
Jing then fafetie in cating afier one ts rifen.

: : Habeau fe lever tard qui ale bruit de fe lever ma-
tin: &; Qui a bruit de fe lever matin peut dor-
__mir iufques à difner : Prov, Seeke Lever. à
Matinal: m. ale : € Earlie,
Matine : f. 4 Maftine, |

Matinée : f. À forenoone,or morning-tide, a whole mor-
- ning, the {cafon of a morning; alfo, a mornings worke,
or taske. :

Regnard qui dort la matinée n’a pas la Jangue

emplumée: Prov. The Fox that fleepes a mornings

meets with no feathered breakfafis. }

| Matines:£ Matines,Morning Prayer.

| Matines Parifiennes. The maffacre of Paris > which
began about midnight. fl
Chanter Magnificat à Matines. To fing Magnifi-
cat at Matins; to peruert tb'order of things ; or doe
things out of order.

Plus eftourdi que Ie premier coup de Matines.

More drowfie,and amaxed,then a-Frier at the firfi toll

_ of the morne-facring bell. ;
LeRetour de Matities: Prov. 4 mifchiefé done in
the darke,or at unawares; (from the cuftomes of Fri-
ets,who commonly make choyce of that obfewre feafon,
for the fur prifing,and thumping of their bated compa-
nions ; which hath bred another Prouerbe; viz. Un'y
arien tant d craindre que leretour de matines.)

Matineux: m. eufe : f. Earlie, foone rifingyvp betimes,

- | Homme matineux fain,alaigre, & foigneux : Pro,
| _ Anearlie man is buxome,healthfüll,carefuil,

| Matinier :m.ere : £0/,or belonging t0,the morning; al.

Îi,Eaflerlie, of or towards the Eaft; and hence;

L Inde maatiniere: The Eafl India.


as Materas:
Matlaffé: m.ée: £0f. Matereffès,or Quilis.
| Matois :m. 4 vaine companion, worthleffe perfèn; or


as Martois. 3
underflands the whole


Tlentend le matois. He
_. trainé,or plot,
| Matou:m. 4 cat,a puffe.
Matoiiard: m. The fame.
at
wide,round-bellied bottle,or violl,of firong, and thick
|. gafés °. QUE mt
Macaficr. To mall beat,or bew, downe ; to bruife, or
} Matraz mu A glaf bottle > or violl; or as Mattac;
| a ase sap wr ;
| Matricaire:£ Fedderféw, Feuerfew , Motherwort,


~


_ Whiteworte

Matricaire. Veinemat: Looke Veine, . *
attical: m. ale:f, : ing to , or feruing for, the
Matrix. DL 1170 OR) : Jristgs à


__ Entonnoirm Entonnoirs: 1 ©
Matricave. Fedderféw,er0; as Matricaires


Matrac: m, A flraight, long narrow- thelial
m, A flraight, long gia nech ya gre


À Matrice:£. The matrix, mother,or wombe of a woman;
alfo,a certaine veine that, along the flank neere
the reines; alfo,as Matricule; aff, a make
> or letter-founders ie


yp Matrcieghe mana or firme rs the


M A T
eyes of their markes or letters,
atricide: com. Mozber-killing.
Matricile: com. Ofor belonging to,the matrix,
Matricule :f..4 lift,roll,catalogue,regifier of names 5a
matricular booke,
Matrimonie : m. Matrimonie mariage, wedlocke,
Matrimonial : m.ale: £. Mtatrimoniall ; of or be long-
ing to; matrimonie.
Pr de matrimoniaux. which come by the mo-
ther,
Matronal:m, ale: f. Matronall, matron-like, modef,
mothevlie,graue,
Matrone:f. 4 Matron,a difèreet or [agé dame; a fober,
modeft,graue mot ber lie woman,
trones. Damaske or Dames Violets, Queencs
Gilloflowers Rogues Gilloflowers,clofe Sciences.
attarruys:m. .4 mad, rafh, barebraind affe; one
that throws whats next him at any one that mouesbing,
Matte: f, Was heretofore (in Paris ) a raskallie place,
whereat common Gameflers | Cheaters, Conicatchers,
and Cutpur(s vfually met : Thence, Enfans, ou fup.
pofts de la Matte; Such well-giuen youthes.
Matté :m.ée:f. Mated, amatcd, quelled, fubdued,
puld undertaken lower ; tired, wearied,
err sm. Ce:f. Clotted, knottie, curdled, or curd-
i


Matter. To quell, mateamate; fubdue, pull under,take


lower ; 10 gine a mate unto,
Mattes: f. (urds,or curdles,
Matti: m, ie: Deprived of moiflure and verdure,
dried vp; whence, bearbes dricd upon a bot Jhoucll,
tile,or in a flill are faidto be, mattics.
Mattois :m. A Setter, Cutpurfe ; cheater, Conicatcher;
a fisbtill, or craftie fellow ; alfo,as Matois.
Mattonné. Ciel mattonné. 4 curdled sie ; oa skie
fall of fmall curdled clowads, ‘or
Mattraz. as Materaz, a
Marüratif:m, ine: £ Maturative , ripening, [up-
paring, ©.
Maturation : £ A maturation , ripening ; Siippu-
ring , growing toa bead , mattering , refoluing into
matter. à:
Maturer. To ripen mellow, wax full,grow mature ; allo,
lamatter,tofuppure. -
a oats Mathurin,
aturité:fMarwritie ripenelfe,mellorwne neffe;.
per fection of | peg eke ere fs
Matutinel: m,elle: £ Of the morning; alfo, timelie, or
earlie in the morning. \\ Leb avr M
Matz: m. The maftof afp © "0
Mau 3 née D lees ocr. acai ret
loigniefe, ficnnefse. | 4S HDI ,
au de pipe. Drankenneffes or asin Pipe.
Mau de nue The me le wi ms
Mau. (for Mal Adjeët.) Bad, ill, naugbtie svbence;
~Amau chatmau tat» Prov, Twoknaues well met,
Maubert. Place mau. The Marketficad, and place of
~vexeculion, for th Uninerfitie of Paris. sa .
Cela fent fa Place Maubere. ‘Thats clownifhixiude,
verie bomelie, 11 THD 48 ANS
Maubrenage.vnefemme qui demeureadm. A fiin-
king, or naflic draggletaile. ASSET’ >
Maucocureux;meufe :f Queafie-omacked, |
Mauconduiét: m.ête : f. 11 guided,badly gonerned.
Aaudire. Looke Matildire. PNEUS
audifné: m.ée: F4 dined that hath had but a courfe


Maudiffant. curfing,bannine,blafphemings + 200
Eff iy


+
i)


f


Mau. ae


dils i. 2,2


OT


| Maulx. Mifébiefès ; Looke Male


Mr À V


M AV


Maudiffon: f, A curfe; Looke Mauldiffon,
Maudite: 4 kind of fandie-coloured vermine , like 4


Viper.
Maudolé: m.ée: & Mifhapen, ill framed, ill-fauou-
red, luskifh, without proportion.
| Mauduiét: m, éte : f Urmannerlie,clowui(h;ill-beba-
| mt brought AR METNRE.
auffaic: m.4 Goblin,Bug,Diuell, Spirit.

Maufc:f.4 Bug, Fairies fhe Spirit. pe f old words.

Maufle : £ 4 wretch ; or as Maufte.

Maugifant. 1 bedded, il lodged, lying ill fanouredly
or «s Malgifant.

Maugratieufenent, Haflily,rudely, unpleafantly, im-
proper ly,unpleafing|y.

Maupgratieux : m, eufe :f. Vnpleafing , rude, barfh,
unbandfome, vacomelie, vnfeemelie, without grace,
without gar bes

Maugré. Looke Maulgré. |

Maugréement: m. 4 curfing, banning, blafpbeming.

Maugréer. To curfe,banne,blafpheme,reuile extreamly,
raile on defpightfilly,

Maujoin:m. Th Arabian Gumme called Beninne,

Maujoinct: m. cte: f. Looffe, gaping,ill ioyned,ill com-
ched badly fet together. ;

Maujoine. Barbier demau, 4 Barber ofa womans


dc. ;
Maulavé: méc: f.lll wafhed ; flubbered naskienapie,
€


fiule,

Mauldict : m.cte: f. Execrable,accurfed; moft vnbap-
pie, alfo,curféd,banned,execrated.

Mauldire, To curfé ,banneexecrate, werrie, betake to
the diuell; alfo,to blajpbeme,

Mauldiffon: f. 4 maledittion,curfe banning execrati-
on;a Dane
Les mauldiffons font fucilles qui les feme les re-
cuéille: ProCwrfes proue choke-peares unto thofe that
plant them. j

Maulgré eux. Manger their teeth, in fpight of their
hearts,againft their wills whether they will orno,

Mauloubet: m. The wolfe(adifeafe.) | |

Maulubec :m. as Malubec;or,a@s Mauloubet. — :

Maulve: £Tbe bearbe Mallow; alfoya Sea-mew,or Sea-


4


mauve.
Maulve cultivée, Garden Mallowes, Hockes, Holy-
bockes. AE
Maulve grande. The great Mallow,ortree Malleïs,
Maulve de Iardin.as Maulvecultivee. :"
Mauve fauvage. The field Mallow, wild Mallow ;
our. ordinarie Mallow, +

~ Maulve terreftre. Blacké Brionie; or an bearb that
hath blackeberries and is ufed by Curriers, ©


ched ill maried, >
Maumené : m.ée : f. Tale Drop pige 2
3 iy perfecuted, purfued neve, baied to, - 2:
Maunet : mette: f, Vacleaneuncleanbe, fullied, flute
filthie naftie, flonealic. 0
:menne:f, Martial, |


Ft merci, merci


Maumarié : m.ée: f. Be


cul. #8
Maulve blanche, The white Mallow ; or as Gui- :


Maupreft. wnreadieunpreparedunprenided.

Maurelle. as Morelle. ot ~

Maurequine. Goutte maurequine. # Goutte fe-
rene; See Goutte,

Maufade : com. Harfh,vrfancrie Jowtifhencinilevn-
mannerlie,rude;unproper;vnapt,unfesfonable.

Maufadement. Harfhly,vnfauorily,vnproperly,zmapt-


ly, unfeafonably, lowtifhly, vnciuilly, rudely, vnman- |*


nerly.

Maufadeté :f. Harfhnefje,unfanorinefft or want of fa-
wor; unaptnelfe,wnbandfomene [Je,unfeafinablene/fe ;
lacke of ciuilitie;rudeneffe.

Mausoigneux : m.eufe :f. Carelef[e, vetchleffenegli-


gent.

Mautolée: m. ‘The flatelie fépulchre of a great Prince,
or Potentate.

Maufoupé :m,ée :£14 fupped,that bath bad but a bad


upper.
Mauffane : The wayfaring tree,
Mauvais: m. aife : f, Naughtiebad,lewd,ill ; forewd,
mifchieuous, burtfill,unbappie, knauifh, cur(t, char-
lifh, croffe, froward, flubborne,obpiinate, ouer thwart ;
malicious ; depraued,corrupt,mard,
Mauvais garçon. A fhrewd lad; alfo, a fhrewd, or
tall fellow, M


Mauvais ocil. Ivie Chiclnveed,Morgeline Henbit.
Mauvaile tigne. 4 malignant feurfe bred in the


Faire mauvais. To depraue,marre, viciate,peruert,
coriupt..

Fairele mauvais. To fwagger; to boafl, cracke,brag
of bis owne valour.

Sentir mauvais, To flinke,o7 fmell ill,to be fomewhat
to blame,

Mauvais chien ne trouveou mordre: Prov. The
curtifh dog in fight not bold feekes where 10 fnatcb,nor
wbere to hold,

Mauvaife fille fe mocque de fa mere: Prov.A wic-
hed daughter flowts her(vitleffe)moiber.

Mauvaife herbe croift toufiours: Prov. da ill weed
thrines apace.

Le mauvaisemporte le bon. Where th’one of a ma
vied couple is free, and th’other a villeine, their chil-
dren hall be villeines, by the cuflomes of Nevers,and


Il faut avoir mauvaife befte par douceur : Prov.


voir.
Il n’eft qu’ vne mauvaife heure au iour: Prov.One
day hath in it but one lackleffe houre,

On n’a jamais bon marché de mauvaife mar-
chandife : Prov. Bad wave is neuer cheape yneugh,
Mauvaifement.Badly,(cwaly,naughtily wickedly vily,

filthily ; mifcbieuoufly, burtfilly flrewdly ; frowardly,
ubbornely,churlifhly. +: :
auvaiftié: f, Naughtineffe, badueffe , wickedneffe,
lewdnefle, knauerie, mifcbitucnfne[fe , fprewdnift,
curfinef[e, burtfilnefie; malicioufneffe ; peruerfitie, o-
alé "2 cie, flubbornnefe.
Mauve. as Maulve,
Mauvis® £.4 Mauis ; a Throfilesor Thrufl.
Max. as Mas, 1: 2. à ae
Maxillaire: com. Ofer belonging to, the icw-Lone,
Dentsma The grinders,orcbecke teeth,
Osm res. The bones inte which th’upper teeth
are fet; in mem but two (diféernable) in beafisfiure,
sve bigger and vo let Ae


band. |. ‘Amaxime, printip ie, femme À
L 44 May emma) eaten ep


D
-


a OP TE


janes 2 LES.


MEC


M E D


‘A bon bluteurinay propice: Pro.Somewhat as fliffe

as a majpale does po bim that boults ima flefhlie

tuo, : ; mw)

Il ne feait que c'eft de vendre vin = n’ artend' de

May la fin : Prov. Belike becaufe he cannot before
that'sime gucife what will be the next yeares Vintage.

May: f. 4 kneading trough,or tub ; alfo,a Racke,or pile
of wood rec.

Maye:f. A kneading trough; a butch, or binne; alfo,a
balfe-thraue,or beape of corne (in the fheafé.)

Mayenche : f. 4 Titmouft. Savoyard.

Maÿeres:f rhe branches a se and Willowes, fit

| _ tomake rayles, props,or flayes for Vines.
May-loubet. The fe which wee call the wolfe.
@Langued, y
ay-mis: m. ife: f, Maimed.

Mayraltre: f A ftepmotber. @Langued.

Mays: m. Mais, Turkie corne,Turkie wheat,

Maz: m. 4 finall countrey tenement; or, as Mas ; alfo,
the mafte of a fhip. ny
Me. Me,or tome ; a Pronowne (of the Datiue, or Accu-

fatine Cafe) which ener goes before a Verbe, whereas

Moy comes after. 4
| Means: m. Void, and emptie places betweene beds in
. gardens, referued for (peciall bearbes; fuch are the

(paces left for Cardoons betweene rowes of Onyons,

er :m. A way, or open paffage ; aboleor pore in the

Le,

Meat Cholagogue. Looke Cholagogue,
Mecanique: com. Mechanical, belonging to an ban-
: dicraft ; bafè,meane ordiaarie,vile,

Mecaniquerie: f. Mechanicalluelfe; bafenelfe of bu-


mor. oo
Mecaniqueté: f. The fame,
ecer.for Menacer ; to threaten. @Rab,
| Mechanique. as Mecanique.
| Mechanizé: m. ée:f. Mechanicalixed ; made, or
| _ 2rowne bafe,vile,ordinarie,meane. x AS
Meche: f as Meiche,
Mecheron: m, 4 little matchor candle-weeke ; alfoya
fParkle.
Mechine:£ A maid-feruant,a chamber-maid,
Mechoir. 2 Mefchoir,
| Meét: € A kneading trough,or tub ; Looke Met. :
Medaille: f. A medal; an auncient and flat iewell,
ouch,or bruche ; or, a peece of auncient coyne, or plate,
wherein the figure of fome notable perfon is caft; or


CT ARE \ À
Medaillé: m. ée: € Furnifbedyor (et, with medals,
| Medaillon: m. A little medall,ouch,or brache.
Medalie. ce
| Medamothi. Of mo place. ab.
| Medard. The mi: 4 fanélified Bifhop of Noyon,and
* Tournay, in the yeare 524 ; by whofe prayers (fayes
G de Tours) diners prifoners bane beene deli-
uered from captiuitie, whence ; . à Sma
- Mal SMedard; (ay be) captiuitie, or imprifan-
_ ment. | Shah
Mede, A precions flone that yeelds a Saffron-like feat,
and gtaftlikewint, . Mi
ecin: mi. A Phifition,aLeech. L
“si d'eau douce, An vashilfull,or unexperien-
ced Phifition,a duncicall dog-leachs onethat-bathnot
À trauelled farre for pees skill be hath : CAfclepia-
| - des,a better Orator thea Phifition (2s Plinie reports)
À was the firft that allowed a Patient to drinke cold-wa-
ter; and thereupon. elfe 10 be tearmed, The


|) frefh-water Phifitiony i


Go gle


‘Mediocter.


Apres la mortlemedecin : Prov. After meat muf-
tard; when [leed is flolne [hut the fable doore.
‘Bon eft le medecin qui fe fait guarir : Pro.He is a
right Phifition that can cure bimfelfe.

Dénouveau medecin cimitiere boflu: Pro, A mew
Phifition makes a Churchyard fwell.

Vn piteux medecin faitvne playe mortelle: Prov.
A puifull Surgeon fpoileth a fore.

spa barbier vieil medecin : Prov. Looke Bar-

ier,

Les maux terminez en ique (comme Hydropique,
Heétique,Paralytique, &c) font auinedecin la ni-
que: Prov. Becaufe they be hardly cured,

Medecin: m. ine: f. Phificall,medicinall;, belonging to
Phificke, or to a Phifition.
Doigt medecin. The ring finger, that which is next
vato the little one,

Methepmeblc: com. Meditinable,bealable,curable,
edecinal :'m, ale: f. Medicinal, ferning-for a medi-
cine,curing bealing.

Medecine: . 4 medicine, or phificke ; the art of Phi-
Jicke ; healing, or curing; a remedie fir difeafes ; alfo,a
fhe Phifition,

Contre Ja mort n'y a pointde medecine: Pro, No
Phificke can preuaile*gainft death.

Contre peché eft vertu medecine: Prov. Vertue is
a falue for finne,

Tard medecine eft appreftée a maladie enracinée:
Prov. Grounded difeafes are incurable.

Medeciné: m. ée: f. Medecined,cured,besled,

Medeciner. To medicine cure,heale, falue leach; to ap-

ve aremedie ; to practife,or minifler Pbificke.
ediane : m. as Mefentere.

Mediane: f. The blacke,or middle veine ; the inward
branch of the fhoulder veine , difcending downe the
arme unto the band,and there difberfing it [elfe among
the fingers.

Mediaftine: m. A partition made in the bodie by cer-
taine thin skins which dinide the whole breafl, from the
throat to the midriffe, into two hollow bofomes.
ediateur: ni. A mediator ,interce{Jor ymeane or means
for; alfo,an arbitrator.
ediation : f. Mediation,interceffion, fuite,or meanes
made for; alfo,an arbitrating ov compounding of (other

- mens) controner fies.

Mediatrice: f. A mediatrix,arbitratrix. ;

Médicament: m. A medicament, (alue,medicine.

Medicamenter. To falue,cure,beale apply a medicine,
lay a plaifler unto. Sys REY

Medicamenteux: meule: f 4 curing, faluing,bea-


Medication : f. as Medicinement. be :
edicinenent: m. 4 curing, faluing. he ling.
Medier. To dinide into haluess alfo,as Moyenner,
Medieu,ou medieus. So God belpe me, or by the faith
of my bodie. à
Medimne: m. A corne-meafure,containing almoft two
of our bufhels. ‘
EE = : ie An Egyptian coyne of filuer, worth about xx
ar . .
Mediocre: com, Meane ; moderate, indifferent,rea/o-
nable,competent,neither too big nor too little,
Mediocrement. Meanely, moderately; indifferently,
competently,reafonably, meafurably,meetly well,
jocter. To qualifie, temper, moderate,add a meane
unto. - .
Medioctité: £. Mediocritie ; a meane, meafüre
.* tenciejindifferencie; tape marines


LA
Cm


a
=
2
=

;
D
£


M E G


ee te ee ee del ut de 1 … a rit à


M E L


Medique: £ Medick fodder, Spanifh Trefiile, Snaile
Clauer.

Mediffon. Looke Mefdiffon. '

Meditation: fA meditation, or meditating ; a deepe
confideration,car efiull examination, fludious cafjing or
deuifing of things in the mind.

Mediter. To meditate, ftudie, mufè on ; to thinke feri-
oufly, renolue fludioufly, confider deepely, deuife care-
fully, ponder diligently,

Mediterranée: f. The Mediterranean, or mid-earth


fea.

Medon: m. The drinke Mede,or Bragot.

Medullaire: com. Marrowie, of marrow.

Medulle: £. Marrow; pith.

Spinale medulle. Seeke Spinal.

Medulleux: m. euf>: f.Marrowie, pithie, firong ; fill
of marrow.

Meftai&t: m, À fault offence trefpa(fe,mifdeedsa wrong,
abufè,difpleafüre,bad part, fhrewd turne.

ai: m, Cte: £ Mifdone,trefpafed;offended.

Meffaire. To trefpefsafendsmifdoc againfi ; to wrong,
abufè,deale treacheroufly, play falfe with.

Meffiance: f, Diflruftmiflrufi, fufpition, iealonfie.

Mcfher. Se meffier de. To difirufi,miftruft,baue in iea-
loufie, put finall confidence in. :

Mcgalopfychie: £ SMagnanimitie ; or, as Magnani-

mite.

Mcgicier.as Megiffier.

Megis: m, Tawings ; tbe offalls, or peeces cut from
skinnes in tawing ; or the liquor wherein they ave, or
baue beene tawed.

Megiflerie: f. The tawingor dre fing of (thiane)skinnes
for Gloues,Purfs,&c:

Mcegiffier: m. A tawer,or lawyer ; a Fell-monger, a
Leather-dre er.

Megifte. erie great. €Rab.

Megle: m. 4 kind of forked Pick-ax,or Grubbing-ax.

Megre: f.Looke Maigre: f.

Megtelin: m. A leane ferag,lanke flarueling,

-Megue. # Maigue.

Mehaigné: m, ée: f. Lamed,maymed ; grove impo-
tent,muchweakened by extreame hurts received, care
taken,or toyle indured, : ph

Mehaigner. To mayme, or make lame with blowes ; to
weaken, bruize, or founder by extreame care, firipes,or
toyle. j

Mchaing: m, A mayme ; or, an extreameweakeneffe,
impotencie, or abatement of firength, in the bodie, by
hurts receined,care taken,or toyle indured,

I n’eft cheval qui n° ait fon aing: Prov. No
horfe without fome bruixe;no man without one fault or
other. ; tenet

Mejane: f. Amizzen fayle; alfo, a Guilt-bead,o7 Got.

lennie of a middle fixe. !

Meiche: £ The weeke (or fauffé)of a candle ; the match
ofa se pe sn for a SR cd ” alfè,a
tent (for a wo Tins: rme, or all of a bigneffè, and
theres differing from Tente, which is bigger at one
end then at the other. - = An PEUT?


Defcouvrir la meiche.s in Defcouvrir. (from birds,


id bef wich venting ametchsdee quick gt


rai CO: QE


&,la meilleure chofe qu’ ils ont,&c,
Ila eu du meilleur. He bath gotten the vittorie.
Courtes folies font les meilleures: Prov. The fhor-


teft follies are the beft; (and thereof may the next Pro- |


uerbe be under ftood;
ras plus bref eft le meilleur: Prov, The fhorter the
better.
Qui avec fon feigneur mange poires il ne choifit
as des meilleures : Prov. Looke Manger.
curer. To improue,better ; make better.


Mein: m. A proper name for a man; and particularly, |


the name of a Saint, who is held the Patron of the Scur-
hie ; and hence;


Mal de fain& Mein. The wild {cab, mange, or feur-
HLE,


Meix. as Mex. ;
Melancholie: f. Melancholie,blacke choler ; fadneffe,


penjinenelfe, beauinefe, thoughtfullnefe, care-taking 5 |


on , retyrednefe,

elancholie artificielle.Oyle of Vitrioll,or Coperas;
tearmed fo by fome en becaufe being [pied on
the ground,it boyles of it felfe,like the Melancholie cal-
led, Atra bilis.
Melancholie louviere. Seeke Louvier.
Elle fait plufieurs petites nelancholies à fon amy.
She playes him many wanton trickes, or puts bim into
many pretlie extafies.

Melancholier. Se melan. To be melancholicke, fad,
penfiue, beanie; to forrow,gvieue,take thought,

Melancholique: com. Melancholicke, fad , pen(iue,
Kara thought full ; retyred ; fullen ; full of blacke


Melandrin : m. A féa-fifh, that (bis blackifh colour ex-
cepted) refemblesthePearch, ' .

Melanterie: f A caufticke mineral ( of the color of
Sulpbure) found in Brae mines.

Melegette, The ppice called Graines, or Graines of Pa-
radice, R

re: FA The Larch,or Ti j > el and (as Me-
eze) the gumme,or teare iffiring from it,

Melet: m. A fwall, great-eyed, and little-mouthed fea-
fib, otherwife much refembling (though not fo daintie
as) the Anchoua, whereof fome bold jt to be a kind; or,


4; LÉ
Melette: f, A verie fall, ft,and fat fea-ffb, bred of
raine,and water, and called the Smie, or fea-Ground-


Meleze: f. The eumme,or teare of the Larch tree; alfo,
the tree it felfe ; whence ;
Refine demeleze. The Turpentine thats ordinarily
fald by Apothecaries. .
Meliceride: f. Animpofume, or fore, whofe bumor re-
fembleth bone.
Melichore. A winged Scorpion that bath two flings; al-
fora precious lone thats white on the one fide, and of a
honie colour ont the other, é
Melicrat: m. Métheglin,or Mede; drinke made of wa-
ter and bonie fodden together. ”
Melifot:m. Melilot Plaifler Clauer,Harts Claner,
Melilot d'Italie. Ftalian Claner.
Medlilot de montaigne. Herborift or Tetvifilie;tcar-
_ med (Northward) Bader or Baier. : ?.
Franc melilot. The fame; or milke-Trefoile , fianb


Trefoile. 1. >
Melin: m. rd yellow, firew colour, a colcur be-
p= a

} An tement, a bettering; 4AN'a-
king, or growing, better ; and inten a epson
7e: e;


Original from
[THE GHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


Mu Se Gr RS FENTE


?


AR RER LL, AVES


M E N


Menaçant. Menacing,threatening.
Menace : f. 4 menace,a threat.
Menacé:-m, ée: £. Menaced;threatened, «
Menacement: m. A menacing,a threatening.
Menacer. To menace,to threaten.
Il ne le menace pas de molles. Tis Bo /mall
matter, no fleight mifchiefe, wherewith be threatens
kim,
Tel menace qui eft bau: Prov. Some threaten that
à beaten. a kr
Tel menace qui a gr Prov. Looke Peur.
Menaceur: m na pr os rete
De grand menaceur peu defaiét: Prov. Great me-
nacers,little men-backers.
Menaceux: m. eufe: f. Menacing,threatfill.
Menage: m. A bringing, leading, conducting ; band-
ling, manage carriage.
Menandé. Surely,out of queflionswithout doubt;(aGo/-
fiplie oath,or a[feucration.)
Mendé. as Menandé,
Mendeux: m. eufe: f., Erronious, faultie, nasghti
lewd, falfe.
Suture mendeufe. The feame whereby the. bone of
the temples is ioyned with the feull.
Mendiant : m. 4 beggar.
Mendiant: m, ante: f. Begging,
Mendicité: f. Meni begaric beget
Mendience : f. A begging. .
D cee To beg,to crane an almes, to goe from dare to


Mendele: f.4 Cacharel fifh. ;
Mene: f 4s Mi
Mené: m. ée: f a brought; guided ,condutted,direc-
ted; managed; moued,induced, perfuaded ; alfo,oucr-
raught, fubdued, fetcht in.
Menéa S. Mathürin. Gulled made a foole of:
Mal mené. 1 bardled,abufèd, bardly vfed; fore'l
cd to;wearied,tyredjidw -fallen;imboffed,or almofi fpet,
asa Deere by hard Purfuit, -
Mencau de fenetre. The tranfome, or
window.
Mens: f. À plot,confpiracie, prattife; private
ift, fitbtiltie deuife; a bu re tal
the direët,or outright cour(e of 4 fying Deere. :
bamenéeda Sergent. C'eft quan le Sergent va
fur Jes lieux du fi & meine tefmoins pour heater
en fon exploi&. :
Vn faifeur demenées. A Polypragmonymedier, com-
mon barrater;bu f


si sa ofa


nage,or handle; alfo,to moue induce,toll on,perfuade ;

alfo,to fubdue,ouer-reach, fetch in.
: Menerl'afne.To be laughed at,or little accounted of,

by all men.
 Mener barant devant eux. To driue,or chafe before
them with blowes ; and in fight, to purfue berdor fine
- bard oe ton Ee es Le

ay & To put unto caringser
ot rai ; to bring unto drudgerie.
à la bonne eau. To fleale(a ie)

| pee enifle au Taureau, To play the bard.


versa te


men


t L- ET ene 32 fl:
Erin


| Go gle.


Menet.To bring,lead ; guide,condu£t,direët;afo,10ma-


To precio a ita tafe
A Lo Serene =<


M EN


Mener le train de.T 0 follow the bufinefe of.
Meucr vne trompe. To drive a top ; Looke Trompe.
Cclane me meine pas. Fam not ruled, not frayed
by that; 1 neither beed, nor refpeët i it; it prewailes no~
thing with me.
Ily-a-vn mois que la lavandiere nous meine. The
Laundreffe hath put vs off this month.
Qui femme croit, & Afne meine,fon corps ne fera
ia fans peine: Prov. He that beletnes a woman, and
ney an Affe,bath brought bis bodie (and mind) tan e-
uill pale.
= Oifons menent paiftre 6 Oyes: Prov. Looke
ifon.

Meneftran rf. A-companic of Minfrells:

Meneftrandier: m4 Minfivell,or Fidler.

Meneftrel. The fame. = .m.)

Mencfirier:m. The fame ; alfo,as Gaian,

Menier. as Propre; (an old word.)

MERE Le Looke Maniguette,

Meninges. Two skianes, or filmes which emwrap the


braine.
Mennetot. The name of a fiveet apple.
Menon:.m. A guelded Gagt.
Menone., A Minfirell, @Poi&evin.
Menotes : £. Manacles,band-fetters,
er :f. The Table-line in the band; (a tearme of
Palmiiftrie.) ©
Menfonnier. «s Manfonnier.
Menfonge: ee Abe, fibsleafing,cntrath atalejenf,
Le, Fafe report.
Les fonges font menfonges : Pra, There is no truth
in dreames.
Menfonger: m. ere: in Lying, falfe; ontrue, fained,
ttc D bulou amiffe,
Menfonger. To lye, fi, fit, fable cog, fainei to forge,
pt deliucr,an untruth.
Menfongerement. Lyingly, fabulonfly, falfely, on


ca) on rm. ale: £ Menfirualljor menpruosbelo- À
ME ,0r like,unto a womans flowers. À
iene é: m4 womans flowers; ‘ite montblie difeafe,


or teaymes.
Menfurablc: com, meafibable,
nm m,ale:f. tea theme belonging to
the mind, (onely) in the mind
Mentaitre: m. Calamint, mountaine Mint.
Mente: f The bearbe Mint,or Mints.
Meniteaigué. Speare-Mint, garden Mint, érèdes
Mint,Mackerell Mint,our Ladies mint.
ogg aquatique, Fÿfh Mint, water Mint, brooke
int. .
<q chevaline, Horfe Mint, wild Mints; water
int,
Mente crefpuë. (urled Mint,red garden Mints. .
Mente de noftre Dame. as Mente Romaine,
Mente Grecque. The fame. YA
Mente Romaine, Speare-Mint ,balme-Mint,Macke-
rell Mint, garden Mint, browne pp our 3."


ente Sarrafine, The fame.
ela re Mini inal are


Mint,
Mentereau: m. 4
Menterie: f. 4 pe foi ling fibbing


alfo.
Menteitt :m, Ai 7 fier ier, fabler, cogger, ls


co ames Prov. See Plaideur.
Men.


LPS 2h oe.


ME N


Menteufement: Moff vntruly,verie falfely.
Menteux: m.eule:£. Full of hes, fraught «04 lea-
jings, fables vntruthes.
enchaftre: m. Calamint mountaine Mint. :
= Menthe. Looke Mente.
2 Menti: m.ie: f. Lyed, fained, filed, fabled.
Mentibules: €. The james. ,
Mention: f. Mention ; remembrance ; a nomination,or |
naming of ; talke had, Speech pafed,of.
entionné: m. ée: f. Mentioned ; nominated , na-
“med, remembred ; fomewhat (poken,or talked of’ 3 tou-
wched in diftourfe.
Mentionner. To mention; remember: {nominate name;
fheake or talke of; touch mdif ourfe,
Mentir. To (ye, fib, fable,cog, foi, faine, forge untruths,
coyne leafings,tell alyes alfa;fo doe any thing contrats
to it (elfe; whence ;
Bon cœur ne peut mentit: Prov, An boneft bedré
cannot utter (or be the author of) an untruth; and;
L Le bon fang ne peut mentir. 4 woble nature will
not yeeld unto base conditions; or cannot,when per
i offered, conceale it felfe. »:
Mentir commewn arracheur de detits, To lye lke 4
tooth.dvawer ; (we fay that Barbershane all thenewes
in pe countrey; "and they that tell muchnewes tell many |
2e Mxhe)
… | On ne doit point mentir en Vin: Pro. Wine telleth
truth,and fhould not be belyed. >
Menton: m, The chinne, M


De


den,jncourage. a
e: Rabaifler le menton 2. To bumble dei sbring toy, |
placke downe.)
Tenirle menton à. To fuccour, fau; fippors, main:
 taine;vphold,
Celuy peut hardiment nager à quil l'on fouftiene! le
_. ‘Menton: Pro. He muft needs guess tbat is beld vp
- by the chinne (fay we +)
… Laverru ne füt jamais À menton re Pro. Ver:
«tue ncucr grew old; the vigor thereof did neuer decay,
Mentonnuicr: mere: £Ofor belonging tothe chinne.
entule: f. 4 mans yard, @I Rab,
Menu. Lemenu.:Tbe prettie difhes, or fine meates at
Table; alfo,the bead, feetsand paunch of a
im. UE: £. Liu; | all, finc,thinge, fle efi
till, exile.
Menus droi@s. AU vailesjor fees belonging to amof.
à fieersand particularly the bead, feet, skin,and intralls


À of the flaughter-boufè;referues for bimfelfe


sidi s al ,iddes Le;or prettie thoughts)»
Lemenu peuple. dt the seras |


45 DR es common people,» |


great (ort of little peeces,
Menuéinent. 5


or |
75


jets or trifles, © 10m


ls


= Lever lemmenton à. To bardensaferesbeartenjimbal-


» 0fa flaughtered beafts or a I uch parts as à Coakezor |
onus panais The white Mallow, marfh Male,

x Mallow, th À
Men ues penfécs: Paunfies, Harts-eafe boue elite in |


Common, paires Frisialigue
à | Goutte d gourte Ja mers efgoures: Pho, Le


le
2e EE gr wate staf, inal ofl, a


MER


Menuet: m. The name of à fiveet apple, that yeelds'ex-
. cellent Cyder.

Menuet: m.ette: £ small fh Jittle prertie, fine,thinne.

Menuëté : f. Smallneffe,littlenefe,exilitie, flendernépe,
fineneffe,thinneffe.

Menuisailles: £. Small trafh, lender toyes, little trifles,
or offialls ; alfo,as Menus droiéts;or tbe bead, feet,and
paunchof dr edible creature,

Menuife: #1 Small fifh of divers forts ; or, the fall fy
of fifh caft inio a Pond, ec, for the toring thereof; al-
fo,a kind of net wherewith Sich fifh may be caught ; al-
: fo,any finall teafh, guts,or garbage; and the gobbets, or
parings of fifi cut,and caf} away by Fifbmongers;al(o,
a finall Gudgeon, or fifh bred of the fpawne, bit newer
growing tothe bigne fe of a Gudgeon,

enuifement;'m. 4 minifhing, extenuating » making
fimall; a crumbling,or breaking verie final,

Menuifer. To minifh, extenuate, impaire vevie much,


. makeveriefinall ; to crumble ; to grind, breakesor ca


Menuifetie: £ Seeling,wain{cotting,loyners workes al.

fo,any {mall worke.

|} Menuñfetéif. Smadlneffe,lititene[;thinncfe, fiéenefe,

exilitie, flendernefe.

Menuifier: m. 4 Joyner. .

Menuifier: m. ere: f. Ofjor belonging toa ower, or

to Foyners worke.

Menufaillerie: Small flaffe,*

| Menuvillé:f.# Manivelle (in the laff fence.)

Meon: m.Mew,Spignell ,Baldimonie ,Bearewort.

Mequine. # Mechine, € Pic.

Mer: f The Sea; the Mayne alfo, the hollownelfe , or
channell of a: Wine-preflé; the round RER yabere:
in thegrapes are preped.

et d'amont, The Adriaticke fea; the Re herein
Venicedoth panda.
Mer d'aval. The Tytrhenian,or Tuftane fea,
Mer majour. The Euxinofea; the fèa which di des
Europe ds: Afa. .
»y Merde procéz. dn infiniteonendleffe fit
Diable de mer. A (éa-Coot,or Cormorant, «*

: gr andéiméer.The firft a of Priniledges ner: nd

ares.) sy 0 74 he TA

Verte er. S ane sss ana

ntre deux mers. Js vaderftood of the countre that
dyes betiadené the: two large ‘Gafton Riners ‘Dor

.. donnezayd Gatonne. : >: -

Mefler 5 abla le ciel. To make a borribte: Caf
\ ie SHY y 229 RES 0 te
ingler en tas mer.Tofalé inthe Mayne} 20 baue
dup enoughto worke onjar at wills 9191
Tenir la mer, To command at, or bemaifer ofthe
Seas TEIN Se À 2011919
: Tenir lamer. To worke,arfayle againft thetyde. A
*Celuy qui fe mer fir la inet oiril ef fol) ouvilreft


oe


| . pouyteobilaenvie dextourir: Prov.: He that Unto


. the fea consmits-his bodic; is either poore or pe cad
anoddie.


« Efgouteri si fit RQ 2 att
Les AE pans wie we pig : Prove (Said
when: Pr oe. (Queexe dut of their
Pua Fe art wi nl baue pr em


Cora Ms: RIB ID VE
wget fe choi 3 Techn tl xen ts ne
Ge ragga . Bon. ey er a
naug. toy fending an unjit meffenger, 1.3»
»1 Qui eft fur la mer ne:faic:pas dés ven


:


Sele uen dd es


MER
- veut: Prov, Winds are not fubielt unto thofe that


Qui veut apprendre à prier aille fouvent fur la
. mer: Proy, He that will learne to pray let him goe

M to i 4

erane. , ejane, @Rab,
Meratre: f.4 fl mother.

‘Merc de Chaftel; du Gibet; de la Iuftice. The feat,
: place,or marke of the boufe of a Lord Chaftelain,and
of (bis) Gibbet, or Gallowes, which be fignes of bigh
Faro,


Mercadant: m, A poore marchant, paltrie trade[inan;
one that deales but for {mall or fleight ware.
ercadence : f Small trafficke.

Mercader: m. 4 Marchant,or Tradefinam.

Mercandeau: m. A paltrie marchant; poore bargainer,

PF sm chafferer,beggarlie chapman,
ercandier : m.# Mercandeau.

Mercantil: m. ile: £ Marchantlie, marchant-like.

Mercenaire: com, Mercenarie,bireling,or bived that
takes hire wages,or bribes.

Mercerie: f. Small ware,chaffer.

Mercerot: m. A Pedler, apaltrie Haberdafher.

Merci:f. Mercie; alfo, pitie,compaffion ; tender-bear-
tedneffe ; alfo, pardon, remiffion, forgiuene|fe ; alfo,
a benefit, or fawour ; alfo, thankes ginen for a be-
ne


Relief merci. The reuenue one na in ome ple
ces) of euerie third yeare,ycelded for a Relief.
i: 2% ie: £ Thanked ; as in Dieu merci. God be


. thanke

Merci-dieu vilain. Gods mercie villaine; or though F

M2 it, you rogue (an angrie womaus oath.)
ercier: m. A good Pedler, or meane Haberdafher of
finall waves; a tradefinan that retayles all manner o
finall ware, and hath no better then a Shed, or bootbe
far bis fhop.

Roy des merciers. Looke Roy.

_Tuervn mercier pour yn peigne. To punifh light
faults with beanie penaltics;or to take a great rewenge
of a final wrong.

\ Chafcun mercier prife fes aiguilles,& fon panier :
Prov. To eneric one his ownefi ive
‘A chafque mercier fon pannier:
bis owne burthen beare:

_ In'eft pas mercier quine feait faire fa loge: Prov,
The Pedlers gaine will be but finall that cannot reare
bimfelfe a fall. CE HAN
Petit mercier petit ier: Prov, The little Ped.
ler alittle ete mt a aa 113 than

Mercier. (Of three 5) to , OF gine t xf

Mercredi. Pdf,

Mercuire: f. a Mercuriale,

Mercure: m, The God Mercurie ; Planet Mercuries |

ine veces ; al, Quick-filuer. ,

Iladumercure à latefte. He is fantafticall, bumo-

vous, new-fangled, giddie-beaded ; alfo, be #4 verie


Mercurial: male: ‘Mercinrie; made of Mercu- |
4 me under the Pi Mercurie; bence, bumo- |


Me diode recs aercalaibaers
whereof there be tbree kinds ; a male, and ;


et each man


t
15


Mereuriales:£. Afteraone Sitings appsinted io be


Go gle


MER


held on woman’ firf euerie fifteene dayes, orsat
Leafjonce a saftervards(by an Edict of Charles
the ninth,in the yeare 1566) once enerie three months,
in all Townes of Parliament ; and at length (byan I~
diét of H,3, Anno 1579) in all Prefidiall Townes,and
but once ia fix months ; The Judges in them be certaine
Select Prefidents of the Place, who are to examine,and
cenfure the faults committed by th’ Officers of th ordi-
narie Courts held there (or elfewbere within that Fu-
vifdittion)and during the continuance of that bufiic{fe
muflintend no other,

Mercurializer.To mercurialize it ; to be bumorous,
ee 3 alfo,to prattle bable,tatke oner-
KC. .

Mercy. Looke Merci.

Merdaille: f. A crue of fhittenknaues, of filthie fcown-
drells, of finking fellowes.

Merde: £. Mans dung,turd,excrements ordure.
Merde de fer. The drofe of Iron,

Merde oye. À Goofe-turd greene,

Robbe d’ argent brodée £ merde. Ax excellent
Text ill expounded,or commented on; (for which caufe
Rabelais cal/s fo Iuftinians rene )

‘A cul de foirard toufiours abonde merde : Prov.
There wants no turd at [bitten fellowes tayles.

Le Porc a tout bon en foy fors que la merde: Prov.


Looke Porc.

Merde. 1n fiead of, Mort Dieu.

Merdefer. The drofe of Fron

Merdefin: m, A Phifition ; tearmed [à in derifion:

Merdeux:m, cule: f. Befhitten, berayed, all-to-be-
turded, full of ordure.

Merdigues. Mother of God; (a vufticall oath.)

Merdré. as Merdé, qRab.

PPrrdupues Mother of God; (a ruflicall oath,or Friter-
tection.)

Mere: f, A mother ; al/o,the wombe,or Matrix of awo-
man ; alfo,the earth of a Fox,or bole of a Badger; alfo,
a great falting-tub for Hogs-flefh; alfo, a great pit.or
trench, whereinto the fi ous moifisre of watesie
ground ls conueyed by fmall cuts, or ditches; alfo,the
anterior and inner fide,or face,of an Aftrolabe.
Mere des cailles. 4 Rayle; 07,4 brooke-Owftll.
Mere d'une fontaine, The head of a Fountaine, or
Conduit walled ahve with,0r vouered with a vault of,


ee
Siang grand. A grandmother, a grandam,
D pe à “te The dob shin that conereth
4? outfide of the braine, eepeth it from bein
burt,or touched by the skull. 7 f 7
"Piemere. Athin,and cleere shin,or filme, next tothe
braine, the which it invwraps on all fides, and nourifhes
~ byveffels receined from other parts. ii
C'eft le ventre ma mere. I will comenomorethere,1
will doe no more fo, Bae 74
Il s’en va prendre Ja mere au nid. Said of ome that
fieales (inieaf) towards another, with a purpofe todoe
bim fome unbappie tricke : Said alfo of a nice,and pre-


: bypocr 11e. ted
Mere piteufe fait fa fille roigneufe : Prov.A tender


| | mother breeds a feabbie daughter.


La mere du timide ne fçait que c'eft de pleurer:
Prov. The comards dam knowes tot what wee


” Monde EN, sale gett:
Mer nh 4 of itp resin fale, right, pare; plaine,


Mere


Rd fi ei ho 2 At a? i)
‘ | pe


SPS SIL i
Bateau mere. A great falt-boat,or barke; or,the chie-
Ffisor greatel of aj 28 191 NTIC
Sentine mere. À little falt-büator barke. 1: 0

Tout fin mere nud. Naked vp,or énen,to the bellie.
Mereau: m,.4 Counter (to caft withall;) alfo, a Token
4 (receiued at Church by one that meanes to communi-
Meregrand. Looke Meresn inti oi 6) is :
| Merelles. Le Ieu des inerelles. The boyifh game called

Merills, or fiue-pennie Mortis; played bere mof} com-
_, monly with flones; but in Francewith pawnes,or men

made of pur pofe,azd tearmed Merelles.

Mere-perle. Motber of pearle. 0. PERL
Merge: m, 4 name for diuerswater fowle, that of@ to

ducke much ; as the Puffin,Cormorant,Didapper sere.

4 Meriane: £ Nooue-refl, fleeping adayes, or at mid-day.
} Norm! UM ts Sita M
} Merianer. To refl.or flcepe at noone-tide, \
ridian:as Meridien. 4 4: sh.
eridien: m, The Meridian; a circle whichpaffing
through both the Poles,and through our Zenithfmbere-
Soeuer) diuides the Sphereinto two equall parts;th one

Orientall,th’ other Occidental. bistA
À Meridien: m.enne: f, Meridian; South, or Soxther-

lie; of or belonging to,the Meridian,mid-day,or noone,
Meridional: m. ale: £ Meridionall,Southerlie,of the

South,on the South fide ; belonging to noone-tide.

» Cercle meridional, as Meridien ; called fo,becaufe
whenfoeuer,and veberefoener the Sunne comes into it it
4% noone. ‘ ¥
À Mein: m.A Sergeant common Baylfe,or fuch like rurale

… Officer in the Cuftomes of La Bourt,
} Merife: f. A finail bitter Cherries TEA Mi
} Merifier: m.. The fmall and bitter Cherrie-tree. |
Merite: m. Merite ; defert jan ad worthie of recom-


: AMI


pence. l
2 merites d’un procez. The Pleadings of a caufe;
the Bill, Anfiver,Reply,and Reioinder ; the titles alled-
ed, proofés produced,or matter contained therein.
erité:m.ce: f, Merited,deferued,earned: |.
Meritément. Meritorioufly deferuedly,worthilywith


good canfê. *
Metiter. To merit,to deferue.
* Mcritoire:com. Meritoria

of reward, Fra
Meritoiretnent. Meritoriouflyydeferuedly, wortbily.
Merlan: m..4 whiting,a Merling


L deferwing,wortbie


(of it hardneffe) Buckhorne.
Merlanc. as Merlan. | Les
Merle: m..4 Mearle,Owfell,Blackbird.

Merlebleu. 4/fral Owfell,that v{ually builds amon


Merete on wormes, fruits,and feeds,


A kind of Mearle of a linelie red co-
Merle au collier. Aïind of Thrufh that bath a wbi-


tifh ring about sh >
erle de mer. The (oc 7 fea-Tench; a duskic,
and daigtie Perch.
Merle noir. The ordinarie Owfell.
Grand merle. 4 Go 34 ine bird,
os at bigger then an and leffe then-a Cue=
ACER ET TER den Ag
impoffibilities or À en» or el
au A


= | Go gle


. S à "


MER M ER
_ Mere goutte: Uaprelfed wine, les uch an of it | Merle: f. as Mefle; à Medlars
A iftills from the grapes,or me immediatly after | Merlet: m. À battlement (of a wall.)
© they be layed in the prefe. tol. | Merlette: f. 4 Martler,in Blafon.


erlanfalé, 4 dyed whiting; the ff mbich aye cal


+ | ~Vines,forthe moft part among bills and imbigh places.


Merlier: m. 4 Medlar tree.
Merlus,ou Merluz : m. A Melhwell,or Kecling a kind.
‘of. ow Cod whereof Stock fifh is made. 2
Chaufles à queuë de merlus, Looke Chau
Mermelade:£f. Marmalade.
Merque. as Marque.
Merque de bois. A rowe,tift,or groue of trees necre
to a bonfè. “
Merques: f, Be,in a paire of beads, the biggeft,or leaf.
Merrain,& Merrien. as Marrein.
Mers. Batture faiéte au deflus des mers. Upon the
bead,or face. ‘
Merveillable: com. Maruellous admirable.
Merveille: £ 4 maruell,wonder; miracle; a monftrous
« thing; firange accident admirable matter.
‘Ainerveilles. arwelloufly, miraculoufly,wonder-
fillyjadmirably, frangely. x
Pois demerveilles. The blacke winter Cherrie, Fndi-
an Havt,or Hart-peafe.
erveille; ou,Pomme deiner. The Balfam, or Balme
\ apple; (an yea
erveille femelle. The female Balfam apple ; beares
a purple flower, and differs from themale in all things
but the fiuit;which (though like unto) is fomewhat leffe
then-his. ru
Merveille mafle. The male Balfame, or Balme apple,
 (tearmed particularly the apple of Ferufalem) beares a
int-yellow,or flraw-coloured flower.
Merveilleufement. Maruelloufly,miraculoufly, won-
der filly, frange).
Metveilleux: m.eufe : £ Marvellous mir aculous,won-
de? fill,admir able, fti'ange.
Mety : m. The guilet,weafin,or pipe, whereby meat paf:
(eth downe into the flomacke.
Més: m. 4 me(fé, or feruice feat; acourfe of difhes
at table,
Belle chere vault bien vn més: Prov. A cheerefull
looke fills vp balfè-emptie difhes.
Qui a fourmage pour tous més il le doit couper
bien efpez: Prov.,He that bath nought but Cheefe at
— and night , muft banifh the Phifitions penny-
weight, À
Mes:ThePlurallof Mon ; as,Mes livres,habits,&c.
Mes. for Plus,zs Oncques mes. Newer more.
Mes, in Compofition, 1 as muchas Mal, peruerting and
turning to ul the fence of the words it precedeth » 4s in
Mefaife,Mesfaire,&c; Or as our Compounds, Vn, and
Mus, which we vfe-unto thé fame purpofe..
Mefadvenance : f Vacomeline(fe,misbecomming.
Mefadvenir à. To mishappen,to fucceed ill into,
efadventure: f. ©Mifaduenture, mifchance, misfor-
tune, mifhape 1: y Bos it
Mcfadyenuë: £ as Mefadventure, ~~
Mefaile: f Difeafe,trouble,molefation, calamitie; mi-
ferie,affliction. ' RE
Mefange: f, ATitmoufe,or Tittling.
: Melange bleué. Our ordinarie Titmonfe.
efange hupée. A copped finall Titmotfé,that bath
a blacke bead {potted with white, a light-browne bo-
die,white breaft,and afb-coloured thighes:
Mefange àla longue queut.the lôg-tayled Titmon{e;


Mefange nonnette. The little Titmoufe called a
Nunne, becaufe fhe feemes toweare (as a Nunne doth)

a fillet about her béad. | ce à
_ + Ogg Mer


; Dep ek o>. à NUE Be LT MR Se a ee Te EAE PPO ee ree | gee ue
eS roe a + Fr. ”
. } >
M E S M E Ss


Mefaraiques. Veine mes. Looke Veine.

Mefarriver. ‘To mifarrive, to bappen; or. come unfortu-
nately UAL.
“A qui il mefarrive on luy mesfaiét: Prov. (So apt
are men towrong th cals tate

Me wickedly , if} ur
naughitily, filtbily, m a, LT roghi
knauifhly, villanonfly; en frowardly, mi(cbicwonf:
D; paltrily,courfely.

Mefchance: f A mifthiefé,or mifcbance.

Mefchanceté: f. wickedneRe,impictic,ungracioufaelfe,

knauerie, naughtinefe, villanie, vilenelfe ; 4 bad aët,

levod pranke, filthie part, finfull deed.

Mefchant. Wicked, impious,vngracious, naughtie, ou

lewd, villanous, roguifh; vile, filthie,{curuie, mo

pures alfo, paltric, courfe, unwortbie ; 3 alfo, cur, mi

chieuous,har{h, froward.

Mefchant ouvrier ia ne trouvera bons outils: Pro,

À bungler feldome fits bim wit 7 tooles.

Mefc hantes paroles ont mefchant lieu: Pro. Bad

words doe find but bad acceptance.

Mefchante parole ieétée va par tout a la volée :

Prov. A bad word caf, foone roues,abroad.

De mefchant homme bon K oy: : Pro. The froward,

00!


UN Vers


74 ; or untraétable man proues a good King.

5 2 nee hofte boas pren Pro, Ance-

=: à Le (or ghef}) a notable

4 Tout mefchant eft ignorant: Prov. Allnanghtie

Ki. = ave ignorant.

14 : Aujourd'uy marchant demain mefhant: Pro. To

ER by day a Marchant,to morrow amifcreant,

ES Bonbaftard, c'eft avanture, mais mefchant c’ eft

4 de pv Prov. Baftards by chance dre good, by aa-
4 ture ba


Sans eftre pourfuivy le mefchant prend {a fuite :
Prov. rhe finner flyes before be be purfued ; felfe-guilt,
though nought elfé makes a finner fly.

Mefche. «s Meiche.

Mefcheif: m, Mifchiefe.

Mefchenicre: £ Candle-weeke Mullein.
Mefcheoir à, To misbappen,(ucceed ill, fall ont vnlucki-


y
“A quimefchet on luy mefofize: Prov. ‘Thoft whom
neceffitie, or misfortune frs to fell,are neueroffered


the full vor Py
Aux bonsinefchet il: Pro. The be/t men(commenly)


baue the worft =F ify we fay,The bonefter
man the worfe bis

I n’eft pas en feud is uinemefcheutt oncques: :
Prov. He flands not furely that did neuer flip.
Mefchine: £ 4 wench,maid féruant,miskin fro.
Mefchinon: f. A girle; a littleor young maid fernant,
Melcle:£ Maplin; wheat and Rye mingled. €Lan+


gued,
“Metcogneu, Il ne s’eft point mefcogneu. He ac-
juowledged, forgot not, was mindfull, or not ours,


Mefcogno: ffance: f. V7 ledgement

Sons. |
ignor : oy

oo te: m. Yet


MEN .
Fm fal peruert, poner | M
: mn


» Go gle


Mefcontentement : m, homes offence; ilk
Metooorentern. 7e To dipleaseifcontent, offend, die il


fatisfattion to.
Se mefcontenter de. To take the pet, or pepper in |
2 males at; to be ill fatisfied with; noway to se


Mefconter. To mifcount,ynifveckonsfayle,or erre in recs


honing,
Mefereable: com. Vnbeleeuable, fuspeltable, nottobe |
credited,un to be trufled.
creance:f. Mifereancie, misbeleefé, a wrong bé. |
ef.
Mefcreant. es misbeleeni ibleffe; incre-
dulous,miftrufifüull, 5 on £ ms
Mefcreu, as Mefcru.


Mefcroire. To miftruft, fufpett, pease litile 5 eet ;
Small confidence, in; alfo, to play the mifèreantor be- |


leeue amiffe. |
Mefcru: m.uê:f. Mifirufied, fufpetted, not credi "1
no way


beleeued. ;
Mes-dames. The stl, or file of the French Kings :


daw ters.
ifelles. The tide,or flite of the French Kings
; a aol
Me(dire. Te Baten srl om, detradd


e. as Mefdiffo


.


Meldifane Reproachful, detratineobliquios, or. t


brious,rayling,reuiling.

Il ne feroit nuls mefdifans s’il n'eftoit des oui

— Pro. There would be none to rayle if none would
are.


Mefdiffon: £. Reproach, obloquie detraBtion,obtvetiati=


Mefdonner. To mifginesor be flow amilfe.
ME Mere (wantonly.
efeau:m. A mefelled, fanruit, leaporous, laxarous


feux.
Mefl, as Mefeau.
Mefelerie: £ Mefeldne(fe,leaprofie, fcuruineffe,


Mefelles fA leaporous,or feuruie woman.
Mefellerie: £. 4s Mefelerie.
Mefelleux, # Mefeleux:


bomells ; or the fat,tbicke,or double skinnes that faflen
them to the backe,and eachwnto other. — :

Mefenterique: com, Of,or belonging to,the Mefente-
rium.


diftributes it felfe among the fmall guts, and,as vnder
one, which goes vato the lower part of the Mefenteriti,
pes re) a
‘o write ill,or amifie,of; to ain
Mel eftimer. ae j -


me


omopprobrious fpeech; reuiling,deprauing;rayling on.
Mele: £ Aneighth,or prie of eight in Mufickesal-


Plus craflèux que lataffe d'un mefeat. SeeCraf À


Mefleuxs m, eufe: f. Meféld, leaporous, full of i


Mefentere: m, The Mefenterium, or the middle of ike |


Arteres mefenteriques. Are two; an upper, which.


audi


—, di des


LR eee.


Mefgue:fwhay.

Mesguis. as Megis. TA

Meshaigne: com, Peeuifh, wayward, froward, il to
pleafe; (the bumor of meit lame perfèns.)

| Meshain. as Mehaing. RS

Meshingandé: m, ée: f.(4lmofl)off the bindges;loofè
in euerie joint. .

Meshuy. Not to day,not this day, not till to morrow ; (a
word applyed moft properly to the whole later part of
the


Meflange: £. A mixture medley,mefb; mingling; botch-
pot, gallymaufrey; a compofition, or colleétien of many
feuerall things.

angé:m, ée:f. Mixed, mingled, melled, blent ;
inmbled, fhuffled,budled togetber. :

Meflanger. To mingle,mix,blend;, mafh, mell ; iumble,
Shuffle; make a confufed medley, huddle things toge-

ther, | 3

| Meflangeur: m. 4 mingler, mixer, blender ; iumbler,
thu ffler,buddler of things together,

Mefle: f. 4 Medlar. Pic.

Avec le temps, & la paille lon meure les mefles:
Prov, Time and afflition fupple barfhefi natures,

| MA: mée: f. Atingled, mixed, put among ; melled ;

medled, intermedled; fhuffled, buddled, or iumbled,

with,

Cheveux meflez. Tangled locks ; alfo, gray baires;

whence; ‘
Vahomme meflé. One thats fl of gray baires; al.

Jo,a general {choller,one that bath a fmattering of all

Arts, :

Peflemeflé. Pell-mell,confifedl, =

_M:fléc: £4 mixture,or medley; a blending, mingling,

re ; alfo,a fight, fray, confliét, combat, bickering,

| battell.
Meflénent. 24ixtly,confifedly,in a buddle,as a botch-
> -pot,one with another.- ;

Mefler. To mingle, mix, blend, mafb,mell; to huddle,
fhuffle,iumble ; confound. :

Se mefler de. To meddle, intermeddle, deale with,
haue a hand in. : ;
Se mefler du meftier. Looke Meftier. :

"Cela meflera nos fufées. That will unite our canfes,
or make themalike.
Heft bien heureux qui fe mefle de fes affaires:
Prov. Happie 1 he that followes bis owne bufinel]e ;
Looke Heureux.
Qui fe mefle d'autruy meftier il trait fa vacheen
vn panier: Prov, Looke Meftier.

Mefleure: £. 4 medleymixture; mingling; medling.

1 Meflié. as Meflé. (Vandofmois, Ape)

| Meflicr: m. 4 Medlar tree; alfo(the name of) a fruit {ull

| white Vine, whofe leaf is almoft round ; whence;

; emeflier commun, The moft fruitfull kind thereof,
Lefranc meflier, Another, which beares the bef

LR

+ grosmeflier. Hath the greateft flocke, and yeclds

the greateflgrape. M

Meflicrs: m, The plurall to Meflier ; afo,'ines offeue-

ral kinds amd colours growing togetber. <i

Mcflinge,& Meflingé. 2s Meflange,& Meflangé,


- dden,or gone awry...
chet. To tres, orgaeaney,to [et the Rept
Perche un: anid poe
marchure: or treading ; an. ve,
À arfetting of the foot ia treading ; ds wrinch, or:


ES
a7


. es FREE sn . .… 3


MES


firaine got in a bone,or ioint by fuch treading.
ne: com, Same, the fame, [elfé, the felfé-fème, the
verie fame,
‘Amefine terre, On the verie ground. |
Eftre à mefines de quelque chofe, Tv bane a thing in
bis power,or choice.
Peftois 4 mefine de ce faire, 7was euenreadieor a-
bout, to doe this.
Pay faiétde mefime vous. I bane done iuf? as you,
Vous n’eftes pas à vous mefine. Your wits runne a
wooll-gathering ; 07, you are not well in your wits,
Les Bourgeois (de ce pais) boivent de bon Vin, &
bint ig de Mefine: fe ord:narie Prouerb in
ne; from the equimocation betweene this mefine
and Meme the name of aRinerinLePerche.

Mefinement. Namely,e/pscially, chiefly principally.

Mines. The plurall toMefme; alo, as Mefmement.
efineté: f. Selfeneffe,it felfe,st owne eRence,or being,

Mefnage: m. Houfebold-fluffe , bufineffe or people; a
houfebold,familie,or meynie.

Poiffon de mefnage. as Belenne.

‘A profit de mefnage. Sowndly,tbroughl,with a wit-

me wisbis icafling or dalliance,to fome purpofé,

Faire mauvais mefnage enfemble, To agree illfano-

redly together,

Remuermefnage contre. To rife vp,or make an in.

farretlion again{t; and hence;

Remueur de mefhage. Anunquitt, feditious, turbu-

lent,or troublefome fellow. "

Tout vient à point qui tient mefnage: Proy, Alls
_ fill that comes to te rer aet.

agé: m. ée: f, Husbanded, thriflil uftd,

Mefñageable: com. ns PE "

Mefnagement: m, Good busbandrie,thhiftineffe, fru-
galitie, warineffe, prouidence; alfo, a bushanding, or
thriftie difpofall, of things.

Mefhager: m. as Mefnagier ; whence the Prowerbe ;

Prou defpendre,&peu gaigner faccage le mefnaer,

Mcfüager. To busband,to vf thriftily,gonerne diftreet.

went the beft or moft of a thing,
efnagerément. Frugally,thriftily, prouidently, like a
good Fasband. gally,thriftily,pr yy, lik

Mefhagerie : f, Husbandrie,or bufwifériesand the ufe,
pe ates thereof.

Mefnagier: m. 4 busband,an houfebolder.

Vn bon ier. A thriftie, warie, frugall, prouï-
dent fellow,one that lookes verie well to bis owm profits
Vn mauvais mefhagier. An vathrifi, feape-thrift,
fquader-good,(péd-a riotous diffolute carele(feyoker,

Mefhagiere: £. 4 boufwife,or hufwifelie woman.

Mefñie : £ A meynie, familie, boufebold, boufebold com.
panie,or feruants, hax esas
De nouveau Scigneur nouvelle mefitie: Pro. New
Lords new Lawes. hur, :

De tel Seigneur telle mefitie: Pro, Like maifler like
meynie, : ss :

Mefoffrir. To vnderbid:to offer leffe for a thing then tis
worth; alfo,towrong,mifie,abufe,  . '

A qui inefcher on luy inefoffie:Pro.Look Meftheoir.

Mcfolabe:m, 4x balfe Afirolabe;an Infirument vfed far
the finding ont of one;or many proportionall lines, °

Mefoiianjoumefouen.tencefirward, fio henceforth

Mefparler.To (peak id,or amiffe ofite deprauedifpraife,

Ve thew tract fe 1 a ‘i
efpartement : m.A misparting; an unboneft,vnfitor
va femelie dinifion. > «2548


:m, An balfe-part ; or a heeping fathing fir
12 À Me :


half the profit comming of'it.
Ge


Yes 7 4
Ds DRA Ca DE er


Dr Na


FER TRE


MES ee


i.


» Se


Tt. De OMe)


M E S


Mesple: € AMedlar,or Open-arfè. "1%
Mesplier: m. À Medlar tree. z
Mesplier fauvage. The Hollie,Huluer,Boie tree,
Mesprendre. To erre miftake ; svanfereffesoiend.
Mespriss m.De(pifall dif, empt,loatbing,
negleG,careleffe regard of.
ant. Coatemning,defpifing ,difefteeming,neglec-
ting,becdleffe of. of.
if€: m.ée : f Defpifed, difefleemed,contemned,
negleéted,not beeded ought fet by.
Mesprifement: m, 4 contemning, #7 feeming, defji-
fiag,difdaining ,negleéting.
Mesprifer. To difèfieeme, contemne, diflaine, defpife,
negleét, make light of ,fet nought by.
Mespeiteretic : f, A coy, fqueamifh, or fornefull


Magee m. A difefleemer, contemner, difdainer,
us one that negleéts, or makes light accompt of,


one: f. Differ offence; a thing done,
or taken,ami

Mefquin: m, 4 wrelch, re fillie groome, poore
fivaine.

Meftien,& Mefrin. as

Mefindgsss Metfidgete as ‘a Meflage; & Meffage-


Meffag rm. 4 ue era alfa mef-
Por ii naan
un) Mes


~ | Æ
Mess i Mee 3 the eflate, office, ov


non of a mefenger.
Meflagier: m. 4 Mefenger; Purfuinant ; Polle; A-
efile,
‘Melfagier folennel An embafador.
Ne fais pas d’un fol ton meffagier: Pro. Send not a
faole.on thine errand make not a foole thy meBenger.
Mefle: € The Maffe,a Mafe.
- Meffe de chafleur. Afhort,or (oone-faid Malfe.
Lamefie Martingaule, An Allarum,or Curfüe bell fo
… tearmed by the inbabitants of Touraine.
Enfans de choéur de la meffe de minuit. Duivre-
flers of midnights Ma 3 night-walking rakelells, or
fiich as haunt thofe night tlie Rites, not Vir bots,
but onelyto:ob,abufe,or play the knaues with,others.
: Quand la meffe fur chantée, fi futla Dame parée:
ass ry Prayers mere ended, Madame ciids ber
CN DTD LU
PV px nfsemelyjil-ftingly oabanifomehy,
ilt-Fauoredly with finall decorum,or comelinefe.


Meffeance: £. A oi tone » unfusablencfexonfit-
neeunfeemelinepe ill fauoreane,
se niga fitting gl Pails a
min Sens pe oe! Epa taped of.
Et MATE beak
effer: m.#s Maïltre ; 4 Maifler; whence; -
monde lemefler:


+ La Cafe
ner fhevvi


ne “ A €: m. Meafvrace ; a mealuria,
À. Mu Ménages mf ce. The appointi A it


aa The the:


M ES


Meffion: £ La Meffion. The BAPE Lawy-
ers,and Schollers) during Vintage; for it begins the [e-
- nenth of September and ends about the eleuenth oc

_ tober. ENorm.

Mcfire. Sir; (The title of a Kaights fa Marchant; and
of a countrey Carate.)

Meflotticr:m. 4 maffing Prieft; or a nickname firbins,

Meftaier. as Meftayer.

oftairie: f. 4 great a Ferme.

Meftais. as M

Meftayer: m, 4 cer; a Hélas: or Plough-
man, Y special [ich a one, as by contraél, is to yeeld
balfe the profits, or increafe of bis land vnito bun of
whom be bolds it ; or fuch a one,as takes or fowes ano-
ther mans land tothe balues.

Meftier: m.4 Trade Occupation, Miflerie,Handicraft;
alfo need, lacke, neceffitie,want,occafion for the vfe, of |
athing; alfo,a Weauers Frame,or Loome; alfo,the wort
of Ale,or Bere ; > alfo,a kind of wafer, which à is not allo-

ether fo ticked as the Gauftre.
Me fiers. À certaine Game wherein alltrades are
counter frited by fines. -
Letmeftier dela guerre. The Art of Warre.
Lemettier ord. sch bawderie;Looke Femme.
S'endormirfurle meftier. Lajily to forelow faint in, |
or giue ouer 4 bufineQe,wben it is at the beight,or balfè
one,
Semefler dumeftier. Femmes qui fe meflent du
moeftier. That deale in the trade you wot of that trade
with their tayles.
gg de faim prés le meftier. To flarue ima Cookes


Creft meftier füré, il n° en eft pas qui veut : Prov.
#0 tevflood oy banefite,)
ieux vault ineltier qu’efpaivier: Prov. Looke EG
— parvier.
Qui fçait meftier il eft renré : Pro, The induftvious


tradefnans vents come in apace; or,be that bath “+ à EX


trade hath a.goodlie reuenue.

! Qui fe mefle d'aurruy meftier il trait fa vache en
vo panier: Proy. As good milke a Cow into a Sine, as
deale n an-vaknowne Trade,

Mettif: m. 4 Mongrell. |
Les meftis. Such as are of a meane eflate, or condi-
tion,

Meftif: m. jue: & Mongrell ; balfe the one balfe the o-
ther, mhence ;
© Vn chienmeftif. 4 Mongrell ; vnderflood, by the
French,cfpecially of a Dog thats bred betweene a nae
tiue or great Curre,and a Greyhound,

Meftivailles: f Haruefl feafts.

Meftivales The fame,

M -ftivé: m.ée: f Reaped,as Comein Hanh. .


| Mefiver. To reape,to make Haruefl. -


Mettives: £ Haruefl; Corne thats ripe, or readie to be
Ne Hie alreadie reaped,in Harueft.


Meftivier: nied Wedper, a Harneft mate,


Mate yan ee 1 Sigil botb.


or tio-
ning of ‘Meafures, or the fetting oof their ey
within a Territorie , belongs fe lke under
egree of à Lord Chaftellain ; ; for the authoritie of
“the Hauc lufticier extends no further then to a bare


pales of their ijineffe 5 af En: aa


 Meafiring,me a
oe. Mehire >


| MES
efure mefurante. The vefèl,or infleument where-


H ith a thing is meafüured, :
a Mefiure :£ Ameafare; (cantling, rule, (quare, propor-
| — tion, fixe; an infirumeat, or veffell of meafuring ; alfo,
modulation,or time,in Muficke; alfo,a meafure yneane,
moderation temperature; alfo,a particular Corne-mea-
fire containing about a bufhell and abalfe. For land
there be foure kinds of Mefitres in France; one con-
filling of 22 foot to the Perch, and 100 Perches (in
… Square) to the Arpent ; The fecond (more common then
that) of 20 foot to the Perch, and x00 Perches to the
Arpeat; The third (leafl in vfe) of 19 foot and athird
to the Perch,and 100 Perches to the Arpent ; The laft
(and mofl vfuallone) of 18 foot to the Perch, and (as
inthe refl) 100 Perches to the Arpent,
Melfure d’un moulin, 4 Mill-hopper.
Mefure de Roy, Looke Roy.
Appetiflement demefire, A certaine Fmpoft upon
‘Wine retayled within Tours, Mehun fur Eure, Vier-
zon, and fème other Townes ; leuied towards the repa-
}+ ration of their walls, gates, bridges, caufèyes, paue-
ments, orc. ce
La petite mefüre. The fame.
‘A mefure que..s, even as, fill as;euer as; by bow
miuch,or looke how much that.
Oultre mefüre. Profijely, exce finely vnmeafurably,


__extreamely,
Cuider n'eft pas iuftemefure: Prov. Conieéture is
20 iuft meafure ; the iuft conclude not by imagination;
He often wrongs both bimfelfe and others, who makes


a certain eftimate,or giues a finall iudgement,upon the


if weer outward apparance of things, ;

+ Mefuré: m. ée: £ Meafured,meated, proportioned,ru-
led, fquared out ; valued, rated ; weighed, examined ;
modevated,tempered.

Mefure mefurée, The fixe,or quantitie of that which

is meafired. oe

Mefurement:m. A meafiring,a meating.

Mefurer. To meafure, meat, proportion, rule; (quare
out; examine weigh; rate,value,efleeme;temper,qua-
liffeymoderate, :

_  Mefurer les fauts des puces, To Loo/ time, or fpend
\ it moft idly, fondly, vainely,
Qui mefure l'huile il s’en oingt les mains: Prov,
Looke Huile.

Mefureur: m. 4 meafirer, meater, furucyor.

Mes-ufage: m. Mi/ifage,badvfage,il bandline.

pie Sometimes ufed (by the Parifians) in ead of

|. Maiftre.
Met: f:4 er pm tub; al/o,a binne to keepe


oe er: |


Meteore: m, A meteor ; an imperfect mixture bred in


ME T


Metalier: m. ere: £ Of;07 belonging 10 mettall:
or abounding withymettall, tet s fill of
Mee É: m. ée: £ Made mettall, reduced into met.
4 L2
Metallier: m. 4 mettall-man ; one that deales in met-


talls, :

Metallurgie: £ À féarcb,or fearchiag for mettall in the
bowells of the earth,

oon ri £ A Metamorphofis; a transformati-
on of fhape. ‘
etamorphofer, To transforme ; to alter, or change

… the fhape of.

Metaphore: f. À Metaphor ; the tranflation,or change
of a word out of it proper into another, fence, *

Metaphoriquement. Metaphorically, by tranflation
figuratinely. °
ctaphrene: m,Tbat part of the backe which is oner-
again(i the beart.

Metapotcopie: f. 4 mans phifiognomie.

Metayer: m. 4 Farmor, or Husbandman; properly one
that takes grounds to the balues ; or binds bimfelfe, by
contract, to anfiver vato bim, of whom he bolds them
halfe,or a great part, of the profits thereof, 2

Metayere: £.(Such) a Farmers wifè,or woman Farmer,

Metayerie: f. À Farme ; alfojthe renenues thereof.

Metayse. as Metaife; and 45 Metaycrie.

Mete’: £ 4 limit,bound ; end,

Meteil. 2s Metail ; l/s, typhe wheat, bearded wheat,

Pins wheat,Roman wheat.
etelle. Noix metelle.The thorne applesor thornie ap-
ple of Peru ; an Fadian nut, or fruit, which being ea-
ten off, caufèth an extreame numneffe, beauineflè, or
drowfineffe. “Ys

Metempficofe: f, The tranfinigration,or pafage of the
foule from one bodie to another ; (Pithagoras error.)


the ayre,
Meteorologie: f. A difcourfe of Meteors,
Methelle, Noix methelle. 2s Mcrelle.
Methode: f. A methode; a fhort, readie, and orderlie
courfe for the teaching,learning.or doing of a thing,
Methodique: com. Methodicall,orderhe,
Methridat: m. Methridate;a ftrong Treacle,or Prefer-
uatine deuifed at firfi by the Poatian King ,Mithridates,
Metiz:m. Mongreils ; or,as Metis.
Metope: f.4 Metopesa fquare [pace between Trigliphes
. ina Dorick frize,
Metopomantie: f. Diination by the face.qRab.
Metoyant. Dixiding into halues, parting in-t0; alfo,
equally belonging to,or depending on,two, whence ;


. breadin ; alfv, the trough, gutter,or furrow of a Wine- Mur metoyant, 4 partition wall, oe

: pre(fe; that whereinto the Wine falleth, j rm. Meeter, LE : =

5 cee: m, The upper part of the band fiom the | Metrifié: m.ée : f. Made into mecter, put into verfe, à
| wrifftotheknuchles,or the root,of the fingers. Mets: m. as Més; a mefe,courfe,or feruice of meat; al- a
| Metagraboulizé: m. éc: f. Puxxled in, dunced vp- | fo, houfé,or tenement ; and hence; |
ih Et PÉMETETSE | RE À es ore a do Mannor-houfe of a fac- 6
| etagraboulizer er. To dunce vpon, to puzzle, or (too ceffion,or familie, €Norm. .
muc HN" 7 ris Mettable: com.Paffable yallowable,of good fufficiencie, %

| Me ‘Maplin; wheat and Rye mingled, | of currantvalue. 6 7 ‘ ss
5 dtogether, i Mettant. Putting, fetting, placing s pitching, planting à
ctairie : f A Farme,Tenement,Countreyboufe. - grounding, fruatine bringing, fending. à

| Metais: m. 4 Farmer,or Husbandman:for be bolds not | Mette: f (The drinke) Meade. De =
À bprentyerc ; but onely tills, and orders the Farmé as | Metteut ; & encheriffeur de fermes. A. chapman for at
| feruantunto the owner, 7 a Farmes; one that bids readily or roundly for. a Farme ag
| Metaife: £ SuchaF wife. . , which is to be let. “TR RUE =
| Metal: m.Mettallmettle. ©) | Metre: m. A Corne-meafure in fome parts of Burgun: =
| Metaleple: € 4 figure whereby a word is put from it | dic,containing the balfe ofa Bichot, or two crab. 3
proper fignification. RUN of that cowatrey bufhels. RE 27e à
LR a Ge Me) | |

3 = a

mw 4


Go gle


ie) od RU


oe
*


ee


sb) yh aa


MIC


Mezereon: m.Dutch Mezereon, German Olime Spurge,
Dwar fe Bay tree : (a fmail fhrub.)

Mial. for Miel, Honie : Norm, _…,

Miaulement: m. 4 mewling,or mewing.

Miauler. To mewle,or mew, liken cat,

Miauleur: m. A mewleror mewer,

Miauleux: m.eufes £ Mewling,or mewing.

Miault : m, 4 mewing, or counterfeit voyce of wayling.

Mibaudichon.faire le mib.70 doe a thing feolifhly,or
ill-fauouredly ; unbandfomely to goe about it,

Mibrutal : m.ale: f. Sewage, unciuile barbarous palfe
beaft-like; almoft as rude as a beafh,

Micacollier: m. The Lete,or Nettle tree.

Miche:£ 4 certaine worme that fecdeth on Bees ; alfo,
a fine Manchet, or, patticularly,that kind of Manchet
which is otherwife tearmed, Pain de chapitre: The
countrey people of France call jo alfo, a loafe of boul.
ted bread,or Tems bread,
Miches du Convent militaire. BaHets,or flones.
Michesde S. Eftienne. Stones.

: Michel : m. Michael.
L’ Ordre de S. Michel. Seeke Ordre.

Michelot: m. 4 Pilgrim to S.Michaels Mount.

Michemis: m. A Turkifh fruiét that fomewhat refem-
bles the Apricocke,

Michette: £ 4/mall Manchet.

Michon :m..4 fat,blocke dunce doult a iobbernoll du!
lard loggerbead.

Miclette :£. (The name of) a moft excellent compofition
that flops all kinds of fluxes, and dries up the fuperflu-
ous moiflure of the bodie.

Micocoules : f.Lote berries(be round,and bang by long

ee like Cherries.)
icocoulier : m. The Lote,or Netile,tree,
Micocoulicr d’ Afrique, Th’ African Lote , or Net-
ile, ges of whofe blacke wood excellent Flutes are


made,

Micourber. Te bend, or bow bimfelféa prettie deale;
almoft,or balfe to double, Vian ; F

Micraine. as Migraine.

Microcofine: m. 4 little world.

Microift. Looke My-croift,

Mideloret. (Coyned in derifion of our) My Lord.

Midenier : m, Halfe a pennie,or balfe a fine.

Mideronner. To fleepe in th’afternoone : €Norm,

Midi: m. Midday noone; anse South. i
Poids de Midi. One of the Pyrrbenian mountaines


| tearmed fo, becanfe the Sunne tyes euer on it about


noone. :

Vent de Midi. The Southerne wind. £

Cercher Midi ou il n’¢ft qu’ onze heures. ‘To looke

for a thing before it be readie to come; to picke a qua-

rell without caufé,or find a faultwhere there is none ;
_ alfo,to feeke for bis ovne bart, or firine to procure bis


_ewnebarme,
~ SAmidicftoille ne lui: Prov. Euerie thing bath it


tearmed mador :


dy. as Midi. eee =
“de The crumme,or pith of bread.


TPs


aa ‘ « 7
ee


eo = =


+5


| _Go gle


: Miculx. Looke Mieux.


Soften edb ta ob night at Éd a


a st:m.ctte : À Prettie,daintie, feat, peart.
dverb.) Not, not at all, wo wayes,by no maner of ement, Prettily, guaintly peatly, fnely, fate
=. Not of a long time , not of a great


MIE


Micl cui&. A kind of fiveet meator pancake mde
of,ov feafoned 2 er ue

iel Heracléen. Heraclian hore; cleeres thekin,
and takes avay the blacke fpots bat come by crâbes,
or bruifes ; but in lien thereof, rakes them fneexiutbat
Ne it,and mad vo 2 wie

el vierge Virgins bonie,pe bonie which of ie!
and withest prefing > diff fromthe 3] oe
Celuy gouverne bien male miel qui n’en tite &
fes doigts n’en leche : Pov. We/ay,be is an il Cooke
that lickes not bis owne ingers ; One may [ap,be is vn=
wife,who in the managug of publiche bufineffe addes
not fomerbat vnio hi priuate. “
Qui n’a argent en Jourfe, ait dumoins du miel en
bouche: Prov, He #at batb net meanes to pay,at leaft
wif frame bis moub to pray.
Trop achepte le miel qui fur efpines le leche: Pro.
He buyes honie to deere that lickes it off thornes,
Vn’Abeille merte ne fait plus de miel: Prov, À -
dead thing is good for nothing.

Mielleufement. Honie-like, fweetly, delicioufly,lufhi-~


ously,

Mielleuy: m, eufe : f, Sweet, lufbious, delicious,

Micellicr: m.ere :f. Ofer belonging to,bonie, full of bo-
nic, bearing bonie,

Miclfaude.etheglin ; or bonie fdden,ér therby made
intodrinke, :

Mien:m. enne:f, Mine,

Il eft des miens. He is one of my feruants,people, fol-
lowers ; he is of my traine. ;

Mies mies. The crie of new-borne children : (Rab,

Mi-efté: f, Midfummer.

Mi-eftoupement : m. Ax balfe-fopping, L

Micfure : com, as Miefureux.

Miclurefle : f. 1zcontinencie,wantonne|fe,leacherie,laf-
ciuionfne [fe lupifiulneffe. ;
iefureux : m.eufe : f. Incomtinent,lafcinions wanton,
leacberows,lufifull;that lones to be fizging.

Micttes: f, Crummes, feraps, finall fragments,or mam-
mockes of bread, L


Müiere: com, , outtagions, ener doing one
mifchiefé,or other ; or as Miefureux.
Micüresse : f.4 fancie queane,a bold, impudent pr vn-


Mieux. Better; alfo,bef. :
* Aumieuxaller (ou faire, ouvenir.) Fall out what
can; let the beft come tothe beft,
‘A qui mieux mieux.7be bef take it,or, Priving who


fia doe beft.
aimeroye mieux. I bad rather, 1 would leuer,
Migcotté : m.ée: f. Well ripened, filly ripe : Norm,
Migeotter. To ripen fully: Norm, ,
Mignard : m, 2€ Migniard,prettie, quaint,neat,
feat; wanton; daintie,delicate.
Mignard rare okey, fonce,


ged ; planfible in | go
imée:f. Dandled, fedled,cockered,yuch
_.. eherifhtdmade a wanton, 1


? daintily want | laujbiy,
RL ee HE
mixe, make much or make a wanton;of,
Mignardeur:m. 4 luller, dandler, cherifkerÿa foo-

Mignardlfe:! Ouen ne perefedaiminefe,d
- ainine; ele, 3 Alm
icacie wantonne(fe; (anath or ied Sree
ig-


4
j
{

{|

+ |


F


ie 4


i . | IE m.onne:f Minion, daintie, neat, rue,
ite fe cin eect gli allan, gol kind.
: ent Mignon. Readse money. ul
D mignon. A tame Deere. tf AEA RS
| Mi ignonne.fa mignonne. Fi vestige free: bar
bis prettie mimion;bis douelie de
ignonnement. Minionly, pes #8 » like
eS | ra m,.Aprettie, dean, vera oh mini


OL. kr.

3 Mi nonneté :f. Minianifine, Sms rimes

" cie, (prucenefe, featneffe, ce ge

- fi | pa as Mignonne, : 5
Mignot: m. Awaniin, fiddle, Pts a dit

dandling,darling.

| Mignotement : AREA

1% pos Tender iceyfarabh kindly gen

a2) . ty, cherifhingly

| Mignoter. To dandle, fiddle, cocker, cherifh, bandle

À gently, intertaine. kindly, ue tenderly make a wanton


À “ang gentle bandling, tender ufage ; alfo, wantonnelle;
1 | tamene[fe,gentleneffè.
LS:  Mignotises. Prettie dainties,or trinkets j fine toyes;
affected delights.
[mines : €, The Megrim,or beädsachy aie Ponida-
steak 3 alfo,the great Sea-or chin ; 3 alfi,Scatless ot Purple
graine.
Migraine de feu. A fie, or brand of fire ; a,
‘a ball of wildfire.
Migration:f. 4 migration , aremainger Jhifiing €
ae : places.
) Miorelin: m. final thinne ferag,, a tender fare.
lin


fer To remoue,to flitzor foift fiom one J to on


Je x | Mi ae acer eS a) on
a ane) Mi illet,Hirfe;
Vat shoe Frenchie, Bucke-wheat, ie


Mila: Rd Gat of the Holmeor Scarlet Oake, :
| Milacié :m.ée: f, . .Mill-cating, millet-fed; a niche:


name for the Gafcon pobafe bread pe the moft pars, |
_ made of Millet.
Milaire: m, A mile, aie Getehrive, ve
-} Milan: m, 4 Kite, Puttocke,Glead ; ce name of}
À - délicate peares
Milan marin. 4 Gilden. -pole,or kind of Gurnard,that
. fhines in the night, and before change of aren
D (or feemes to fhe)a Littleaboue the water.
ÿ Royal. Th'ordimarie Kite or Glead.: yey
as | Piedde Milan. Rens foot,
pins little Dog-ffh thats metal enenit to
manki


f


emumier of; (eric,


are: : nm: Sud
Li hnaves HAE
<enghas. ip HA
NUE ve je ith


wit et. + ‘ree CAT we OY eee
+ ee LE,


{| Mitton: an. ini, rite enon ling ir


of.
| Mignotife: f. A dandling, fedling, cockering, chi |


D + vin i ph ur]


MIL


i ifer. as Mignarder.: Herbe militaire à millefucilles. Knights Milfoile
en mineligs Mg. | oldie Yaron. ls
ak ARE LEO iter. To warre , ge a warfaring, be in warres, prac-


tife the feats of warre; to fouldierize it.

= e. .A thoufand,

;m. 45 Millefueille.

Millefueilie: £, Milfeile, nofe- bleed Yarrow, common
Yarrow,
Milléfueille aquatique. water Yarrow ; alfo, water
Sengreene,water Houflecke, Knights Pondwort, wa-
ins Poteet > frefb water fouldier.
Mi e grande. Great Yarrow(differs from the
ordinarie one in onely bignefe,
Millefucille iaulne.Kzights Milfôile, fouldiers Yar-
Meet yellow knighten Yarrow, yellow or little Yar-


Millefucille petite. The fame,

Millegraine : £ Oake of Ferufalem, Oake of Paradice;
( aa bearbe.)

Millene:f. vne mil.d années. 4 thoufand of yeares.

Be eat mn, S, lobns wort,S.lobns graffe.
aon m. The worme,or vermine , called a Pal.


Milletaie: :f A rest of ground fowed with Millet; a
Millet. ground.
Milleret :m. 4 Middle Ray, the balfe of a Miller ay ;
peece of gold worth almoft 7 s.fterl.
Milleritié :f. The firary, or flubble of Miller.
Millefoudiers: m. Old maimed foulaters ; {ich as bane
… athoufand fous (or 51. fterl.) of yearelie penfion.
Millet: m. Millet, Mill,Hirfe. ‘
Millet d’Inde, Mais, Turkie corne,Turkie wheat.
Millet noir, Blacke Millet; and, as Millet de Tur-


quie.
Millet Sarrafin, French-wheat, Bucke-whect, Boly-


mong.
Millet de Turquic. Turkie Hinfe,Turkie Mill Lblacke
‘Miller,
- Percer vn grain de Millet d'vntarticre, To performe
impoffibilities.
Milliart: m. A thoufand millions of millions.
Millier :m. vn millier. A thoufaad ; a proportion, or |
rete of a thonfand,
ee imiere : £. Of or belonging to,a thoufand.
Milliefine. la milliesme partie. The thonfandth part.
Millet : m. Aférpent of agreenifh colour,
Million tm, A million; ten bundred thoufand,
Millon: m.. Akind of flint, or bard flone,
ae f. Furmentie, or pottage, made of Millet:


| Milods: m. Halfé-fines ann cafes of colatevail füc-


“oe hon unto Cenfuel inberitancé (as in unois)or
“cafes of Donation(as in Dau} Pine)
Mi ort : m. Lord ; a a Montand a
vowed of and mployed ones.)
-Milrai: hit ay; a cone of gold worth Beene
and 4 fillings ter.
| Mifrer. as Milleret. . Ka
Mime:m, Avice; , ieafler, fooffér, dre: ne
Plays alfoya anton, ,foamele fe ,vidiculons Po-


eme,partor Play; al/o,a graue,and fententions Poeme. -
Mi-more: a Swartie,blackifh,balfe- Moore.”
Minage: my 24 meafiring of corne by the Mines,


i


wbence ; ; hi
= Droit de minage. migage. 4 fe dué vnto fome Lords sal
euerie Mine fe corne t ats menfured within their ter}


ot Es à 1


Je


DY, eT JA Oat ne


i .he À dite


as Ce


Minau: m. A corne fire 5 as Mine. f
Minauderies: £. trickes,apifbo pranks,mumpings,


mowings. > re
Mince : com. Thinne, fine, flender, little,fmall. ~
Mincé: m. ée: f. Minced,cut veriefmall.
Mince-fueille: f. Featherfew, frdderfiw, feauerfim,
whitewort, called alfo, Motherwort , becaufe tis good
againftthe difeafe of the Mother ( ‘yet us not this the
right Metherwort.) :
Mince-fucilles.rhinne leaned,or hauing tbinne leaues;
whence ; Armoife mince-fucilles. Thinne-leaucd
Mugwort, — i
Mincelet: m.ette: f. Somewhat thinverie fine, finall,


More

incément. Thinly, flenderly,fmally.

Mincer. To mince; Bip sip cut into final peeces.

Minceté: f. Thinneffe, exilitie, flenderne{fe, tittleneffe,

fmallneffe. te

Miachon :m, 4 fot, blockhead, loggerbead,

Mine : €(The balfé of a Sextier,and 24 part of a Muid)
A meafure for graine, ec, containing fomewhat lefje
then tava of our (London) Bufbells ; (1,3 Nicor faitb,it
weighes but 110 pounds: But Vigenere vpex Linie
affivmes, that the Mine of wheat weighes about 120
pounds; marriein Rit, fayes be, it comes but 10 110 ;)
alfa Mine,orcaue dig ged under ground; alfo,a mine,”
or veine of mettall,ére.

Mine de Clermont(pour Ic bled.) Js the 12 part of
a Muid; or iuft as big againe as tb'ordimarie one,
Mine de Paris. as th’ ordinarie Mine, _

Mine de plomb, Aa Orenge tawnie minerall vfed by
Painters.

Plombde mine. Blacke lead.

Mine deterreen la Chaftellenie de Bulles. Con-
taines so Verges of 24 foot to the Verge.

Mine deterre en Clermont. Containes 60 Verges
of 22 foot to the Verge.

Mine de terre en la Seigneurie de Remy. Coa-
taines 80 Verges, at 22 foot and the third part of a


Ws to the Verge.
ine :f. The countenance, coke cheere,vifage; the gef-
tur2,or pofiure of the face; alfo, fauor, phifnemie, fea-
ture, outward face,orfhew. |
Fairemine. Tofecme,or make a fhew of; whence;
Ce ne font que mines.
Faire mines, To make faces.
Faire des mines. The fame ; alfo,to make anadoe, or
foew of loathneffe to be dravone to a thing. }
Faire la mine. To lowt,or lowre
Faire les mines. To make (frange) faces ; al/o, to at,
or play ona flage. LEA |
Faire bonne mine.To excufé,colour,beare out a mat
ter bandfômely ; to fet a good face on’t, to make a
ood fhew. f
aire bonne mine, & mauvaisieu. To fet a good
eon a bad matters to beare out croffes with a)
cheere full countenancesto affront miféries with a shew


bflance,more cer emonie then foliditie init.


‘Miné: mées£ Mined,undermined, fupplanted ;alfo,


sibs av de mine que de ieu. There is more flew


Ui 340 AVE CON <
josie Deer (ca
. À mineral; a ching found growing in
that’s in minoritie or under


MIN


as Miniere; whence;
~ Qui n'a mineur n’a honneur : Prov.He that wants
© money wants bonour.

Mineur :f. The minor propofition of a fÿlogifme.

Mineure :f. as Miniere,

Mincux: m.eufe :f, Outward, feeming, apparent ; be-
longing to,ov confifling in, the countenance, ov gefiure
of the face; alfo, faucamifh,quaint, cay, that minces it
exceedingly; alfo, mining, or undermining ; alfo. fill
of mines, ad
ingant : m. A broth thats thickened with the meale of
pounded roots.

Mingrclet: mette :£. Thinne, gaunt, lanke, flender,
leane, {craggie meager,

Minicre: f..4 mine of mettalls,or minerals,

Minime: m. 4 name of Fricrs inflituted ly François
de Paule; a man renowmed fir bolineffe of life during
the raigne of Lewis tWelcnenth ; who sent fer him into
France,in a bope, that by bis meanes bis life foould bee
prolonged, sesh
Couleur de minimes. 4 light foot colowr ,baning an
eye of gray init.

ris de minime. The (ame.

Minime(blanche.) À Minume,in Muficke.
Minime noire, À Crochet,

Minime : com, The leafl,or fmallefl.

Minion rane fe lead,Vermillion ; Painters red
made of burned Cerufe. :

Miniftre : m, 4 Minifier, Sernant ; Officer ; Deputic;

… Affiflant; Inflrument,
Miniftres duRoy.His Agents;thofe that negociate or
deale, for bim. 6

Miniftré :m.ée: £ Minifired, ferued ; affilled; offe-
red, yeelded,affoorded vnte.

Ministreau: m. A little Minifier.fmall Officer, Affif-
tant or Sernant, .

Miniftrer. To minifler, afifl,ferue unto; alfo, tooffer,
or affoord unto,

Ministrefle : £. 4 Minifireffe; a weman that afffis, or
ferues unto. $

Minois : m, A fower face,barfhvifage,evabbed counte-
nance ; a craftie,or difcontented looke,

Minon: mA litile kitling ; or fuch a tearme for a cat as
is our Puffe ; whence;

Ilentend le chat fans dire minon. He apprebends
the mans meaning before be fpeake unto bim.

Minons:m, Cat-tailes, or Catkins; tbe long aglet-like
buds ofnutatrees.

Minoratif. Medecine minorative. Gentle Phyficke,
Phyficke that workes ea fily,or is of gentle efftét,

Minorité :f. Minoritiesunder-age, ...

Minot : m. The baife of a Ming; three French Bufbells;

+ Looke Mine. ‘ot ee

. Minot d'avoine,defel, & de legumes. Containes 4
LES 74 :

‘Minot de bled.(Th'ordinarie Minot) containes three
Boifleaux. :, je
Minot de noix,& d'oignons. Containes foure Boif-
feaux,and a balfe,of firicken mcafure. |

| Minu: m. The particular furucy or defcriptionwbich a

ere 10 deliver vato the Lord of wbcm
is purchafe is bela,

Minué : m.ée:£ Diminifhed,minifhed.

EE minifb,diminifh,leffcn, impairesabate.

inuict : f. Midnight,
Minute : m. 4 mite; the fmalleflof weights,
Minute :f. The ( fr ) draught of an Euidence,or Plea-

ding ; a fovell,or fcedule. Fa Me


pt ee em


PES RP ENT


MIR


Minuté:m.ée:£, Minifbed,


inifbed, impairedymade little’ a-
bated; dfà leds af dravne, or rbereaf a dranght


' & made(in writing;) aljo,deuifed,caft,or concluded on,
| sl the fn 4e defigne. D à
inuter To minifh diminifh impair 01 t-
tle; to difable,or inti draw,or make adraught
=: of,an Infirument in writing; and bence alfo,to denife,
caf, or kay the fir{t proiett of a defigne. es
_ Minuter fes papiers dexaifons, To caft make vp,re-
| duce ta a bead,his ( flragling)accounts,. ae.
Mioche É A crumme; ferap, fmall fragment, or mam-
mocke of. 54 3##p00lofis À
Mioler. To mew,or crie likeacat, 7
| Mi-panché: m.ée:f.Halfe bowed,alfe declining bale
hanging downewards, BIS No ation
peat :m, ie: f.Parted in the middeft,or into(equall)
; Hes, + vote Ve wt Fateh!
La Chambre nipartie, Looe Chambre, 11124
Mipartir. To part ia the middeft, or into baluess to dis.
wide into twoequall parts... ‘OR EULD
Mipotence. enin. H1de,o7 fafbioned,like a halfe gib-
» bet ; crooked,or bent into the forme.of th'vpper part of.
a gibbet; as a tenter-hooke,erc, AT
| Mique, 4 kind of baflie pudding. yo HV
| Miquelot : m. 4 PilgrimtoS. Michaels Mount; alfo,a
poore,pettie,vagabond Pedler, that witha (britflaffe
crojfes from place to place, towtter (mall trifles, which
be carries along with him in boxes. £
Méshoian: in.4 Mirabolan plumme ; Looke Myrabo-


an. :

: Mirach: mi Th’ outward lower part of the bellie, coue-
ring alt th'intraills : @Arabe{que: (Rab, .. ;

Made: m, Amiracle; a maruellous , or monfirous

 tbi sf J ha *\ oti
Il ace que de vieux fainéts: Prov..we doe
not credit reports,or miracles of a frefh date; Antiqui-
tie is reuerend,and of awfüll authoritie,

| Miracleur : m. A doer of miracles,.

| Miraclifique: com, wonder-working. *
Miraculeufement. Miraculoufly, wonderfully.

Miraculeux: m.eufe:f Miraculous,wonderfill marne.
lous, monfirous, beyond nature, paft common vnder-


Mirae: mA Thornebacke which bath on her of
à > (4 t; 1 a

_ ber fi wane gets De (a har am
Miraillier.:m. A looking-glajfe-maker.

Miraillicr : m. Ofa looking glafje.

Miraine :f, Oake of Jerufalem,Oake of Paradife :&Sa-


lin:m, 4 Lord ower Lords; an Arabian
word vfèd in fome old French Authors, à
Mire :m. 4 Phpfitian,Leech,Chirurgian,
Il n’a plus befoing deinire, He bath no longer need,
be bath no further ufe,of a Phyfitian ; viz. be is dead,
Debonnaire mire fait playe puante : Prov, A gens
tle Chirurgian makes a flinking fore, ait
Qui veut la guarifon duinire il Juy convient tout
(one dire: Prov. He that lookes to be curd muft
: is 11] Mere ne ‘ é
Mire: £. The lewell, or little button at ib'end,of a Reece ;


Yo,the tuske of a wild Boare. . ’
irétm.ée:f, Ai d at ; looked viewed, be.
beld through ; watched d into, neerely. sed ;
alfo,long-tusked,full-tufbed,as a full-growne Boare.
Mirecoton;. m. The delicate yellow Peach; called a
Melicotonie, SM ae AY:
Mirelicoton. 4s Mirecoton, | |


Le Va


- Go gle


ee ae À, : À “de
LPS US a thy “ag


MI oR.


Mirelifique:com, Exceeding wonderfull ; palling ad
mirabl, borribly excellent (a word a he om
mendation,or amplification.)
elifiques :f, Toyes bables  trickes to mocke Apessor
amaze infants with.
\ To aime,or leuell at ; to looke,view, regard, 0b-
fêrue,prie into,beboldthrough,or throughly.
Seunixer, To looke in a glaffe ; to looke on,or into bim-
Self; alfo,to take notice of,or.example by.
rag vous mire. God reflore it you, or veward you
it.

Dame qui trop fe mire peu file : Pro. She that looks
100 much at her [elfe leokes too little to ber felfe.

+ Qui bien fe mire bien fe void; Qui bien fe void
bien fe cognoift; Qui bien fe cognoift peu fe prife; :
Qui peu Ê prife Dieu l'avife : Prov.

Mires d’ yn fanglier, His tuskes,or tufhes.
Milage: f.4 Miriade; ten thoufand.
irifiqué ‘com. Strangely wrought mar yellou/ly adled
un é dons. = Ge ; 1) ?
Mirlirot, as Melilot : Parifien,
Mitloret :m, 4 xeat, fbruce,quaint,compt fellow,
Miroaillier: m. 4 looking-glale maker.
Miroir: m. 4 Myrror,alooking gla([e ; alfo, an inftru-
ment wherewith Chirurgians dilate the paris which be
naturally hollow (as the mouth, fundament rc, )wben
rate occafion to looke into the bottome,ordepth,of
them,
Miroir d’ Afne. A white tranfparent flone, (or con-
gealed bumor of the earth) vfed m old time sa ftead of
glalfe, ( farre better then which)it indures tb'exiremi .
ties of beat and frofts ,withoht breaking.
Miroir de noftre Dame. as Miroir d’Afnes
Le bay àmiroir. 4 dapled bay.
Pierre à miroir.A light,white,and tranfparent flone,
eafily cleft into thinne flakes, and vfed by th’ Arabians
(among whom it growes) in flead of glaffe ; anights it
reprefents the Moone, and euer increafes,or decreafes,
as the Moone doth, .
In’y a meilleur miroir que le vieil ami: Prov. 47
old friend an excellent looking-glaffe,
Miroitier :m. 4 looking-glafe maker.
Mirond : m, de: f. Semicirculer balferound,
Mirouaillier. as Miroaillier. sass
SRE :m. ere: f, Often looking,ener prying, into
aglaffe.. - E
Mirouer. as Miroir,
Mirtil. A irtill berries alfo, a Salamander, or deafè
worme. rh,
Mis:m.ife:f Put, (et,Jayed; placed, pitched, planted,
_fituated grounded ; thruft ies ; DR
Sent. \ ”

. Misen cucilleur de pommes, Tucked up like an
apple-gatbérer, dreffed like an apple-fquires in bafe,
poore,or beggerlie array.
Mis à la pile,ou, au verjus. Trounft coup,

Mifaille : £4 lay,a wager.
Milaine sf. Tbe forefaile of a foip,
:m,A hater of mens companie: €Rab, #


Mifan
Mile: f. Expence, disburfement,ymoney layed out, ar the
laying out of money ; al/o,a chapter,or title of expences
in an accompt; alfo,a price offered or laied dovne; al- À A:
fo,the curranineffe,or goudnelTe of coyne. 2
ife de fait. A iudicial! putting inte poffefion, for À aS
the preferuation of the true owners right, 22
Folle mile. So much as one batb bidden more then a- aka
nother, chapman; which be is bound to pay if ‘Te
th'otber vafife tbe thing in bargaine. ‘a 2


haue propounded, or fet on foot.
com. Miferable wrerc ed unfortunate; pi-
bbl dite ef difaferows.
t. aujeaiipaieabed, wofully, ritthe
ifafterou
LM Miperie, wreichedneffe, difirepe ; adüérfie,
tie ; wofülneffeser awofüll cafe; alfo , a povre
emaile of the water wherewith bee-bives bane
‘ene wafhed.
_ #Ilfüfit au at de fa mifere: Pro. One affliction fi
es for one day,
teed The into beginning) of one of thejtuen
(penitentiall) Pfalmes.
rer mei..A voiding ofth'excrements opwards;
comes of th’abftruction of the fimall guts, and is venie.
paine full, the patient imagining that bus guts’ are pus
; led out,and broken.
= © Tu auras mifererc iufques à vitulos, Than Jl be.
| ” Purdy whipped,
Meo Vf Herc piicompasfin ra, vende
neffe.
Efpée mifericorde. A waned fwordl.
Mifericordieufement, rl confine pi


pe Pea so rdicux: :meufe: aerial


yor a


isque:m. Moff,

Missal:m, ale: Eo bin eis
| Painmiffal. A kind of of wafér made only of
“HE bie fit.

2% te: :m, 4 Maffe-booke.

2 iffile. feu missile. 4 4068 } or other freswoike
Bee orate throwne,

pe Mif ton: fas Mife ; Exyence disbiafteinie, charge:
ot € Bourgongnon.

3 _ | Miflive:f 4 letter miffine; aletter fent.

3 _| Miflotage : m. Mafferie, Maffe- -trinkets,Maffe. Lis
1 things. belonging tothe Malle.

2 iflotier : m.cre:f Malf-manging, Mae-making sof
4 the Maffe.

' Miftagogue: m. A teacher pr interpreter of meres,
and RS. alfo , a keeper of the Churches Re-


ee ae AN Te Tet 1e


ver


Mine: lies Neat, fpruce, compt, quaint, picked, mini-


ij on;trickefie, fine,gay.

Œ? | Mistement. Neatly, fpricely,:comptly, quaintly, finely,
A: as thomas ae .

ha iftigouri. Mypillicot prettie rogue: d
oe | Miftion: £,.4 mixture, ma dling ati


a comfounding ; 4 a fophiftication,
iftionné :m. ée:f Mixed, mingled, melled, blent ;
(ophiflicated by mixture... |
_ Mistionnement: mA mixing singling meling ben.
bone r making; DORE

ftionner. To mix,mingle ame lett ek

a edie #0, dunes: x

a SAN : COT


; ps


m. My Dubé my my matter, the


| Mithologic : f. Mitbologies an expounding, onal


| Mi ing ,affnaging,appe


Mitaines: f. Miecines peter one 5c Saute
‘Us ne fe laiffent prédre fans mitaines. They


sa taken without mittains; Viz, much b preparation,


Mitan : m. The middefier middle of ¢ @Noring 2‘
Mitanier :m.cre: +f. Middle of the mi def. .
— la Region du m. The middle Region of the.


Mitese: A Mite, the. finale of coyness af, the Le
worme, called a Mite.
- Herbe aux mites. Moth-Mullein,


xing, of ‘fables. -
ne Sr aa Mibobiteh : bya morales D


ition of fables
€: f Looke Mitre,

Mitheidae: :m. Mithridatum; Looke Merida.

Mitifier. To foften; dilgeft concod.

Mitigatif rm. jue: Mitigatiue lenitine, appéafue. ©

Mitigation:f, A mitigation, qualification allaying,tem-


afing.
tigue: m, ée: Be vod qualified, moderated,
allayed, affuaged,appeafe fed.

Mitiguet.7 To mitigate qualifie temper, Midénas: ef
seal ppeae .
Mi-tirer. To ara out the balfe of.

Mitis. Nice, curious, precife’; bypocriticall.

Miton: m. (The final worme, or Vermine (amet)
Mite,»

Mitou : m. 4 great cat,

Faire le mitou. To diffemble,or pigy the bypocrite; to
put on alowlie, meeke, bumble, or afficted eo
nance; 10 looke poorely;or pitifully onit,

Mitoiiard : m, À cat ; alfo,an hypocrite: (Rab. "

Mitouflé :m.éc: £ Furred like a tat,or walb\cals shins;
bidden in,wrapped or lapped about with. Jirrerper at
fürred garments. me

Mitouin : m, An byposiite jadi igfembler under tbe: pre.
teétion of a mecke,and lowlie ae shee 1


a


Mitoyen, @s Moitoyen. * ARE
Miträille : f. Broken braffe,or copy ac conf
- ting of diners mettalls, which ne beetie gr
melted together, s
Mitrant. Hoodÿ or crowning, with a miter, ÿ
Mitre:f A Bifhops miter ; alfo,the bole(or capof a mans


yard,
Donner la mitre, & la crofle à. To fet a fpecions
_glofe of Religion on; or to authorize (an ill thing) by a
of devotion.
tré:m.ée :f. Mitred ; beeded with a miter, wearigg
amiter ; ques a pillorie,er feaffold with a miter of] (pa


on bis bead,

Mon. m. Amitring; a booding, crownineor co-

uering of the bead with a miter ; for ‘ornament, ‘onin
diferace. -


Mitrer. Toboodr ewan cian Ube bead witha mer,
ee hale Fo (atte coneraion à
ifgraces
Maton! tr
Mixtio ftionner. as  Miionn, 8 Mi


one: Zone he name of a delicate Jaltanipeare thats
Moadies, Barbaronfl for Bona dies Gare tego
Mb: : com. Mouable sobich may beremoued > d


Mob iliaire : com. as Mobile.
ilité : f. Chouablenefies'a Mons mg


M0 D


RE ne ee tbe Raph ie te 504 @ hind thereof
| Mocqué:m.ée: & Mocked, flowted, fiumped; feoffed,
ls re af difappointéds fruy-


trated,
mock , flown, frump, adrien


se Mocquer-ïs
| at,langhtofcorne ; : 0 gullgudgeon sfrulirate, ma
: foole of difaphoinr.
|. Vous vous mocquez du feu” You doe but dällie,
+ Semocque qui cloque:Pro.be mocks that léafl may;
the greatefl mockers bauecômonly moft imperfections.
Mauvaïfe fille fe mocque dé fa mere: Prov. The ill-
: bred daughter. mocks her fillie mother.
La paelle fe mocque du fourgon : Pro. One Friend,
or kinjinan mocks another; tbe that might well be flow
sted flomts his neighbor,
=} “Mocdjiereau: m.4 moitie child,or,a little hooker.
| Mocquerie: £4 mock, flowt, frumpe, {coffe gibe, teal;
gull,gudgeon,derifion ; a mockerie,tale of a tb vidicu-


feoffing, frumping
j Môequeur: m.4 mockér; Panier fumer: Sefer i
et, deriders :
e:m,as Meuf, 4 Mood.
e: f Manner, fort, fafbion, rip hepa sa,
fr meanes.
£ Er trotre qui mode. ‘Setting the cart befoie the
(A I
4 .To modell, forme; faflson,tlet,cafi in a mould,
} Modelle:f,4 modell patterneynould, plot, forme, frame.
EF in. 4s Modillon,
. separa: m. À ‘moderator g Jgouernor,! drap,


Er. | Moderation 3 A mode té = ot ?

- |  ment;agoo tion,due tion, meature,
Moderattice:t:4mederanix,

eré.:m.éc:f Moderate quietrulie inaiel.
derlie, patient; alfo, moderated, allayed, tempered;
4 whofe edge is fomewhat taken off; or hr: pates
= | = dovwne;alfo, floped,or cut aflope.

a  Moderément. Moderately,temperately quietly, order
À à manga reafon,in good rule.

erer. To moderate qualifie temperquiet,ordet,ço-
-uerne, rule, refraine, holdin, vfe with meafire;fet'a
sar, a abate th’edge,allay the heat of; alfo,to flope,
or cut aflope.
Moderne: com. Moderne, new, of this age, of thefe
times age 7 ie bf fl, am
F scom. Modeft, faber, c a e-
. fred, D con A ober le, .

Z "Fame ten Modeflly, foberly;chafily civilly,
| Modefteté : £ 2s Modettic {out 4
| Modeitic:£ Modefie, moderarion berne temp
Re: rance,bumilitie, bafhfitneffe;maïdentin
+ Mod Modicitie, moderaenee, meena i


tent Roman meafure contcinine filme» {


our pecke,and balfe.
odifia Modifiable qualifiable, :: !°!
ca me
tion exception, .
sg. à m.ée: F-Madifédmoderated, qualifie li-
mited. 3 ME. ito «PRE
ifier. To modi Say
he ion irr age


\


or corbell.


dulation: € -Medalatioa ihmeri all
rae epi pi


| Module: m. 4 modell;or module; that wberby a whole


lous diftour{e, Sot thing; alfoja mocking, flowing,


MOT


‘worke is meafured, proportioned, or fquared'; alfo, the
\ mibafiere, bignelfe, or quantitie of 2 thing; alfo,a ter-
taie meafure in conduits or conueyances of watersal-
fo,modulation melodie,or à meafure in Muficke,
Modurre, 45 Madoure : 4 Rab,
Moë. as Moué.
Moëlle :f The marrow of bones; the pith of plants; al-
fo,as Meule ; a milftone.
Moëlle de pain, The pith of bread.
Moëlleux: meule : £Marrowie,pithie, fall of firength,
or fv orig fap.
Moéllon. as Moilon.
Moëtte. 4 Sea-mew.
. LesMoéttes. Forerunners, foreriders.foretellers of
ones comming.
: \\Moétteblanche. Th'ordinarie white Mew,or Sea-
mew.
Moétte cendrée. TI? (ordinarie) afh-coloured Sea- |
mew.
à La petite Moctte. The /mall afh-coloured Mew,tear-
med otherwifé Hirondelle de mer.
Meuse Manners’; Looke Meurs.
Moge:f, Amealure containing about fix bufbells.
Moiau, as Moyeu.
Moien,& Moienner.Looke Moyen,& Moyenner,
Moïeu. as Moyeu.
Moignon: m.4 flump,or,the blunt end of a thing,
oignon des ailes. The flumpes, 07 che of the
wings.
Moinon du bras. The brawne, or baie part of
tl'arme. :
Gros moignons de chair, Great lumps,or gobbets of
maffe-flefh.
Moil sm: 4 fea Barbell,or fore Mullet,
Moile: An arch,damme,or bay of planks, whereby the
force of water is broken.
Moileux. Looke Moelleux.
Moillotineux: m.eufe :£ Full of rubbifhmade of ru-
ble 3 alfo, full of the fofi lone Moïlon.
Moilon:w.Rwbbifh;ruble, fhards,ragged flones,peeces
offtone béwed,or broken off; uch as walls are built,or
parget made,of; alfo,the foft upper cruft of a quarvey of À,
free flone; or a kind of foft, or tender flone, ibat lyeth
fome 10, or 12 foot thick aboue the bar def? free flone,in
the qharreyes about Paris. <
Moilonneux. a Moillonneux. |
Moindre: Fe ec Leffelefer;infériour to ; sai, the leaf,


de A Monke; th a cafting top; alfosthe little
Titmoufes alfo,as Albaflan, ]
Moines de la Charité. 4m Order tee
44 fie are bound to vifit the Jicke, andb unas the
(7 A i LE
Moines de Grace. 4m Order of white Monkes, who
weare great white croffes on their bofomes.
Collation de Moine. A Monkes nunchion, a large
collatio; as much 2s another man eats at.a good me
Tefte de Moine. 4 blunt, andround-nofed Porpofe
alfa;the bearbe ‘Dandelion,
Avoirle moine.To be coufèneä, got perf bobbed, |
croffeds to baueill lucke.
Bailler lemoine. To crampe, alfo,to bring il icke
VND | i
Bailler lernoine par le col. To bang, or twitcbop,
"Alain le regnard fera moine : Prove 42
‘Fox tarnes puit (vizwben bee, gen pl
no longer.) « hi
Hbb


de Wi bee


ae Se. ee


PRS aoe


Ps Sar es ee Oe
7


ur 5 "LES
1) à ys


Moisiflure: f. Mouldine


0
2
L
=
Le
7
ey


M O I


Homme ne cognoift mieux la malice que I’ Abbé
qui a eftémoine : Prov.There 1 noknaue to the Ab-
bot that bath beene a Monke; or no man knowes bow
to play the knaue better then be, ’

Il n’eft envie que de moine: Prov, No eauie like a
Monkes,

L’habitne fait pas le moine: Pro, The Cole makes
not the Monke; euerie one is not a fouldier that weares
armor ; nor euerie one a {cboller thats clad in blacke.
Pour vn moine ne faut Convent: Prov. For one
Monke needs ne Monafterie.

Moineau: m, A Sparrow; alfo,a Nouice; 4 young, or
little Monke;alfo,a Rauelin in fortification; alfo,a cere
taine little peece of Ordaance,

Moineau de bois, The little Brambling or mountaine
Spinke,

Moineau de haye. Is not that which wee call the
Hedge-fparrow, but a little bird that lines altogether


Oo” fries.
Hit de noyer. as Friquet.
Moineau à la foule, The ring-Sparrow ; a finall
bird that bath a yellow ring about it necke, and builds
in the trunke of atree;(Germanie bath many,England
but few,of them.)
Herbe au Moineau.lvie Chickweed,Heabit,
Paffereaux,& Moineaux fontde faux oyfeaux. 4
Prouerbe taxing the lafeiuious conuerfation of Cloifter-
Sparrowes, :
Moiner. To breed Monks,to play the Monke : Rab,
Moinerie :£ Alonkerie, Monachifine, the fate or pro-
feffion of a Monke. ;
Moinichon : m. A little paultrie Monke.
Moins. Leffe,leaft.
Moins deux tiers. Lacking two third parts,
Vn moins de cent. 4n bundred wanting one.
Aumoins, ‘A tout le moins, Toutau moins, At
leaft, yet at the leaft, newerthele(fe, notwithfanding,
bowfdeucr. ‘
Leinoinsdemon plus. The moft I can, theleaft 1
ould. à
ft portoient alors ie ne fçay quoy de moins; They
wore at that time fome od thing or other of leffe value.
Pour yn denier ny moins, The loffe,or expece of one
pennie will make me neuer a whit the poorer,
Moinfné. as Mainfné.. ;
Mois :m, 4 month,or monetb.
Les mois des femmes, Womens montblie le
Mois blanches. 4 kind thereof tearmed by our wo-
men,the whites, hes
Mois mort. The feafon that is immediately before, or
aficr,Chrifimas. : G
Moife:£ Full length, or growtbin fifh; alfo, a halfe-


beame of timber,


| Moifi: mie :f. Mouldie, boarie vinowed ; alfomufiie,


or füflie,by mouldine
re PR ga à a rs gow
 muflic, fultie; to get awhite co aranke
De baarin


pp 3


inclle. rary
. ae len pe à
| + old time was vvoont to be at the leaft 20
vent ofa farme, or tenement, paied ia cersjenetber
is ke


Vne DRE A Per green ES
bay i i À bch if Jag i
| tle knot of bunches,or clufters, tied together with lon
Don TT unies


- rats


MOI
Moiffon: m.45 $ , 4 kind à
ER a
Moiflon :£ Haruefl; reaping time.


Moiffons. Harneft ; or baruef fruit ; the corne vea-
ped in barueft.

- La moiffon des avoines,orges, & legumages. Be.
gins(in France)about the 16 of Fulie.
Lamoiffon des froments. About the 27 of Fulie.
La moiflon des feigles. Begins about the 27 of June.
La moiflon d’ yne vache. The milking ef a cow,or as
much as fhe giues at a milking. ‘
Droiét de moiffon. Anyearelie rent , or duetie of
corne paid unto the King out of the towne, andiurif~

ition of Bourges.

Efpée des moiffons. Looke Efpée.
Te ne mettray la faucille en fa moiffon, Iwill not
meddle with, or incroach wpon,his gettings.
En moiffons Dames chambrieres font :Proy. See


es.
Grande moiflon l'obeiflant recueille: Pro. Great
is the barueft that th'obedient gathers, ;
Telle femence telle moiffon: Prov. 14 feed, ill
weed ; 07,{uch as the feed fuch u the crop,

Moiffonné: m.ée : f.Reaped, gotten Jas corn in baruefl.

Moiflonner.To reape,to make or get in,barueft;to work
barueft worke. it
Avec le temps lon moiffonne:Pro, Leake Temps.

Moiffonneur : m.4 reaper,a haruefl man. ‘

Moiflonnier: m.cre: £ Ofer belonging to,barweft.
Chevreau moiflonnier. 4 fat Kid. ;
Faucille moiffonniere. À reaping fickle.
Oifon moiflonnier. A flubble goofe.

Moiflons. Looke Moiflon.

Moite : com, Moifl,liquid, humide wet, fiveatie, gining
as flones in rainie weather.

Moiteau. as Motte ; 0r,#5 Motteau.

Moiteur:£ Moïflure, moifineffe , bumiditie, wetneffe,
waterifhnelfe,

Moitié :£, An halfé,orbalfe part.

oitié figues inoitié raifins. Betweene iea/i and


earneft, :
Moiton : m. The balfé of a Bichot ; twe bufliells and a
halfe ; and,in fome places, three: Bourguignon, »
Moitoyen : m.4ay whole thing that is enioyed in com-
mon,or by undiuided or undinifible balucs.
sep a ae ne: f, RS the mid-
sewerall poffeffions ; alfo, enieyed in common,or
vndiuided te. inifible a whence ; cif
Mar moitoyen.4 partitio wall, whereof th’one balfe
or fide belongs to one, th’ other to another;alfo,a wall
wherin many baue parts according to the {cope of théir
tenements ot flate of their tenures.
Oitoyennerie: f. Th'enioying of a thing by manyin
common ; or by equall parts or undinided balues.
MES fas a ed cod old cae F
Ol:m, Sofines; 307 fofter part of a lbing;wbence;
mol de pr . The calfe of the leg. : }
Lemol de l'oreille. The /ug,or lift ofth'eare.
Mol :m.molle:£. Soft; füpple,tender, lithe,limber,pli-
ant; cafe gentle, eelding mild, cffeminatesremife ;
(A “


dain
Bol, frat,in Muficke.
De B. carré en B. mol. Inconftantly, or fuddainely,
from one matter into anotber. -
Molen putain de bordeau. As tender as a Pricfles
an (faywe.) ae
Molaine: f. 4s Moulaine. |
Molard. poire de m. 4 verie tenderer delicate pere
o-


M OIL MOP NY


Molares: ie di ol The cheketeethso ride 2
| Mole:m..4Peere ; a banke, or çaufey on ihe fen.
neere unto a
Mole: £4 pnt nal sa fhapele( 4
of fiefinor bara (welling,in the wombe, that ma
woman feerne withcbild ; bai Molebout Vallées
PS pre ET db mou
ole : m.ée :f ed;caft in,or frame: a
LL 4M Molebout: m, .4 hind of great fea-lumpe.

. | Molefte: com. : Fondée office, meso Mie.
sn a loathfome' spain fill, b burden-
fome,vnpled orme URLO, +:

Molcité : re ée:f. Molefled troubled, offended, ene.
red NS affictted ; 5 Urged mph ta |
6 407 ax f …
Molftément ranch fuel ombeaneh,
| moÿomely,to tbe wrongyorvexation of, >
Molefter. Tomolef annoy. trouble,tombersvexiie,
offend, paine inf afl to vege,preffesimportune-teo
much ; be burdenfome vnto,lye bard,and heauie upon.
Molefteur: m, A molefier, troubler, vexéésdifquiéter,
À >" annoyer.: 11
“Molestie:£ Molefation,troublesannoyances vexation,
|. difquiet,affittion, offence, difpleafure, irksomend{fe,
loathfomene|Je,tedsoufnelfe,too much Eros or
: bufine(fe.
| Molet. Seeke Mollet. .
| Moletted'efperon. The rowellofa fpurre. ‘1
Molibdene. as Plombagines Als tise bearbe Lead:
wort,
Moliere : £4 bo ,or quagmire, © 4
Moliere; it ti pere mole Agindfon,
or grindlefione. sa)
Molin-2s Moulin, * \ *
Moliner. To worke,or thicken De a A, tit
Mhlinet.+sMoulinec; Alo, the voll wherein ei
of a Rudders tiller goes.
Chafcun n'a pas fon molinett Prova Chafeun
ne dort wali mol, & nets» >
“Molinicr : m. A Miller.
Molition: f. se siete ene


+ Mollette à brayer ésiileurs, 4 Müller; the tittle
fu bottomed fione wherewith a Painter prindes bis
colours,


Chaire de bois 3 mollette.4 ing chaire of wood.
Mollice: :f, as Mollefe: ne $
“RE : 4 alifcation mollping, Softening,

ing.
Mole’ m.ée:f. Mollified, foftened, fuppled.
Mollie To mollifie, fofien, fupple ; sfinontb, make ply-
aat,eentle,tender.
oe: im, A mollifier, fofiener, Suppler; fnoother,
eäfer.
Mollnes im, The Jewells at th’end of bodkins; alfo,
s bauiag pearles banging at them,
2 To foften,mollifie; fmooth; to make gentle, ten-
der pl ant ; to looffen, flacken,relax;al/o,to make wan-
toniyeffeminate, funt,
Molu:Seeke Moulu,
Molofle: m. A: foot of three ie f fllables, in verfifj-


Mofuë t f, Cod,or Greene-fifh ; Looke Moruë.
Molure. Seeke Moulure. ©
Molurien.(The name of) a certaine harmeleffeferpent.
Molybdoide: f. 15 held of fome,to be,the minerall,and
leadén-coloured,Calamine; of others(more properly) ibe
oare of lead,or lead- -floñe untried.
Mome:in. A Momus, find- -fault,carping fellow.
Moment: m. 4 moment, a minute, a iot of time ; alfo,
moment, importance, weight, value, validitie, confe.
quence; the vertue, force,or firength of:
Momentaine: com. Momentaric tranfitorie, of little
durance, of {mall continuance,
ental: m.ale; Forcible, weightic, important, f
moment ; alfo,as Momentaine,
Momentané : m. ée: f. as Momentaine,
pa f, Momerie, momifme, carping, fault-fin-
ing.
Mommeric: £ A Mummerie,a Migyming,
Môtnmeur #m.4 Mummers one that goes a mumming. |
Mommon,\@ Mommeur ; Alo, a troupe,or companie
of Mummers ; salle cifardior maske s al, a fet, by a
: Mummer at di fees th :
: Illuy.couvra fonmommon. Illa Cros
Mon: m.The giferne of a bird,
Mon : mima: f. My.”
Mon.(4 Coniunétion)Afçavoir Mob: herbe This
in Demaunds onely ; for otherwife tis vfèd as an in-.


Mollaffe: com. Quaggie, (wagging, not fre
ee a ar mé Supple vapleafantly pla


Molle men ) an indian treeof whofe tender |


Nollemeas aoe 4 t ffir whence; C'eft mo
se == ine hip
ly; yeelding: ,efleminately ie |
anes ens fuppleneffetenderne fe; limber- onacal :m.ale : spent be- 3


' longing toa Monke.

Monacalement. Monaflically, Monke: a

Monade : f..42 vnitieor fingleneffe yanone,

Monaquat: m.Monkerie, Monkship, sone
chifmes the di plate:

Monarchie: f A Monarchie; a kingdome the gone ;
ment of one abjolute Prince.


nee plante ea ine egentiene pein can
- neffe, trattableneffe; mantonnelfe, delicacie 5 faint-
PE rem rm rot Le -
tite of {ome maids,and women,unto papersa 5,
~) and {uch otber hai {hand unfauorie acates. ont"


fine part of the band betweene the


Qu Mother lft pars Monarchique:: com. Monarchall ; belonging toa Mo-
1 ir ele; alfa, a fend ie sede Monarch. og :
wins ne loge Monarque: com. 4 Monarch; an obfolute Prince,
sae apple tender; ne Monaftere: m. À Monafierie Cloifter,, Abbey, (o-
En. eae aie A (0 mente). à:
Painmollct. 4 aad fauriewbire | Monaftique : com. Monaflicall, Monklie,Monkiff,
bread, ful pi fa 8 dal. 0, some | Moncaïatt:m: Sitke Moccadoe ; or,a kind thereof.
olle x Qa aucngisinol ‘Monceau: mA beapeyamalfea pile,
nome infer sabthete- || :. Monceau defoin: Acacke,reckeser flackeofbay.
d'of a fearae, or @, the rowéll of a Petit monceau de eue 4 hart Dur ou
pres. wathek Mike te USER AW oo à dan bik, : ; rot a


Le (à A bb jy.


Le


RL ee Sa SR ,


PPetia) er, eee ee de
À os


oe Ne ASIP Sue aramid
eye ‘ ,


be

~~.

my

fé

fo

Æ
7


rsa


aa


MO N


- Se retirer en vn nonceau.To gather bimfelfe vp in-
to a lumpe,er heape. i
Avarice fait petit monceau: Prov.Looke Avarice.
De bien commun on ne fait pas fouvenrimonce-
au: Pro. Of common goods men feldome gather beaps.
Monceler, ar ile up, |
Moncelet : m. A little beape,maff,pile.
Moncet. #5 Moineau; 4 Sparrow.
Mondain : m. 4 worldling ; one thats througbly ac-
ser with,or giues bimfelfe wboll) to,worldliebn-
Li


Mondain: m.aine :£ Mundane,worldlie, fecular;pro-

int difolate, (enfuall, flefhlie epicurious, —
ondaniser. To world it,or,to play the worldling.

Mondanité: f.worldlineffe ; vanitie ; fenfualitie.flefhe


linefe. :
Monde: m. The world, the vniuers ; all-vifible things

under the cope of beauen; alfo,a(world,or)great num-

ber of people,great {tore of companie.

Le monde va toufiours à l'empire : Pro. The world

growes euerie day wor/é and worfe.

Qui veut la confcience monde, il doit fuir le mon-

deimmonde: Prov, He that affects a cleane confti-

ence nut ausid uneleane copefmates.
Monde: com. Cleane,neat ; pure,cleere, fincere,

Qui veut la confcience monde, &c, 4s before,
Mondé: m.ée :f, Cleanfed made cleane ; al/o,pruncd;
4 ; 25 Bess |

br G monde. Looke Orge.
Monder vn arbre. as Efmonder, nif
Mondificatif: m.iue:£. Mundificatine, mundifjing:

cleanfing purging, purifying. Sex.
Mondification. 4 mundification, mundifying, clean-
ak #4 sky Sal i ;
Mondifi¢:m.cerfi Mundified cleanfed,purged, purified,
Mondifier. To mundife;cleanfé, purifie, purge, wipe,
make cleane.
Mondinet: m. dress [pruce,compt fellow,
Monettes : f. Wa?ning, or admonifhing women:: @Rab,
Monfaucon. The great gallowes of Paris ; (flanding on

16 flone pillers ;) whence; aa

Banderolle a!’ advenir de Monfaucon. One for

wbom the gallewes grones;ene (bat defèrueth.or is like

to come to,the gallowes, ‘
Monial: m.ale:f. Ofor belonging to,a Monke,

Herbe moniale. Wild Larks-heele, Monks-bood with

the purple flower.
Moniale: f 4 Nunne. La
Monilles: m. Necklaces,Tablets, Brouchesyor Ouches ;

__any {ach Ornaments for the necke. ‘


} Monine. as Monnine,


Moniteur : m, A moniter,adm sifher warner; a Sum.
moner,an Appavitor.


“Monition: f. 4 monition,admonition nonifbment ; an


aduertifement,information, warning, (ummons,
Monitoire: m.4 monitorie,or admonition; the cenfure,

or fentence of a Bifhop in an Ecclefiafticall Court, —
Monitoire : com, Monitorie, monifbing, i


ed Pam 2 oo er
ritorial:m.ale:f. Monitorial,moniterie ,admonifhing
onue:f. A Momkie or Pug.
o 7eme ta corner "à
a” 3! €, &
bdr cheb firs, bed m, Gent.
men, poore LU d
ep ey pele mul.
~ ter AURA, (2:50 152
Monnier : m. The Chenin,or Chub-fifh.


Go gle


MON


Momnioe sf, gr little —
onnoyage : m, The making ,or coyning of moncy ; al.
Me the Ve Ls unto 2 « :
onnoye : f. Money ,coyne,chinks, ; i
Mondoyes. (as in,Je fai& des mon. les Generaux
‘des moni. le Maiftre des mon.&c.) The Mint,
Popa ae Bafoche, Counters,or Palace Crowns;
any fuch irafh currant among Pages,¢> yong Clerkes.
Monnoye de beliftres, FA wee is
Monnoye bliche.Braffe or copper coinefiluerd over,
Monnoye de cordelier, Thankes, or a Benedicite;
wherwit
bout them,ufe to pay their foots.
Monnoye noire. Seeke Noir,
Monnoye de Roy. French money of gold, or fluer;
os in rs 6: 5
onnoye de Singe, Moes, mumps, monthes ; alfa,
fokesleapgamiol
ié comme la vieille monnoye. Stale,-out of
ufe,out of date ; alfo, of bad report, tbat hath but an ill
name, in the world.
Payer routes perfonnes en mefme monnoye. To
ufe,or anfiver all alike,
Kefembler la monnoye rongnée. To be illiterate,
or unlearned; Eftre fans lettres.
‘A ae ASE M monnoye: Prov. Small
money fiffices or fits,t €.

Monnoye : m.éc : £ nr made into mony.
onnoyement : m. 4 coyning,or money-making.

Monnoyer: m. 4 Coyaer,er money-maker.

Monnoyer.To coine, make monye, or make into money.

Monnoyeur: m.A Coyner,Moneyer,money-maker.

Monochordifer des doigts. To quaner with the fin-
gerssto wag or play with them, as if he touched a Ma-
nitordion,

Monocle : com. One eyed ; baning but one eye.

Monocule. as Monocle.

Monogaine: m. One that nener bad but one wife.

Monologue: m. One that loues to beare bimfelfe taike;
or talkes verie much about a verie little, —

Monomachie: f..4 Menomachie,or fingle\combat.

Monon: m. A certaine little green-leaned fhrub,wbich
beares a red fruit refembling a finall chérrie, bus not to
be eaten

Monope:: m.4 Peonian beaft, that ists big as a Bull,
and neerely purfüed {quirts out afbarpe, and fieris or-
dure deadlie to fucb as it lights on,

M le: £ 4 Monopole ; a priuat confpiracie, faiti-
ous combination uniuft cofeder ation;bence alfa,the fale
ofa marchatable comoditie challenged by one,or few ;
‘th'ingro rh into one,or few mens hands, by Pa-
tent from the Prince,or packing with others.
onopolé : m. ée: f.Monopoled,or monopolixed;com-
bined,confpired; ingroffed, as a commoditie,into one,

a few mens


or Ise '
M . Toconfpiresor combine together ; to mol
i hea hs 4 Oncor af ing,
94 commoditic i
Em pete ly utter. pre sad
M : m. À monopoler or monopolixersan in-


of fale commodities, by Patent from the Prince,
or packing with otbers, sf
Monofyllabe : com. Ofone fillable, <9:
aan co Eunuch: peers nl
onfeigneur. My Lord; (atitle coferred on fuch great
men as be in degree,or authoritie, canard > À |
 Sir,or Maifler ; (a title fit for or
füch a one as is not much fuperior to bim Wes
it.) * Mon.


gra) Friers, who are tocarvie no money a-


he i À \ = }
ee On yee es ee


Lee ASS


- Awmatin vers les monts,au foir vers les fonts:Pro.
A mornings walk vp tb’bill,in th’euening oc M
Mont. i ftead of Moule, Much,
C’eft mont. Looke Mon:
Montable : com, Mountable afeendable,climables
ontagne. # Montaigne.
Beet faulcon mont, # Montain, or Monta-


Monf eur etat na: &, detroisdvne |
cfpéc. 4 thread-bate,  fiigle-foled,courfe-purme,gen- )
‘tleman. VE PET ies FIRS
- Monfieurfans queuë. A cheater; alfo,a@ Mailer
without father addition; a gentleman without Arms,
; ‘or Attendance; one thatstroubled with no more gr
_triethen he needs. :
Monfieur-vaut bien Madaaie :Prov, À Lord Ve
 ferues(or is worth)a Ladie at all times. +
|  Aujourd’huy monfieur demain Moufcheur: Pro.
1 ta go marvow Maifierleffe. :
| Monftier :m. 4 Monallerie; alfo,a Minfler, or Cathe-
| drall Church; (and fometimes) alfo,any Parifh Church,
~\ Laiflerle monttierouil eft. Not to alter am aunci-
À ent cuflome ; or,to leaue the determining of Church


Montagon wd kind of bardie faulcô,bard 10 be kept.

Montagu. The name of a beggerlie Colledge iP Paris,
. founded in the yeave of Grace 1314,

Efparvier de Montagu. A lowfe. k
Montaignard: m, 4 mountainer,or mountaine man.
Montaigne :f. 4 monataine,a great bill,

Montaigne de Mars. The flefhie part of the band be-

tweene the thumbe,and middle finger ; or the mufcles

whereof it is made ; i(a tearme of Anatomie.)

_ Les hommes fe rencontrent, & non pas les mon-
taignes : Prov. Men meet often, yrountaines neuer,
seMontaigner. To looke big ont; bighly to exalt, or

lift vp , himfelfe.

Montaignette: f. Alittle mountaine,

Montaigneux : m.cufe: Mountainous,mountainie,
Full of monntaines,

Montaignois : m.oife: f. Of or belgnging to , refiding
es drélin in mountaines.

riaignoll le: f. as Montaignette.

Monee im, A kind of fhort, Jtrong,and excellent(but
ill to be kept) Faulcon, that vfeth to looke much on ber
feet; alfo,the little bivd,called a Brambling,

Môntanage, a: Montenage.

Montance. à la non, decent. Arifing, or amounting
touboue an hundred. .


matters unto Church-mens
Ce que l'enfant oit au fouyer efttoft connu iufques
au monttier: Pro. The Parifh quickly Armes bas
| infants beare in prinate.
| Monftre: m. Amonfler; a deformed: cregtuté sa thing
| thats fafhioned,or bred contrarie tomatures
| Monftre: £.4 patterne, feantling proof exampleselfays
| alfoya muflerview, flew,or fight; the countenance,re~
prefentationsor outward apparence of a thing ; ade-
monfiration ; alfo,a watch, or little clocke that trikes
nat; alfa; the glaffie box ‘that flands on the: flalls of
{x Gold{mithes, Cutlers cre 5 generally, any thing
that fhewes,o7 points at another thing ; whence;
+ Eamonfire d'vn horologe. The hand of aclocke.
Lainonftre-d’ vn maquignon de chevaux, The
eas hep a borfe-fcourfer fews bis commodities.
nftré: m.gerf, Shewed, reprefented, difconered,
- bewrayed; pointed at ; fignified, expreffed declared,


| Monftrée. Morice view, flew, fight wmufler of, | Montant :m..A Mountan; an upright beame or pol in |
Monftrement: m.4 Loto 9 Lonne à pointing at; | building; alfo,a boat that goes vpa riuer,or againft the x

a demon(trating exprefling declaring. fireame ; alfo, as Col rompu, or a finall rifing inthe ‘
Monftrer. To fbew; reprefents eres ‘point at ÿmid- of the mouth ofa bit ; alfo, an upright blow, or : ,

nifefi, fienifies demonpirate, declare ; adifelofe, patent thruft; alfo,th’aftent,or rifine of athing; ora thing,or :
bewray,reneale. any part thereof,confidered in itafcent, ;

"4 Semonftrer. To appeare, fland ont, prefent or ‘put Lesinontants d’vnli&.'The meg re :
¢ . forth himfelfe; alfo,to few or proue bin Lemontant du pied, Th'infinp. ’ «
Monftrer la dent. To girne; ro np 0 Montant. Mounting, aftending, riff, getting up om; #5
Monftrer le mouchoit blanc Looke Mouchoit, > alfo;increafing,or growing deere ; alfo, ouerbidding am a

. Monftrer les talons; ou le cul. To fhew à five paire nother, oa

© À ofteeles; to une away, . Monté! :mécif  Mounted,afcended, rifen,got up, got a

À Monftreur: m) Afbewer,a Dinofraser: n ; di UP Oy EU
Monftrüeufement. Monfraufly;, mifhapenbs mp: de. | Bienjoumal Ver well,or il mounted ; viz. well, x
eee defectinely ; againf the courfe of nature. or ill borfed, , 4
Monftrücux:m.eufe +f. Monfirous ;mfhapens defec- | ~ Guiterre bienjou malmonté.well,or ill rung. | ‘a


| fitgeenbitantsenmatarallo mo contrary to nar. + Montciufc 19 au nid dela pice ube eh bis


Mont: m. A mount,billmountaine, fortunes; as bigh asbis meanes,or worth,can raife him,
Les monts. (Without addition) are commonly under- Iln’eft curé qu ero hate elt miones-Rro. 24 3
© flood tobe the ae ee eee


fits. not faltwhofe feat is raifd top bighy >
Mo f. Aa afient rifing, emt or. clin Ps
alfosthe rifing part of a borfesbit. BE
La montéed’ vn baftiment. 7/7 per part of a buil-
: ding; or,are dr or modell thereof,called the
upright plot of abuilding,
*A haute montée le fax encombre: Proy, He tbat


<.Malieand Fr
enr Jorie. Fy 7 onder ( tBinfide of ine of the


% 4 i 5: Apublicke 5 maintai-
i ber nr


TS Fa GR F


* Du mathe top to the botone,- climbes bigh feels cuerie finall weight beauies —
En monte}’pwards,aboue,on bigh, | Apres grande montée grande vallée: : Prov, After
2 Farmons & pa vaux, An: cuerie coaft, in veuerie toyle refl,afier paine eafe..
grees sa = wal ough’ | |: Apres grande valléerudemontée : Prov. The con-
Fe Fi , & merveilles; ou, monts & trarie.
= yaux mgolden worlds ;(aifome | Montelet:m.A little mountaine.
Montenage: m, Toll paied vaio certaine Lor T


fuch as buy,and fell ne >


_ Au matin les monts, a fonds — - É
ya their territories.
Hbb ip | Mosier.


: ce mnot,performe “8
Swen quickely ——


À
Ê
<
a
a x
4


e


M ON


Monter. To mount,afcend rift climbe, to goeor get up
© walo ; to leape as the male vpan the 3 alfo,to in-
creaft,or grow deere ; alfa, to overbid another; alfo,to
Je in quantitie; to amount unte ; to raiféseduance,
lift up. dd
Monte monte. Words whereby yong Sparrowes are
taught 10 climbe the lather.
Monter vn arbalelte, To fet a croffebow in the flock.
Monte fur l'afne, faire cefsion des biens. Looke
Afne, P d
Monter fur fes grands chevaulx. To fpeake bigh,
and upon high tearmes,
Monter au greiner fanschädelle, To light in a turd,
. Monter vne monftre. To wind up a watch.
Monter à la navire. To get a fhiphoord,to take fhip.
Qui plus haut monte qu'il ne doit de plus haut’
chet qu'il ne voudroit : Prov, He that climbes bigber
then be fhould falls lower then be would.

Monte-vin : m.4 firait-mouthed veffell of glaffe,which
if you fill with wine, and another of the fame fafhion
with water,and then fet this vpon that, the wine will
ffraight mount through the water to the top ofthe one
veffell,and the water defcend through the wine to the
bottome of th other without mixture of either with the
other,

Monticule:£ 4 billocke,a (mall bill, ‘

Montigené : m,ée: f.Borne,or bred on the mountains,

Mont joye: m. The title of the chiefè Herauld in
France.

Mont joye: f. A barrow; a little bill,or beape of flores,
layed in,ov neere a bighway, forthe better difcerning
thereof; or inremembrance of fome notable ack perfor-

* med,or accident befallen, in that place; alfo,agoale to
run at; alfo(metapborically)any heape.

Montoir. as Montouér; or the hee whereon we get on.
Se ranger au montoir. Metaphorically from a borfe
toa wench,that fuffers amanto get on; or fettles ber
(elfe to gine him the eafier getting on.

Montouër:m. 4 mounting blocke ; or as Montoit.

Montroüage. as Montenage.

Montuëux.#Montaigneux. —-

Monture: f. A horfà to ride on, a faddle horfe,

Monument: m, 4 monument ; fepulcbre, tombe; re-
cord,memoriall remembrance of. |

Moquer. Looke Mocquer. ..

Moquettes :£. Mockes, frumps, flowts,gudgeons.

Moral : m.ale: f Morall,belonging unto ciuilitie,or ma-
ners. ns

Moralement. Morally,in a morall fence,or fafhion; al-
(0, doubly, or with a meaning different from bis words,


| Moralifé: m. ée: f. Moralixed morally expounded,
-| Moralifer. Tomorallige, to D 2 to giue a


morall fence unto; alfo,to alt a Morall,or Enterlude of
‘manners. ».
Moralifeur: m.A moralixer, an expounder of morali-
© ties s an Ethicke Lecorer,or Philofopher.
Moralité : f Moralitie ; a morall fence , or fubieét ; al-
fo,a Morall, an Enterlude or Play of manners,


-Morbifique : com. Vawhole[ome, infectious, difeafes-


— breedin i


Fr


| Motceau:m. Amvr@l; bit, moutbfil à ae


| nn ken
au d'Adam. The bead of the wind-pipe,
: sheds renbfing of threaitle tes 3 aa


4


Se courroucer contre fes morceaux. as under


Courroucer.


M OR.


Cronpir aux efcoutes de gras morceaux. Te le
in wait for wealthie Offices, fat benefices dc.
Cela leur fax tailler les Morceaux plus menus,
That makes them line the more (paringly,or pinch it the
more.
‘A morceau reftif efperon de vin: Prov. Put ona
refliue bit with fpurres of wine, —
Au ferviteur le morceau d’ honneur: Pro, The laf?
. morfell in the difhis the feruants fee ( fome bolding it
bat arude part to leaue a difh emptie.)
Morcel: m. 4s Morceau(in old French.)
Morcelaire. Collation morcelaire. A hort cokati-
on,a bit and away,
orcelé : m.ée:f. Nibled,eaten by bits, bitten by lit~
Mie and et a
orceler. To bite fmall movfells nibble mince it, eat
gl end lite, eter 2
orcelet: m. 4 bit, finall mammocke,or morfell.
Morche:f. Fasdviltucls choo besten
Morcillant: m.ante:£ Peecemealing, diuiding into
morfells ot finall ee 3 alfo,knapping,or nibling ; bi.
ting fafh and fleightly,
Vn ocil pus > A greedie,or bungrie eye; fuch-
a one as exprefes a great oe to beat it,
Morcillé: m. ée:£ Peecemealed; dinided intofmall
morfells,or peeces; al/o,nibled; bitten faft and flight}.
Morciller. Topeecemeale; to dinide into (mall mor-
Sells or peeces ; alfo,to nibble,or knapple ; to bite verie
Saft and vevie fleightly, like a rabbit that mumbles «
bard thing which ber teeth cannot pierce.
Mordacité:f. Mordacitie, eager detzaflion, fharpe
taunting biting (beech, bitter tearmes,
Mordant: m. 4 kind of great blacke, and flow Spider.
Mordant : m.ante :f. Biting,
Beftes mordantes. The wolfe,Boare Otter ,Fox,cre,
En mordant. Holding faft, biting bard.
Mordeur: m. .4 biter.
Mordicant. Nippingopinching, biting. —
Mordication : f. 4 mipping,pinching,biting.
Mordienne. Gogs deathlings ; a foobfh oath in Rab.
Mordillé : m.ée:£ Nibled, gnawed; fretted, fnipped off.
Mordiller. To nibble,gnaw, fret, (nip off.
Mordiquer. To bite,pinch pip.
Morte, To bite, or fet the teeth ins to gnaw, broufe,
champe, nibble; to pinch,nip, (nip, or [ap with the
teeth ; alfo,to fling ; alfo,to finell (whence, lemord ;


Vo a nofe; ) alfo,to conccine, apprebend, under. |


rdreau bafton. pour le faire mordre, &c. To
aida M as kate a
Mordre les doigts. Tofret, or chafe imvardly at a
thing paft sy j
Mordre à la grappe: Il fembloit mordre à la
grappeHe ke) eartilythat beféemed 10 doe what |
be delinered.


Mordre oreille à, # much as flatter, ou careffer
ji wherin the biting of th'eare is,with


ordre en riant, Te quip,or taunt by way, or with a
of ieaft; tofbew a man a goood countenance to .
bis face,and cut bis throat bebind bis backe.

= In’y pouvoit rien mordre. He could not skill of it,
be knew uot what to make of it; twas paft bis reach,

out of bis courfe,out of bis element.

: Vous avez bien envie de mordre fur mon
gangs Ton nb Pie Late helps boue e


a my words.
Chien qui ab disais": à 0
3


awl


Mee ET
few,or no blowes ; they feldome firike bome that threa-
temor talke,much.


Prov. The blond of the innocent cryes-vnto God for
vengeance pursuing vato,and flinging after death the
confeience of a murtherer : Howfoeuer fome may flat-
ter themfelues with; :

_ Homme mort ne mord pas: Prov, A dead man, (or

” aswoe fay,a dead dog) bites not. }
Mauvais chien ne trouve ou mordre: Pro. The curt
curre knowes not where to fet bis teeth,
On ne fçait qui mordne qui rue: Prov. A man
knowes not what may fall out.
Tel eftrille fauveau qui puis lemord: Prov. Looke
Fauveau.
Tel rid qui mord: Prov. Seme laugh that bite, fome
ieaft that gall ; or as before ir, Mordreen riant,

Mords zm. À Bitt for a borfe. ju

Mords. Bitten; enawne, champed; nibled; nipped,
pinched with the teeth; flung.

Mote: m, 4. Moore,Morian,Blackamore. 1
Petit more. The name of an excellent Ordinarie in
Paras,

Tefte de more. Locke Tefte.

Il a efté pris comme le more. His cunning is difoue-
red; or be bath coufened bimfelfe in thinking to coufen
others ; he is caught in the fnare he layed for another.
(Francis Sforce che laf? abfolute Duke of Milain(für-
named the Moore ,becaufe of bis {wart complexion,and
the moft crafiie Prince of bis time) hauing receined a
great overthrow, put on the apparrell of a Swiffer,and
thought foto baue lined, for awhile, bidden among the
Regiments of that Nation; but they within a while dif:
couering, deliuercd bim unto the French King, in
whofe prifons be ended bis dayes.)

Moreau. Cheval moreau. 4 blacke borfé.

Morée: f, À kind of murr ey,or darke-red colour,

| Morel. a Moreau. . : En

Morelle:£ The bearbe Morell, pettie Morell, garden
Nighrfhade. :
Morelle furieufe,ou maniaque. Mad,raging or /i-
rious Nightfbade, Saha
Morelle marine. 4 kind of fleeping Nigbtfhade which

owes in rockie places neere unto the fea. .

orelle mortelle. Pore Deaths hearbe, deadlie
Nigbtfhade, great Night{hade.
Morelle fomnifique. Sleepie Nightfhade; or as Mo-

e mortelle, è | je

Morelles: f, Morell Cherries; late-ripe Cherries,dryed

for Winter prouifion.

Morene: f. as Hemorrhoïde ; the Emrods,or Piles,

| Morengue. The name of a kind of Oliue.

Morefque: f À Muoreffe, a flee Moore, a blacke wo-


. man. à ;
Morefque: com, Moorifh,Moore-like,of the Moores.
| Fueillage,& Ouvrage, que. vorke ;
arude,or anticke painting,or caruing,wherein the feet
À and tayles of beafts, ec, are intermingled with, or
made to vefemble,a kind of wild leaues,érc, 0
| Moreffe: £. A Mooreffe,a woman Moore,a blacke wo-


Moris De morcts. winne-berries burtle-berries.
o FR ee +


Morfce: THEN > 2410.91
| Morfiaille: f. Greedie eating , ilfimoured or baflie


| deuouring ; allo, bad or dead Wine, fuch as is no


= - Go gle


Homme mort mord iufques, & par delà la mort: |


man. Beira PE Tr | |
| Moret: m. A kind of Lye whereof Sope is made ; alfo,
as e Pe pe: PAL Eee ’ | SIOGs .


- MOR


better then droppings.
Morfiailler. To feed greedily, eat or drinke baftily, and
write the mouth illfanouredly in chawing, or (wal-


Morfiailleries: f, Food or viélualls greedily, and illfa-
uouredly taken in, ~ +

Moifil: m. Yrorie,Elephants teeth.
Le morfil d'un coufteau, The edge-fide ofa new,and
unground knife.

Morfondement : m, # Morfondure.

se Morfondre. To take cold,cat ch cold,get a cold.
Se morfondre fur, To flawd long, or dwell much


upon.

Morfondu: m. ué: f. That bath taken,or caught cold ;
that bath got a cold.

Morfondure: f. A cold; or a taking of cold.

Morganegibe. 4 matrimonial gift ; or, fuch a title as
our frankmariage.

Morgeline: f “fuie Chickweed, Henne-bit; alfo, the
finall,ov fine Chickweed ; allo, Pimpernel ; whence;
Morgeline femelle. Blew Pimpernel,

Morgeline mafle, Red Pimpernel,
orgoy, for Mort Dieu; (a rufticall oath.)

Morgue; £. A fad,or fadned looke; a folemne, or feuere

ecountenance ; a foure face; an aufiere poflure,or fett of
the vifage;the mump.ng afpelt of one that would feeme
grauer then he is; Alfo (in the Chaftelet of Paris) a
certaine Chaire, wherein a new-come prifoner is fet,
and muft continue fome boures, withont flirring either
head or band, that the Keepers ordinarie feruants may
the better take notice of bis face,and fauoxr.
‘A le voir tenir fi bonne morgue. Seeing bim keepe
bis countenance fo well, or fet fo good a face onthe
matter. . :

Morguer. To looke fourely on,or make a foure face at;
to brane or outface with a foure,folemne,or flout coun-
tenance.

Qui morgue le ciel, & fait gambades à Ia terre,
that hangs on a gibbet. j

Morgucfoupe. lam. #bilefi they were eating their
browe fe, or fat pottage.

+ gr m, À maker of frange mouthes, or foure

ces.

Morgueux, The fame ; or one that illfauouredly writbes
his face to a fhew of grauitie.

Morhouc: m. A Porpoft,orféa Hog. €Breton.

Moribonde: com. Dying ; or wpon the point of dying ;

readie to dye, ie


Morienne: com. Dying a naturall death; or,mot kil. |


led, but dead of it felfe.
Morigené ge. ée: f. Bien mor. Mannerlic,well man-
‘nered well bebaued, of good carriage, well fafbioned,
‘well brought vp. os à
Morille: £'The finallef,and daintief kind of red Mufh-


rome. 4 x
Pinfe morille, The game called, Hinch pinch, and


laugh not, |
ds te or er 0 was
le whofe bead and neckes upper part is of a ruddie;
nites colour the lower part of vis necke,backand
tayle being black,and the vel of bisback and bis wings
 Moufe-colaureds alfo, the name of ablacke grape that
yeelds verie good Wine,
Morin. Vent morin. The South wind, 2)
Morion: m. 4 Murrian,o Head-peece.
Morionné, 4rmed,or couered with a Mirrian,
_ Lievres morionnez. (Silie Artificers, or coward-
lie Tradef-men, turned watchmen ) the ordinarie


tt Vera a Le rt ur frite Gé.


MOR


watchmen of good Townes, as
| Soldatsmorionnez, Footmei.  % Ni
Morique. for Morifque, €Rab. x4
Morin Looke Mourir.
Morifque : £. A Morris (or Moorifh) daunce ; af, the
mixxen fayle of a Ship.
Mo: The ruddie,and fpottedfea-Breame,or Golden-


Mormyre. as Morme.
Morne: com, Sad, heauie,lumpifh,lowting ; a.
ceued,in a melancholie mood all in dumpes;al{o,du
Fr pide, fottifb, fencelepe, blockifh. -


Lance morne. À launce with a blunt head; a tilting-


, Lips morne. Blacke,duskie clowdie, gloomie, low-
ring weather ;
Morné: m.êe : £ Dulled, bluntedyunpointed ; alfo, tip.
ped,headed,or pointed with.
Efperons mornez. Spurres with blunt rowells.
agape cyl ar es EEE
ottifbly ; clowdi
Morner, To pass sr ( sy itp 4 vint of a weapons
Mornifle: f. À daintie round ftalian finit,growing like
a vertes alfo, a tricke at Cards: alfo, a =:
pafh on the lips.
Bailler mornifle fur les levres du Roy: Ta cie


MorocherE 4 f. The finale courfef, end nd of
wheat.


Moromantie: Fa ifs Foolifh divination.

oron, #5

Morofité: f.. onafiie, frowardne[fe, waywardlnelfe,
crofneffe ouerthwartne(fe.

Morofophe: : com. Foolifh-wife.

Morphée: £. The res

Morphie : £ Juorie.

Morpiaille. as Morfaille. @Rab,

Morpion: m. 4 (rablowfe.
Grenier à morpions. A Harbour, or Garner fer
Grablice; a filthie, pales fluttifh,or lowfie queane. }

Morquacafté: m, ée: f All-bruifed, or out of iaint.


Moral de mulet: m. À kind of muxxle tyed about bis
nofe,and hauing banged at it a great poake full of Hay,
or Oats for bim to feed on as be goes...

Morrailles.as Mourrailles.

: Morre: fA powch-mouth ; a mouth garded with great,

out-flanding,or flowching ips 5 (or,as Mousses)’

Morrion. # Morion, SE

Morrude: £ 4 Gurnardyor Carre-flh.. a

Mors: m,. A bittsor biting alfoas Mori
. Mors adiable. (So doe fome call) the.
Bennet, or Ble


44
2a sah


Mors du ie Fore-bitor Duil-bits (a barbe)


| Morfaul. as Marfaul.
Merfillans & Morfiller, as Morcillant, & Moréi


Morilleure: A A reece moin trains de


pa) pois don Fm LT SE RE RQ


5 Mort: m.morte: Lf Dead, deceaffed, apr al,


moo h 14 eto


= Le four dei morts:allyindes da:


»:


ae


a:


MOR


wound ; fuch as the tooth, cf uchis the bit,
à Death; bane; a deceaféor departure out of
© this li
Mort aux beeufs, Ox-bane; an bearbe whereof ifan
Ox eat,be dies forthwith of the Squinzie.
Mort aux chiens. Dogs-bane; alfo,meadow,or wild,


Saffron.

oul d’enfer damnation. Looke Enfer.

Mortaux oifons. Henbane ; alfo,Hemlocks.
Mort aux rats. The confellion tearmed Ratsbane,
Mort Roland. Thirft. Rab.

Mort aux vers, The pire called wormefted, fea
Wormewood d,and Wormefeed wort,

Donation à caufe demort. 4 Deed of gift,in the na-
ture of a Legacie, or Will, renocable during the giuers


‘Amort à mort. Kill, Kill; the cry ef bloudie fout
diors purfiing their " fearefill enemies unto death.
La mort l'attend à deux pas prés. Deities bard by
bim,or readie to fèixe on him.
Ileft bon à aller querirlamort. He is a dreaming,
lingering or fags meffenger.
La mort n'efpargne ny petitny grand: Pro.Death
baulkes no creature, [pares nor finall nor great.

La mort n’a point d'ami, le malade n’a qu’un
demy: Prov. Death bath no friend, the ficke man but
anbalfe one,

Apres latnort le medecin: Pro, After death drugs;
the mifchiefe paflsa remedie.

Bonne la mott qui nous donne la vie: :Prov. Good
is the death which brings vs unto life; Gods fanour’s
great not to repriue Site as end well,and die to line.
Contre:la mort n'y a point d’ appel: Prov. From ||
death there's no appealing.
Contre la mort n'ya point de medecine: Pro. No
medicine againft death; noremedie for death. :
‘A longue corde tire qui d’aucruy la inort defire:
Prov. See Corde. F
Haine de Prince fignifie mort d'homme: Prov.He.
whom a Prince bates is as good as dead, .

. Homme short mord & par delà la mort :

Pro. Looke Mordre.
Le pourpre au foc mort d’ egal poix ftasice :
ae Death matches the poore clowne mb purple |
Gallants. 1


, flaine made away.
Mort bois; & Bois mort. Looke Bois.


Mort herbage; où, Herbage mort. Looke Her-
Mac, The fidess or outfide of a Ship from |


the wales vpward.
= Morte’ faifon. The time wherein Hervings, and fuch
tke fifo » being out of feelin are not, or fhould not be, |


nee M tt A |
Late morts Dirges, rentals, Pagers
wes, or Sacrifices for the dead.

mortititin fief. À father,dre, to paffeower in
fief, unto his ire apparant, Me


Lemiort execurgle Vif: Looke Executer.m 9
Ÿ Lemort faifit le vif,fon heritier plus proche, & ha-
bile à: fa tension 8 couftume generale de Frick: |
ce quiafiew en plufeurs pais tant en ligne collare- |
rale que direéte,& tant parteftamentque abintef-
tat : Tellement que la iuflice n’eft pas faifie'de la
ae la delivrerà Fheritier.


me


Original from


FHE- OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


ate


gray
a à


PES SEE EE RO Se es


=


DEA


as,
ant i.


MOR


Homme mort mord iufques, & par delà la mort:
&,Homme mort ne tod polis Pro Leeke Moc-


ce. ¥ à

Homme mort ne fait guerre: Prov. Dead men are
_ quiet; the dead man makes no warre,

La guerre eft la fefte des 1norts: Pro. Ware x the

dead mans bolyday.

Qui fe combat n'eft pas mort : Prov. À man's not

dead as long as be doth fight : ( Fadeed there's often-
|. times more lifé then boneflie ina contention.)

: Mortaillable : com. Subieéé vate hus Lords Taxations,
or unto Mortmaine ; or,as Main-mortable. ;
Mortaillablement. By, or in, Mortmaine ; alfoferuilly,

M villenage. lac? ;
‘| Mortaille : À The Taxation,or Tax whereto a villain is
Subieét, either in bis life time, or after bis deceaffe 5 at
the (reafonable) will of bis Lord,or by cuflome, ot as be
hath compounded with bim, mi
Morttailler. A Lord to tax bis villaines, or feruile Te-
“nants.
Mortaife: f. A mortaifé in a peece of timber, 4
Mortalité: € Mortalitie, frailtie, fubreétionvnto death;
alfo,1 mortalitie, plague,murrein,rot.
Mortau. a Mortel (ruflically.) i |
Mortel: m. elle: f, Mortal, bumane, fraile, fubieët
unto death; alfo, mortall, deadlie, bane-giuing,death-
bringing,end-procuring.
Mortellement. Mortally, deadly, capitally, unto the
death,or unto death. à
Morte-main: f, 4s Main-morte; Mortmaine; a'fo,
the fucceffion of, or eflate left by, illegitimated baf-
tards, unnaturalized flrangers , and vnaffranchixed
villaines.
Morteinent. Deadly,as one thats dead; al, weakely,
faintly, without force,like one thatis balfe dead.
Motte-payes: m. Dead-payes ; Suuldiors in ordina-
rie pay,for the gard of a Fortreffe, or frontier Towne,
during their lues. Jn France they be exempted from
| the Taille. 3 ne,
‘| Morte-faifon. The feafon wherein Herrings, er other
fea-fifh are not fit 10 be caught. see)
| Congé de morte-faifon. 4 Licence to fiflain that
… vafeafonable feofon, Hid,
| Mort-gage, & Mort-gaige:m, Morgagesor Mort-
1 age, toi
Mortier: m. À Morter (te bray things in;) alfo, tbe
Short,and wide-mouthed peece of Ordnance called «
Morter ; alfo,Morter (vfed by Dawbers, exes) alfo, a
: fon of Cap (with brimmes turned vp) worne by the
d Chauncelor;and Pre oe if Fest 3 Courts
on high dayes ; alfo,a ki all chamber-lampe, :
Marie deSageffe, Aa excellent Morter,made (by
fm) of the whites of egges,a little Maflick,and Beane
er. “i ps
Lemortir ym toufours les a al ge à
e e by nature, or an ill habit got by cuflome,
ges fome tacke of themfelues bebind thems ac
Mortifere: com, Mortiferous, death-bringing, bane-


D. [4 deadlie, ee : i |
Mortification: Be Mortification ; a mortifine; a om


tigen ping he hs « dada
appetite, Pee vi
Mon rape 3 de tender. BOTY


| Mortifier. To mortifies to dead the appetite,que ame,
Miche selon ate defo


thats to be eaten, Ht


yo mortier make tendersflafh |
- Jam: neie.
f Pro. Scedeeld ae faa Sictane been mortified.


‘M OR


Mortifieur : m, A mortifier.

Mortmain. Looke Main-morte,

Mott-né: m. ée: £ Borne dead, fill-borne.

€:m. A Mortwarie; that which is due, or gi-
uen,to a Parfon out of a dead mans goods,

Manille as Mortuaire,
ortuaire: m. À fimerall, or buriall; alfo, a bearfe-
cloth,or fanerall es . due fe
Banquet de mortuaire. 4 finerall dinner, banquet,
or feajt.

Mortuaire: com, Belonging toa fimerall, or toa Mor-
tharie.

Cloche mortuaire. 4 paffing-bell ; or, the bell that
rings to a burial.

Drapmortuaire. À hear(é-cloth, |
Repos mortuaire, Take of death, fineralls, or bu.
rialls, |

Morvat: m. 4 dot of fnivell,or of fot.

Morve: m, Snot, /nivell.

Morué: £. The (od, or Greenefifh; (a leffe, and dull-
eyed kind whereof is called by fome,the Morbwell.)
Moruë parce. Haberdine,

Moruë verte. Greene fifh.

D 7 deinoruc. 4 greatout-flrouting,and dull-figh-
ted eye.

Tripe de morué. Looke Tripe.

Morveau: m, Snot, fniwell.

Lemorveau de limacons, The flyme of fnayles.

Morvenic: m. The rough Cedar of Licia. €Proven-


Me To fainell be fnottie let fnot fall.

Morves. Les m. de petit point. À kind of frenzie in
a boife, which during it neither knowes any that
baue tended bim , nor beares any that come ucere


bim,

Morveux: m.eufe: £ Snottie, fninellie’; flymie.
Il faut Jaiffer fon enfant morveux pluftoft que
luy arracher lenez: Pro. Better a füoitié nofe then
none.

Moruyer. Poiffonnier mor. À Fifhmoñger that fells
pr but Cod,ov Greencfifh. . ;

Mofaique: f: worke of finall in-layed peeces ; Mofaicall


worke.

Mofcaire. Os in. as Os facré,

Motcellin: m.ine: f. Ofor belonging to, Muske,

Mofchardins: m. Small pellets,or graines of a delicate
Paflemade of Gumme Dragagant, Roft-water, fine
Sugar Dragons blond, and Muske.


Mofe: & 4 patterne, as of one Herring in a barvell, |


Mise the goodneffé of theïef ; or,as Moifon.

ofle. x Mole : =:

Molle, Bois moflé. See Bois.

Moller. To frame by wiould,to cafl ia à mould.

eur. #s Mouleur.

Mofquée : £. 4 Temple,or Church among the Turkes.

Mofquets. as Mofquettes. :

Mofquette. as Mofquée ; or a litle Twrkifh Church ;
alfaja Musket (Peece.)

Mofquettes. Little seweélls earings,ee,

Mot: mA Motto, à word; a (peech; alfo, the note
winded by a hunt{man on bis borne; alfo, a qnip, cut,
Mot de ne + zn or waggi{hieaflan obfe

O €. A want cene
or tapsiibans conceit, > | aie,


: Mot de rencontte. A wittie conceit; or, asin Ren- |


contre, F
Dire le mot. To breake à iéafi.


Trencher le mot. Fo peake briefely, andto the pur-
pales |


ie


MO T
3 al/o,to ginea nicked fort anfwwere
x hd phe: tu a faut qu'un demy mot: Prov.
A good wit’swell inform'd 4 balfe a Word, :
Bons mots n'efpargent heu Prov. Good words(or
fit walls pe home.
En vne chanfon n’ y a qu'un bon mot: Procrherés
but one good word in a fong.
Motacille: f. Awagraple,or water-Wagtayle.
Moté. as Moter.
Mote. as Motte,
: Motelle: £ 4 Powte,or Ecle-powte.
Moret m, A verfe in Muficke, or of a Song; a Pofes a
rt Lay,
Petes m. A mouer, Jiirrers perfuader, prouoker ; a
motioner.
Mothe. 4 little earthen fortreReyer rong boufe, built on
a bill; or,as in Motte.
Motif: m. A motine ; a mouing veafon, argument, or
caufe ;an incitement inducement, or prouvcation unto
a thing , alfo,the mouer;or author of an ad. .


motion unto.


ding, prouoking unto,
otté: m, as Motet,
Motte: f. 4 clod, lumpe, rhin ter of ‘earth ;
* alfosa little bill, or bigh place ; a t (eat fora fort, or
Frasgbonlts (hesce}al/fecbafer riser boue earths)
_alfosthe gr) ne,or Pubes; alfosa Butt tofhoot at; !
Matte: m. ée: f, Set, or (ofually) fitting, ona clad yor
fodd.


moifiure.


earth.
Mottelette: f. 4s Mottelet, on
Motteux: m.eufe : f Cloddie,tur fie, foddie.
| Mouaillon: m, a Moilon.
Moiianer. To mawle, yawle, or cry like a little child.
Moüard : m. arde : f. Adwmping, mowing, making
 mouthes,
Moucade: f. The Stuffe Moccadoe, — tM
Moucadou : m. A band-kerchiefe. Reiger: ;
Mouce. as Moufle; blunts 0%. le} 4
: Moucet: m. 4 | Sparroms


es nr. on flyes.  ; -
Mouchar A eee cae-drpe po
saan


m00ier ; al


Mouchar watch;obfèrue on inoter
mens dealings ; ; À cer it, or or play tbe edfing-


Mouche:in. A Ship-boys ot Saylor afc!
} rase ME ae rues out in load


MCE A ely; Lanke Mou.
curt. wit eatin


: Ne ve ap romper ion


pa +


i eric 5 emi d'un Sera 2 re |


putes is a fubtill,craftie or warie a


“Moucheron: m. A little Fly; a Gnat;alfo, the little


Mouchet: m. 4 Musket ; the taffell of a Sparhawke ;


Moucheter. Looke Moufcheter. ï
Motoire: com. Mouing; that lends,yeelds,or affoords | Mouchettes: f. 4 paire of fnuffers; alfoya kind of flou-


Motrice: f. Mouing, fürr itia, oa Moucheur: m. A fiyter,wiper, fnuffer. *
aie eet inducing Mouchoir: m. pear se speed


eace.
Mouchon: m. À little Fly; alfo,the fauffe of a candle;


Motteau: mas Mottelet ; ai/o,.a clot of cel Moucle: £. as Moule ; a Muskie.
Moudure. as Moufture,
Mottelet: m. 4 little clod, ‘lumpe, fodd, or ture of | Moue: £. A moe,or mouth; an (ill-fauoured) extenfion,


Mouée : f. Mouéede gens. A crowde,or pet trompe,
Mouelle. as Moelle.
“Mouette;& Mouettes; as Moette,& Moettes.
Mouffle: £ 4 Winter Mittaine ; alfo,as Moufle; al-
. Moucet petit. 4 kind of final beige Sparro; ih
esor fubtsli fellow. 516M |
21
Mol mare ‘f/Hanches moufflettes. Plumpe,


Motes a ‘4 trackle for a Pullie; alfojas Mouffle, -
_Mougnon. See Moignon,


bia teed oR Mi
1é:m, es 1 Sonat ads mes. |


fu feacende; as) aps mck ee


MOV.


temps auquel on fe mouchoit encor à la man- |
che, 1 4 rude, fimple,vnmannerlie,or ignorantage.


blacke patch thats glued by Mafticke, exc, on the faces
of many ; alfo, the {nuffe,or weeke of a candle,

Avoir des moucherons en tefte. To be burmorous,
moodie,grddie-headed; or to bawe many proclamations
or crotchets in the bead.

Autant chie yn beeuf que mille moucherons:Pro.
As much is {bitten by one Oxe as by a thoufand Gnats ;
(Some by this Prouerbe meane, that {paring fhould be
onely in great matters.)


alfo,a little finging bird that refembles the Friquet; al-
fosaneare of fome kinds of corneas of Millet Sc;alfo,
the Cats-tayle,or. Aglet that bangs on Nut-irees ; alfo,
any manner of flap. ] à
Mouchet petit. as Moucet petit.


vifhing among Caruers, ec.


Monftrer le mouchoir blanc à. To make an offer of
Submiffion ; or (after a found beating) to fie vato for


“ll Treatie, yne chandelle pour trouver vn petit mou-
chon. He loofés much to vecouer a little.


or thrufting out of the lips.
Faire la moué aux harengieres. To flandon the Pil- |
lorie ; i fay of one thats bang’d, be makes a #1)
mouth.

ri is vieil Singe ne ft bellemoué: Prov. An
old-bred clowne was neuer mannerlie. ’


of paie


Lo the capsid rs or lid of a Gold/mitbes Cru
> TUM ve

Oma ne prend pas cele) dhaes fans mouffles, Such

» placessor peopleare not to be woon without press


: me: f. wet, mained, foakedor feepedin |
. liquor. - NOTE)
Se couvrir: d'un facmouillé. Foblfbh 10 thinke


idle 4
nr de allege gh à


mA etingormsifesings faking,
orfleepingin moifiure,
Mouiller. To wet,moifien, (à faker eine.
.Moüiller l'ancre. To caftankor, 2". |
© Quife garre deffous la fucille deux fois femouil- |
le: Pro, Seeke Fueille. ister,
oftenwets bis wind-pipe, €, GRab, ni i zh


O. }!


,
‘ :
‘ LM Man 2
eee


;
£ r _—_ x 4 T1 a
his are nat Sata = PPT - tite hf ns ir be = a 7

at TE es SS eee RE ER MR ee ee eee eee eee ee


ny ee

Mouilleure: £ Awetting,or moiftening ; wetnefie,ymoif-
ture, d ai J

Mouilloir: m. 4 certaine little veffell wherein Spinf-

… ters moiften their fingers. 1

ep ory pomenes 4
ouiffon: f. A Cowes milking. |

M zm. Grift, or a grinding ; al/o, Multure, the
fee,or toll thats due for grinding.

Moulaine: £. Mullein, Woll-blade, Long-wort, Hares-
beard, Hig-taper,Torches. > ;
Moulaine blanche. bite Mullein,or white-flomred
couidencs mcipeadl

Mouldeur : m, À grinder, !

Mouldre. To grind ; aff, to pownd, or flampe into pee-
ces.

Qui ne peur mouldre à vn moulin aille à l'autre :
Prov. Let bim that cannot fadge in one contfà fall to a-
nother. pe

Qui premier arrive au moulin le premier doit
noble : Pro. The firft commer is ta be ferued firft.

Mouauret f. che rn grinding ; alfo, a povm-

ing or [Lamping into peeces. \ ;

oule: i : here 2e thing is caft, farmed,or
forged;) alfo,a bigh fhore, or Jtrand by the fea fide; or,
as Mole, a Peere,érc.

Le moule à chaperon,ou du chaperon.The head (of
a woman. Ë
Le moule du gippon. The bulke, bellie, or bodie;
Mons RE le moule du gippon.
Tofeed exce 3 Or,as in Gippon.

pene du aca The tes upper part of
the bodie ; whence, Il y laifla le pour-

int; He was killed or left his carkaffe,there,

Bois de moule. Billets,or logs of a certaine fixe; or
which haue beene affixed by the Mouleur. —
Chandelles de moule. Candles made in moulds ;
(great) Chriflmas candles, ,

Moule de bois, 4 Wood-flacke, or pile of wood.

Moule: f. 4 AMuskle (ffh.)

Moule: mée : f Moulded ; cafl,or famed in a mould.

Mouler. To mould,or caff in a mould; to frame, or forge

| by mould ; alfo,to appoint a mould for, prefcribe a fixe


piainized Go gle


M Ov


Aflez va au moulin qui fon afne y envoye: Pro.He
that — another, is as farre engaged as if be went
elfe.


C'eft au four,& au moulin ou l'on fçait des nou-
velles: Prov, Aa Owen, and Mill are nurferies of
newes.
Chafeun ira au moulin avec fon propre fac: Prov.
Euerie one {hall beare bis owne burthen,or anfivere for
himfelfe.
Le four appelle le moulin bruflé: Prov. The guiltie
accufèsthe mnocent.  . :
On ne peut eftre enfemble au four,& au moulin:
Prov. One cannot be in two places, or follow two buji-
neffes,at once,
Prodigue,& grand beuveur de vin, n’a du fien ne
. four,ne moulin: Pro. The quaffing waft-good quick-
ly rids bis bands of royalties, pofféffions, goods, and
lands


Qui ie fois Officier au moins d'un moulin: Prov.
Looke Officier.

Qui entre dans vn moulin il convient de neceffité
qu'il s'enfarine : Prov. He that goes into a Mill can-
not auoid bemealing,

Qui mieux aime autruy que foy au moulin il
meurt de foif: Pro, He that bur ts bimfelfe to belpe o- -
thers,will dye of thirft at the Mill-tayle.

Quine peut mouldre à vn moulin aille à l’autre :
PE What one will not (or, if one will not) another
will,

Qui premier arrive au moulin le premier doit
thouldre: Prov. Fir/? come fr fi fèrued.

Raifon eft au moulin : Pro. (Belike becaufé Grift is
taken in,and deliuered out,by meafure.)

Sous ombre d'afne entre chien au moulin: Prov.
Seeke Afne,or Chien.

ouliner. as Mouldre,

oulinet: m. 4 little Mill ; alfo, a Morifdauncers
Gaïaboll ; alfo,a round feather on any part of a borfe ;
alfo, a Fencer-like round flourifh with à two-hand


word.
Moulinet à acfle. as Ventail.
Moulinet à bras (pour monter arbaleftes) 4 Rack


unto. ge Croffe-bow,
Mouler vn vifage. To take the fafhion or print of a oulinet à braflieres, The barrell of awindleffe,
o by couering it with plaifier,erc. or Fearne, : ‘ .
m'en a fai& mouler. He bath put me toa good | Moulinier: m.4 Miler,a Millner.
… deale of paines by it. ! _ | Moulle. as Moule. - ,
Moulerie: f 4 moulding ; a forging by mould, a cafting | Moulleur: m. A Grinder ; alfo,as Mouleur.
in a mould, Moullon. as Moulon.
Moulette, as Molette. Moulon: m. 4 dry wall made with lyme,or morter,alfo,
Mouleur: m..4 moulder ; 4 cafier, forger, or framer of a heape,or maffe,of any Such thing,
- things in Moulds ; alfa,as Moulleur ; alfo,anafifer of | Moulon d'eau. 4 great billow of water. ‘
wood (whether for building, or firing) an officer that Moulon de foin, 4 flacke,or great cocke of Hay.
lookes it be füfficient both in fixe,quantitie,and qua- | Mouloter. Ta fécke,or bunt after field-Mice.
itie, Moult. Much,greatly,paffing,exceedingly,
Moulhe. Ma moulhe. My wife. (Gafc. Moulture: £ adulure; a grift, or grinding; the corne
Moulin: m. 4 il. ground; alfa, tbe toll, or fee thats due for grinding 5.
Moulin à bras. 4 Querne,or Hand- mill, Looke Moutture, RES
Amener l'eau au moulin. To bring water to the Bled moulture. Moulture Corne,or Meflin ; Wheat,
Mill ; viz. fees,or crownes to the purfe. Rye,and Barlie mingled together. ° HT
Laiffer del'eauenfonmoulin. Seeke Eau. | Moulu:m, ué: f. Ground; pownded, or broken into ‘ |
Tirer l’eau en fon moulin.To procure his owne gaine |  fmallpeeces. ; ‘
without any refheël of others in{t intereft. Or, & argent moulu. Afçavoir ; deftrempé, & §
C’eft la mai rouë qui tourne le Grate meflé avec vif argent, ou quelque liqueur, pour 7
This is a princspall point, or doth all in all, in the dorer. 3 is
matter. 7 fotex Tay le corps tout moulu. My bodie is all broken, la 3
Il nous refte quelque autre moulin à tourner, | med,ormaymed. a
There is yet fomewhat elfe fir vs to doc. Mouluë. as Moluë, "
. & oe


"MOV


Moulure:f, 4 moulding ; alfo, a mould ; alfo, a mou!-
ding , an edge, or member flanding out from.
timber, feeling,or flone-worke, and diflinguifbed from
the refi bya line on either fide of it.

Droiét de moulure. Seeke Droid. 7

Mounier: m. as Mufnier; alfo,the bird called a Kings-
fifer ; alfo, the little, long-tayled, and black-beaded
Titmoufe, &

Mourable: com, Mortal; readie, or likelie,to dye ;

fübielt;or neere,vnto death. - TEL

Mourant. Dying,deceafing ; decaying, perifbing.
Homme vivant mourant. Looke Homme.
Ons’advife tard enmourant: Prov. Too late one
takes aduife when be muft leaue the world. .

Mourene: f, 4.Lamprey ; 07,45 Murene. _

Mourin: m. The (orne-deuouring vermine, called a
wecuell, |

Mourir. To dye, deceaft, depart this life; to perifh ; to

decay. ;

2 Tume fais mourir. Thou vexef, or troublefime ex-

> ceedingly.

2 Mourir fur les coffres, To dye following the Court,or
neuer to leaue the Court; (where poore wayters,and
fuitors ufually fit,and reft themfelues on their Patrons
Trunkes and Coffers.) 7

Mourir de faim presle meftier, To worke faft, and
thrine but flovly ; or, to flarue in an abundant place,or


Age. |. 7 ; ! î a4
Rath toft meurt veau comme vache (& le hardi
- comme le Jafche;) Pro. As foone dyes the yong as the
Slatibe coward as the bold.) He
C’cft trop aimer quand onen meurt: Pro. He loues
toomuch that dyes for loue.
En la peau ou le loup eft luy convient mourir:
Pro, See Loup.
Le Joup mourra en fa peau qui ne l'efcorchera vif:
Pro. A knaue will fleepein a knaues skin, untill be ei-
_ ther loofe it,or his hfe. ‘ ;
Envicux meurent, mais envie ne Mourra iamais:
Pro. The enuious are mortall,but enuie eternail.
Envis meurt qui appris ne l'a: Pro.He that bath not
well learnt, is loath,to dye. TL
Il commence bien à mourir qui abandonne fon
defir: Prov.#bo quits what he defires,begins to dye in
“earneft.
Lun meurt dont l’autre vit: Pro. That whereof one
dyes,another lines ; that which is beneficiall to one, is
bane fill to another.
Qui bien veut inourit bien vive: Prov. He that
would dye well muft line well; an boneft life endsin a
gad death. F oe
ui mieux aime autruy que foy au moulin i
meurt de foif: Pro. Looke Moulin, .
Va ou tu peux,ncurs ou tu dois: Pro, Goe whether
thon canft, but dye where thou fhouldeft; goc amy whe-
ther fa thon dye at home.
Mourlon: m. The name of a fertile Vine.
Mouron. # Mourron.
Mourrailles : f. pos iy
Moutre: m. The face, or part of the face about the
__moiith (moft properly) of beafis ; the muxxle,or chuffe.
_ | Mourte: f. play of loue; wherein pete 4
|. face from another, gue[es how many fingers be
NT er: sn


of the !
is betweene, eed,and Pimpernel.


Moutri A Miteor weeuell. LAS
ig eee ne


apeece of


Mourron baftard, Baftard Chickweed (whereof Ge-
rard defcribeth foure ‘ia $
Mourron blanc, Ordinarie chickweed. É
mtourron bleu. Blue Pimpernel, female Pimper
nell.
Mourron femelle. es Mourron bleu,
Mourron mafle. Male Pimpernell ; the colour of
whofe flower is betweene a red, and a purple, and in
{ome places fully red; and thevefore it is alfo called,
Mourron rouge, Red Pimpernell.
Mourron quarré, So doe fome (who expreffe Chick- |
weed by Mourron) tearme Pimperzell. 2
ourron fauvage. as Mourron violet,

Mourron violet. Purple Snap-dragon, or Calues-
Snowt is called fo (but fomewbat improperly ; for Sna
pir refembles no manner of Pimpernell;) Some a
call great Henne-bit thus.
Petit mourron. as Mourron quarré.

Mourru: m. ué: £ Chuffie,broad,out-ftanding, like the
face of a Lyon,muxxle of an Oxe, dre. |

Mourrues: f. The Piles,or Emrods in the findament;al-
(o,the Mumpes,or mourning of the Chyney

Mourué: f, The Mumpes; and (in a borfe,crc)the mowr-
va the Chyne.

Moufce. as Moufle.

Moufchard. as Mouchard.

Moufche : £ A Fly; alfa, the play called Muffe; alfo,a


Spy,Eaue-dropper, fnformer,Promooter.


6e the à chien. 4 Ticke,or Tyke.
Aoufche de lippée. A lickorous, or favecie compa-


nion.
Moutfche de mer. Th'ordinarie finall Muskle.@Lan-


ed, ;

Moufche à miel, 4 Bee,the [mall honie Bee.

Moufches en lai&. A cleere proofé,maniféft thing, a

plaine and palpable matter,

Abbreuvoir à inoufches. 4 wound,or bloud-wipe, - |

L'Aube des moufches, Some three or fèure boures

afier Sunne-rife. x

Chaffeur de moufches. A kill-Fly,kill-Cow,bragga-

dochio,vaine fellow; whence; .

Chafler apres les moufches. Tofpend the time moft

idly,or vainely. De

Maiftremoufche. (The name of a cunning Jugler ;

bence alfo) a craftie fellow, ficbtill companion, flye

mate. j ‘

Tefte de moufChe. Az imperfection in the eye, which

makes the membrane Vvéc peere out through the bor-

oe aise the forme, and of the quantitie,of a Flyes

ead. +

Quelle moufche l'a piqué ? what is the matter

that fo nettles bim? what fuddaine bumor is therecome

upon him ? :

On euft dit qu'il n'euft fceu deflier yne moufche.

One wonld baue thought be bad beene verie fimple.

Les moufches vont totifiours aux chevaux mai-

gres: Pro, Hungrie flyes are boldeft with leane borfes;

purloining officers with thred-bare peafants.
Moufchebout: m.The potted Cod whereof Haber dine


is made.
Moutcher. To (py,pry, fneake into corners, tbruft bis
Moufcheron 07 AS Toad-flosle; al
oufc :m, ome,or Toa ; alfè,a
little Fh; aGnat; alfo,an fat Gentleman ; oa


Mou oil: paisder ed le
:f, Spotted; ered with many |
“fois of ind Soribe (ae goles (efpecially blacke;


af,


ATE UNIVERSITY


ae |


eve, eee ede ye Wie


Pits ho. inke or £ ide is mall cuts.
pur in mou le pe
.Tafferas moufcheté. Tuftaffata,or tufted Taffata.
| Moufcheter.To fpet; to che diuerifie with many
| Shots of fundrieor the fame, colours (efpecially blacke;)
alfo,to pinke, or cut with finall ents; alfo, 10 tuft, or fet

| thicke with little tufts ; alfo,to twinkle.or fparkle, as a


Moulcheire £, A Fly-flap; alfo, the end of a beafls


Moufcheture : £ Afpottedueffe,or (potting; alfo,a pin-
> a ing, or tufling ; ie ut, and stefan 5 pinkes, or
__tufts;vpon a thing. SNR.
Moufcheur: m. 4 Fly-(atcher; (ora nickname beflow-

ed by the Ftalians,érc,on the French Monficur.) »
Aujourd’uy Monfieur demain mouftheur: Prov,
To day a maifler,to morrow a micher. :

Moufchon: m. A little Fly.

Moufque: m. A nickname,or name of contempt, for an
ordinavie boy; whence, Venez ça mouique ; Come
hither you rafcall;or come bither wag (for st implies on-
ly an extenuation without iniurie;) alfo, a man that

ath loft bis eaves ; in which fence it is allo vfed Adiec-

tiuely; as in Chien moufque. A curtall,and earele
curre; a dog that bath loft both his eares,and bis tayle,

Moufquet: m. À Musket (Hawke,or Pecce.)

Moufquctaire:m. 4 Musketteere ; a fouldior that


4. fe with a Musket. : À


ouffe: m. ASlypper ; or,a Ship-boy.

Moule: f, Moffe; aifo, the moffie downe that growes
vpon Duinces,Peaches,& c.
Mouffe marine, Sea-Moffe,Corall-Moffe,Coralline.
Moufle marine à larges fucilles. Slanke,Wrake,La-
ner; alfo,Oyfler-greene, fea Lungwort. | 1
Mouffe terreftre, ou de terre. Common ground-
Moffe; alfo, Cub-Moffe, wolfe-claw-Moffe, Wolues

:


dot,
-… La mouffe luy eft creué au gofier. His month is all
mama chaps baue long beene idle,be bath
ed long.
Tamais tune cueilleras mouffe. ‘Téa. wile newer
grow rich; from the Prouer be; à
Pierre qui fe remue n’accueille point demoufle:
Pro. The rolling flone gathers no Moffe. DA
| Moufle: com. Dull,blunt ; edgeleffe,or pointleffe.
Mouffé: m. ée: f. Dulled, blunted, made edgeleffe, or


lefe.

oufleau: m. A little round beapesor ball,of Mofe.
Mouffelu: m.ué: f. Moffe. |
Moufferon. a Moufcheron,
Moufleux: m,eufe:f. Moffie, full of Mofe.
Mouffon: f. A Cowes milke, or milking ; as much as fhe
| __yeelds at a milking,or meale, Ë |

Mouflu.as Moufleux. {

Moutt: m, Mujl ; Wine varefined; new, or fiveet Wine;

mn of Ale,or Beere.


che: m. 4 7 or the Muflachoes. {
Ce feroit pour luy bien haufler les imouftaches.
| This wo ium raife bis hope, or thoughts, to a


verie high pitch. :
ouftaché: méc:f.Hauinga muflachoe,or long haire,
on the vp; lip. Lane cht À . %
Moi le:.f. Muflard: DEN TE
Mouftarde tie nina
… garden au) RE CURE
| Most noire. Common Senuie, field Senuie,field
— ra: : Ga MALE |; - ‘y
- Mouftarde fauvage. Treacle Muflard, wild Muj-


:


LE Go gle


M. O V


tard, wild Sene. *

+ Baveux comme vn pot à mouftarde. 45 frothie as
a Muflard-pot; foaming at the mouth like a Bore (fay
we. ins


Les Enfansen vont à la mouftarde. 7t is / con.
temptible, or common ; that Muftard-pots are flopt
witball.

Amufer quelqu’un à la mouftarde! To hold him by-
fied about wifes (from fuch as trouble themfelues, and
others in controlling fleight expences (as ,it 1s not poffi-
ble that F fhould bane {pent fo much infawce tard

_ inthe meane while pal ouer great matters.)
Mouftarde apres difner: Prov. Afier meat muf:
ae helpe when danger, [apply when want , bath
efi vs.

Mouftardier : m.4 Muflard-pot ; al/e, amaker,or fel-
ler,of Mufiard: 1

Mouftardier: m, ete: € Of,or affelling, Muflard,

Mouttele: f. The little beaft called,a wee(ell,

Mouttoile. as Mouftele.

Moufturc:£ a Moulçure; Multure ; erift, grindine ;
and the toll thats duc for grinding ; alfo,the meale that
falls as it grinds,nto the bag,or Mill-cheft.

+ si un fac deux mouftures. To take double
es. :

Mout. 4 Moult.

Moutardier: m. The great,blacke, and fcriching Mar-
tin,or Swallow,

Moute:f, Multure, grill, evinding.

Mouton: m. A Mutton,a Weather ; alfo, Matton; alfo,
the battering Engine called a Ramme ; alfo,a wild(In-


dian) Peacock; alfo,an ignorant, fillie,or plain-dealing’


- fellow; one thats eafily oxerraught,gulled,ov beguiled,
Mouton à la grande laine. 4 Sheepe well-woolled,
or i fe burthen ; alfo,a coyne of gold flamped on the


one fide with a Sheepe,on the other with a croffe Fleu- :


ry,bauing at each angle a Flower de Luce;(Fohn Duke
of Berry firft caufed it to be made about the yeare
1371.

Pam OR white loaues(with ontfides luck
‘full of graines of wheat) for children.

Sault mouton. Looke Sault.

‘Anos moutons, To our matter againe.

Cercher cing pieds en yn mouton. To expeël more
from a thing then it can yceld,

C’eftvn mouton de Berry, il eft marqué fur le nez,
He hath gotten a rap ouer the nofe; (whereon the Sbep-
bear ds of Berry marke their Sheepe.)


Sentir fon efpaule de mouton. To finell very ranke,


or rammifh.


‘A petite achoifon le loup prendle mouton: Pro.


See Loup.
Chair de mouton manger de glouton: Pro. Flefh
of a Muttonis food for a glutton; (or was held fo in old
tiaie,whea Beefe and Bacon were your onely dainties.)
Moutonnage: m. Toll payed vnto certaine Lords by
thofe that buy and fell beafis, or other marchandie,
within their Territories.
Moutonnaille : f. Sheepeveathers,
Moutonnée :£ Atraétable,fond,or fillie wench. ©
Moutonnier: m. A Shepheard,or keeper of Sheepe. -
Moutonnier:m.cre:f. Of Mutton ; belonging to a
Mutton,or Weather. . arr
Mouvance de fief. 4 holding of, depending on, a doing
of fuit and feruice vnto,anotber,or a bigher fief.


Mouvement: m. A mouing, flirring; motion agitation,


courfe ; agilitie ; moweablenefe ; an inclination,difpoli-
tion, free will. , A LT abe
_ Mouve-


| Fii


a eee


EE NET Pr NS ENS


me er eee


4

3
1
4
4
a
a

q


~


ee TOUR PER


Lu
Le.


…


M O Y


Mouvement de terre, 4x Earthquake,

Mouveur: m. A mouer, or flirrer; a firring, bufie, or
troublefome fellow.

Mouvoir. To mone, flirre; iog,wag ; to remouc ; alfo,to
induce, allure intice, perfuade,incline,prouoke,incite;
alfo,as Releuer, to bold land of; alfo,to breake vp land

ow.


De eaageae
Mouvoir la Camerine. To flirre a flinking puddle ;
to bring a troublefome , or filthie bufinefe on the
Stage,
Moux. The plural of Mol.
Moy: m. Me, ; my elfe, 7 my [elf :
-  I'fair bien le quanta moy. He brags, or branes it
exceedingly; he will not take it as be bath done.
Moyau: m, The middle, or center of ; and (in a wheele)
as Moycu.
Au moyau de, 7x the verie bowels of.
en: in. A meane ; courfe,way; manner;[ort, formes
fafbion,order ; occafion,reafon ; i ur ; alfo,a mo-
deration,or meafure ; alfo,a meanes, mediator ; mode
rator ; arbitrator; alfo,as Virefon; alo, the greatep
vs of the bottome of a Hogfhead;érc.
oyen de feneftre, The croffe-barre of a window,
Homie fans moyen, That holds of the King in chiefe,
or by an immediate homage,
Moyen: m.enne:f. Meane, indifferent, moderate,
meafurable,competent, rea(onable, '
à Juftice moyenne. Looke luftice.
% Mufcle moyen. A muskle(in the hand) that fèruesto
: | moue the thumbe towards the fingers. _
gana Working, being the meane of,or a meanes
7.


Moyennant que. So that,if fo be that.
| Moyenne: m.ée : £
| wellto line,or that bath meanestoliue.
Moyennement. Meanely moderately meafisrably,rea-

fonably,indifferently,competently,

Moyenner. To worke,effett,or compalfe (by meanes;) to
bé the meanes of,or a meanes for.

Moyenneté: f. Meaneneffe;indifferencie,competencie.

Moyenneur: m, Ameanes,wediator ; flickler arbitra-
tor moderator betweene partie and partie.

Moyeu: m. The yolke of an egge; alfo,the naue,or flocke

va 4 cea ne ni
o . Seeke Moïlon. )

Nr Moine.

Moÿneau. Leoke Moineau.

Moynerie: f.Monkeriesthe flate, or profe [ion ef a Monk.

Moynefle: f. 4 Nunne, |

Moynoton: m, A little Monke ; alfo,the leffe, or little
Titmoufe.

Moyfe f' Holie Moyfès ; whofe ordinarie counterfeit
bauing on either fide of the bead an eminence, or lufter
re paires in the forme of a borne, bath imboul-
Mo £ prophane Author to flile Cuckolds, Parents de
oyfe.

Yn. Sixe,bignefe, quantitie, full length,
as Moito ;


+
#


L


NOM RE AB (2 lo Léo AE


Me Ce Mutable, mille void mie.
e: com, Mutable, changeable, var

: LR A6 en fabl
aes ir iy
genet Matablene(fe,changeabl

:. me M on,

Muance: change tn eu pers au
ation,or change of notes in 3 Viz, when in going
‘heel te ek x Notes(Ve,resmi

ronal ten Sa middle to ground,
and. i she gradations asf nflead of Vote,


Wrought by meanes; alfo, rich,


© fa,the bearbe Harrewort,or Sharrewort.


MV G


foljla,in afcending, one fhould fing Vt,xe,mi,fa,re,m0i,
fa,fol,&c, cb ‘ :
ucavineux: m.eufe: £ Symie.

Muces. as Mufler. To hide. &Rab.

Muche: £, 4 hiding bole, &Norm. .
ucilage: m. Shyme; or, a flymie liquor drawne from
Seeds roots drc;and thence,a clammie fap,glewie inice,
cleaning moifture.

Mucofité: £. Siyminefe; or filthie, and boare moifture,
as of flyme, {not fniuell, érc ; or the filtbinef[e thereof.

Mucqueux: m, cule: f. Slymie; (nottie, faiuellie; (and |
hence) alfo,muftie,or fuftie.

Mucydan.Slymie;mouldie,boarie,al the yere log.qRab

Mue: £ Achange,or changing; (bence)any caffing of the |
coat,or skinyas the muing of a Hawke ; al/o, the age, or |
yeare of the age,of an Intermure,or white Hawke;al/o,
a Hates Mue ; and,a Mue,or Coope wherein fore is

Lened,

La mue d’un cerf, The cafling of bis bead; alfo, bis
bead,or bornes being caft. fing salts :
Lamue oak Ty A womans muing; an eldérlie

womans wrinkled skin growne finootb, and fleeke, by |
the belpe of corrofiue drugs. <i pee ta ‘

Mué: m.ée: f. Changed, altered,transformed,metamor-
phofed ; alfomued,renued ; caft,as the coat,or skin.

Muel: m. 4 Mafons Plumb-rale.

Muement:m.4changing,altering,transfèrming;a tur-
ning,or cafting of the coat ; a muing.

Muet.Tochage alter,trasforme,sras figure difguile,tran-
flate.fhifisvarie; to mue,to caft the bead,coat,or skin,

Mucere: com. Dampifh.

Muerier. 4s Meurier.

pai m. 4 dumbe aa Fe ,
üet: m, ette: f Dumbe, fheechlef[e,tongue-leffe ; fi
Silent, bufht ; mute; Looke Mur. : 7 . oy
Muet comme yn Francolin pris.Looke Francolin,
“Plus muet qu'un poiflon. More dumbe then a ffh.

Muette: f The Chamber, or Lodge of a Lieutenant, or
cheefe Raunger, of a Forreft; ale, a Hares neaft, tbe
forme,or place,weberein fhe kindles.

Mufle: m. The faswt,or muzzle.

Mugault. as Macault,

Muge: m.(The fea-fifh called) a Mullet.

uge volant. A kind of finall-mouthed Mullet that

bath Di Lans like wings.

Amour de muge: Pro.Faithfidl,and moft affeétionat
loue of a wife ; (the female Mullet chufing rather to be
caught by fifbers then to abandon her Make.)

Mugereul: m. À kind of Mullet. ¢Narbonnois.

Mugir. To low,or bellow like an Ox,e>c. .

Mugiffement: m. 4 lowing,or bellowing.

Muglement, as Mugiffement,

Mugler. To low,or bellow,

‘ot: m. A hoord,or fecret heapeoftreafure. :
Mugotté:m.ée:f.Hoorded;alfoyipened,as fruit in firav
Mugotter.To per sacar PL witin ira.

M +m. Woodrow,Woodr 0


guet: Woodrowell; alfa(and |
more properly) as,


Grand muguet. The May-bloffome,May-Lillie,Liri-
cumfencie, Lillyconnally. he
Petit Pettie Muguet,Cheefewort,Cudwort,
Cheefé-running Maids baire our Ladies Bedfiraw;al-


guet: m. Vnm. 4 fond woer,or courter of. wenckes;

an effeminat ayonsfie, 4 pose Carpet-knight; alfo, a |

Mugueté: te À :f Conia wwoed, ued untogwhere-
wtito lowe ismade. Mu


ence NE
L + ” . > - 2 -
% + rn + . =


M VL


Mugucter. To court,woe, make loue, or be fuitor unto a
4 woman ( Le plus ordinairement À mauvaife fin;)
 alf,to fneake in and out,or goe finelling (as it were) a-
bout a thing which he feekes to enioy ; whence ;
| Mugueter vne vi'le. To attempt by all priuat meanes
the surprifall,or taking in,of a Towne, ,
| Muguette: £ 4 Nutmeg.
i Miguette de mouton. The nut of a leg of Mutton,
_ | Muguetté, & Muguetter. as Mugueté, & Mu-
& | eter.
| Muguot. as Mugor,
Muid: m. A great Veffellor Meafüre.-
Muid de bled (mefure de Paris;) containes twelue
Septicrs;(the Septiertwo Mines sthe Mine fix Boifle-


aux ; the Boifleau foure Quarts) which come to about |.


fine Quarters,a Combe,and a Bufbell of London mea-
€.


‘uve.
uid de charbon, Containes 16 Mines (which come

to about 30 of our Bufhels.)

Muid deterre.C’eft aurant que 12 Arpens,ou Sep-


tiers.
Muid de Vin, containes (aboue the lees) 36 Septiers
of eight (Parifian) Pinces to the Septier; (Three of
them “ to make a Tunne, Say the Cuflomes of Cler-
mont.
Muid de Clergie. Store of Clarkfbip,e bufbell of cun-
nine,abundance of learning.

Muifle: f. A kind of Sardinian Sheepe, whofe wooll is
hairie like a Goats.

+ e are wie a

ar: m, A kind of great

Mulard : m. One that bath kibie beeles. gf

Mulaffe : m. The fea-monfler called, a whirlepoole,
@Marfeillois, :

Mulataille: £. Mules; the generation, race, or kind of
Mules ; alfo,a troope,or companie of Mules.


Mulété: m. ée:f. Fined, amerced, punifbed by the | M


Di puile, : .
Mulétoire: com. Finable, wortbie to be fined; alle, fi-
ning amercing.
Mule: f. 4 Mule; alfo,akibe ; Looke Mules,
}  Franchemule d'un bœuf, The purfé, bag, or skinne
wherein the flones of an Ox,ére, be contained.
C'eft vne mule. She x a barren Jade; (for Mules ne-
Mer beare young ones.)
Fantaftique comme vne vieille mule. As humorous,
and skittifh as an old Mule.
Opiniaftre comme vne mule. As headie flubborne,
or moodie,as a Mule.
Aller fur mule. 11 va fur mule auffi bien que le
Pape. (An equiuocation, applyable to one that bath ki-
bed heeles) |
 Bailler du foin à la mule.*ro cheat,guil,coufen,ouer-
veach,conycatch. A
Brider la mule à. To daunce attendance on; or to
drudge or doe bafe offices for.
Briderla mule aux defpens dautruy. Yo doe his bu
_ fiaclfe, or fatnifh bimfelfe with nece[[aries, at another
mans charge,


Ferrer la mule a. Seeke Ferrer.

4 Il luy F3 M de pints Docs
| uermaiflered him; 16 euerie way too good for bim;
TE) : Abe made im daunce attendance, or y lng fr

> =} De boumamute vaifebeft A prouerbe taxin

| the giddie and skittifh mati aghsty a fr
| ‘A vicille rule fre : Pro, Said in derifion of
_ an old woman, that paints and prankes ber felfe.


sign


EEA on ir OCR PRE ON SIT VANNRRIINES


Qui ne s’avanture n'a cheval, ni mule: Prov. we
S2,notbing aduenture nothing baue, ~:

= trop s’ avanture perd cheval, & mule : Prov,
Venture too farre you loofe all; (SY the difference is,
that the one wants but what be bad not 5 tbe other loo-
fes what he bad.) ‘


Mules: f, Muleï: alfo,kibes ; alfo,moyles, pantofles,bigh


ippers.
Mike, ni. À Moyle, Mulet,or great Mule; a'beaft much
fed in France for the carriage of Sumpters, oe alfa
4 baflard; alfo,the Mullet ff}, ;
Tour demulet. 4 iadifh triche,
Fou ic ace Ferrerla Mule.
€ mulet garde longuement vn coup de pied à fon
Maiftre: Prov. The Moyle will one ‘ime br aides lend
bis keeper a rap.
Momie as Mularaille,
uletier: im, 4 Mulletor,Moyle-kee er, Moyle-driner,
Mulette: £.4 Gttle Mule 3a fall De ; Moihe pannel,
or bellie of a Hawke; alfo, the maw of a Calfe; which
being dreffcdis called the Renet-bag, Sreneff-bag, or
Cheflop- bag; ;
ulicbre: com, Womanliegf a woman; womanifh of.
imate.
uliebrement. womanly, woman-like; effeminately,
womanifbly.
ulin: m. À narrow beele and high coffin; fuch as all
M baue. Bok Kr y
ulin: mine: £. Ofor belonging toa Mule.
Mullon d'eau, See Moulon, sid
ie tad on
ulon de foin. 4 bay-vick ,bay-Rack,or creat h -cock,
Mulot: m. 4 field Hone Racker nl ack
Muloter. To bunt for,or feed on, field- Mice; or toturne |
Up their neafis, or teare open their holes for the (orne
and Akornes which they bane hid in them.
uloteur. Hunting for, or feeding on, field: Mice 3 OF
turning up their neafls,or tearing ope their holes, for the
Corne,and Akornes which are bidden in them.
Mulotier. Sanglier mulotier. 2s Muloteur.
Multation:f, fining amercing, punifhing by the purfe.
Multe;: & A fine, amerciament, penaltic, puife-punifh-
ment,
Mike fine, amerce, lay a penaltie on, punifh by the
purfe.
Multicuple: m; A manifildnefe, great multiplication,
Mul daube. com. Manifold ; bessding in malle.
tion,or of diuers multiplication.
Multipliable: com. Multipliable,increafeable,
Multipliant: m. The multiplier; the figure whereby ax
nother figuré Multiplied,
Multipliant. muttiplying,increafing,

Multiplicable: com. Multiplicable multipliable,
Multiplication: £ Multiplication ; augmentation, in~
creafe, great floreyacceffe.
Multiplié: m. The Multiplicand ; the figure which is

multiplied.
Multiplié: m. ée: f. Multiple; increafedyaugmented
(ia numbers) propagated. tee
Multipliement: m, er A propagating ; an
augmenting ,or increafing (in
Multiplier. 70 multiplie; 10 augment,or ineveafe in num
< ber ; to propagate, flore, grow many.
Multiplieur: m, Amultipher :; propagator, florer,
Multitude: £ A multitude a many; a great number,
_companie,or flore;of. Sa


See pe Cate ies in on =
ii ‘Mu J :


umer: m.The li ilewe ayle or water-Wagtayle.
umie: À Mummie; oo fe imbalmed ; or rather


the fuffe wherewith it bath beene long imbalmed(whe-
3 ther it be Piffalphalte, or Mirrbe, Saffton, Ales, and
Balme incorporated together.)


unde: com. as Monde,


Mundé:m, ée:f. as Mondé, 50
Mundi es Atif: mine: € Mandificatiue, mundifying ;
F cleanfing, purging, purifying.
Mundifier, Looke Mondifer.
is Muni: im. ie: €. Munited,armed, fenced, fortified ; pre-
» pared; flored or firnifbed with, fully pronided of, all
> kind of neceffaries. e
Municipal: m, ale: f. Municipall ; proper, or peculiar
| onto one onely Citie ; belonging to the freemen of one
+ Citie,or to the right of freedome ina Citie.
a Municipial. as Municipal.
a Munier: m. 4 Miller, or Millner ; alfo,a Pollard, or


Chenin (fifh,) Fa fome parts of France (but not fo ge-

nerally) the Bull-head, or Millers thumbe is alf called

Munier ; Seeke Mufnicr. of
Munificence: f. Munificence, bountie, liberalitie, lar-


gel. go :
Muniment: m. 4 muniting, flrengtbening, fortifying ;
aifo, as Munition,
Munimnens. fu/tifications of allegations,in law.
Munir.To muaite,arme, fortifie, flrengthen, furnifh or
flove with, prouide of all forts of nece[faries.. a
Munition: f. Munition, A papa preparation,
prouifion; prouant,or victuals for an armie.
| Munitionnaire: com. Storing or firnifhing with, pro-
uiding of smunition,or vittuals ; alfo,belonging thereto.
Munitionner. To flore; to prouide of, or furnifh with,
munition ; to vituall before band. .
Marque. The nape of the necke.
Muqueux : m. eufe:f. 2s Mucqueux.,.«-
Mur: m. 4 wall; a rampier.
Ils tireront de l'huile d’un mur. They will draw ale
out of a wall; they will doe more then any bodie elfè
can doe; ( Fronically of Chimicall Extractors.)
Se voyant au pied du mur fans efchelle, Seeing him-
felfencere to that be would bane without means to get
‘unto,or porver to enioy,it. ;
Muraille: £4 rampier,a wall. em
Ce motte foitcomme vne muraille d'airain.Affüre
thy felfe this word will be performed ; thou maieft ref,
“or build,thow maicft lay thy lifé,vpon it.
Muraillé: m. ée: f. walled,rampired.
Muraillier: mere: f. Of walls; affecting walls,cleaning
; vatowalls,as Juie. a 3
Mural: m. ale: f. Mural; of,or belonging to,a wall.


Couronne murale. À Crowne,or Garland beflowed
on the fouldior that firft gets vp on the rampier of an
afaulted towne.
Muré: méc : f. Walled,rampired ; alfo,inclofed,or flut
up betweene two walls. Z
Vn plat de fouppes haut mutées. 4 difh of up-bea-
V6 i bigh-reofed browes. gl
Mie: £A fiane-lefe,andtongue-leffe fifb,of a diame


that ber bodie 1, confidering her
ir tate nd cele oer


- walls ; to frengiben,or evap a Er
“Mureraie:f.
LV a,


Digitizedby: (O4 gle


colour poredered (eSpecially int one) with yel- |
~ low Spots ; ra wayes er tne (on.


A


Muret: m, The purple fhell-fifh; alfo, a Bench (made a-
gainft an out-wall) to fit on. cd :
rette de poiflon. Fifh-broth, or (awce wherein fifh
hath beene throughly boyled ; alfo,the pickle wherein tis
kept;Some alfo call the liner,and long fat gut of a Pike,
Lamurette. | . : pig
Murgé: m, A beape of flones which bane beene picked


up ont of a Vineyard,or Garden, in the dreffing there-


of.

Murler, To low, to bellow. |

Munnurantement. Murmuringly, mutteringly, grun-
tingly, with a bumming,in a buzzing. found.

Munnurateur : m, A murmurer.

Murmuration: f.  Murmurement. ;

Murmure: m. 4 murmure,or murmuring ; avepining;
a muttering, or difcontented mumbling; a grudging,
grumbling, or grunting; alfo, a humming, or buxzing


noyfe.
Murmuré: m. ée:f. Murmured, +
Murinurement:m. À murmuring ; a gridging, or
grumbling; a difcontented muttering;alfo,a humming,
. or buxxing ; a mumbling, or croaking.


grudge,repine at, or gainefay betweene the teeth; alfo,
10 buxxe,or bumme like a Beetle dc; alfo;to rumble or
croake,as the guts doe.

Muron: m, A Salamander. (Norm.

Murte: m. The Mirtle fhrub; Looke Myrte.

Murtrir. as Meurtrir.

Mufaique. See Mofaique.

oe : € A Titmoufe.

Mufaphis: m, Doéiors, Prophets, or great Diuines, a-
mong the Turkes.

Mufaraigne. 4 fhrew Moufe. :

Mufard: m. 4mufèr,dreamer,or dreaming fellow ; one
whom a little thing amufes,one that flands gaxing at e-
uerie thing ; alfo,a pawfer,lingerer, deferrer, delayer ;
one thats long abont a bufineffe;a man of no difpatcb.

Mufard: m. arde: f merger: se at, ga-

ing or paw/fing on,euerie thing ; lingering, prolongin
pi ihe yhoo RP Pr Tet
Mort mu Thats long a comming.

Mufardie: f. A mufe,dumpe, fiudie dreaming; a pawfe,
delay, lingerings
ufc: m, Muske.

Mulcade:f. 4 Nutmeg.

Mufcadeau. Vin ui adegi. as Mufcadel.

Mapa m.TheWine Mufcadell,or Mufiadine.
ufcadelle: f. 4 Muske-rofe.

‘Pomme inufcadelle..4 Maske apple.


in colour, tafl,and fmell ;“alfo,the Mufcadine Raifin,
Mufcagineux. Looke Mucagineux.


Mufcardins. # Mofchardins.


Mulcat: m. ate: f AHuskie,of Muske, fiveet as Muske, |


fivcetned or feafoned with Maske, that bath Muske in
at, pearls Pes ) :


Cérife mufate. ‘The Muske (a delicate) chervie. y!
Raifin mufcat. The Mufcadine Grapesor Muftadine


: Rofernufcate. The Muske-rofe.
Mufcatelin: m. ine: £ 4s Mufcat.


-Mufcateline: f. The Muske Peares the frallef, fwee-


teft,and fooneft ri ll other P Tae
a ei ae Muskie, af tr. full of Muske,


|" efntetned, ob feufoned wish’ nike, boning ashe i |


= Buile


Original from


THEOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY *


Murmurer. To murmure, mutter, grumble; grunt; to


Mufcadet : m. as Muftadel ; alfo,a (yder,which(made | -
of averie fmalland fiveet apple) refémbles Mufcadine


sy


MV §S


MV T


Huile mufcelline. Muske oyle; an oylé extracted
from Muske,and.other aromatick Simples 5 bh ,oyle of
Ben; oyle drawne from the Nut, or fruit called Ben.
Mufchebout. 2s Moufchebout. CSTD:
Mufcle: m. The great fea Muskle,or borfe Misklesal/o,
a(flefhic) Muskle ; the inftrument of voluntarie moti-
on, compounded of finewes, veines, arteries, tennons,
and efb,and bauing a skin peculiar toit felfe..’
Mufcofitez : f. Slymie,or fnortie bymors. °°
Mufcule. Veine muf. See Veine. _ pny
Mutculeux: m. eufe: £Brarpnie, flefhie mufculous, fill
of Muskles, { |
Veine mufculeufe. Looke Veine. JON
Mutculofité: £. 4 mufeulous, or flefhie fabfance ; a
brawnie fliffne[[e,bardneffe, or fillneffe of flefh.
Mute: f. One of the nine Mufes; alfo, a Mufe, Poetical
conceit, Vaine, Pocme or Song ; alfo,as Mufardie;al/o,
Adams Appletree; alfo,as Toffe.
Donnerla mufe à. To amufe, or put into duimpes ; to
driuc into a browne fludie; to make aman pawfe, or
ftudie,on the matter,
Faire famufe. A male Deere to lift up bis muzzle af-
ter he bath finelt at the females nature. "


Mufeau: m. The muxzle, fnowt,or nofe of a bealt.


Mufeleux : m. eufe: £ .Muxzelling,tying up the muz-
xle, clofing the nofe,or nowt.
ufelier: m. ere: f. as Mufeleux.

Muleliere: £ A muzzle; alfo,the nofè-band of a bridle;
alfo,the prouender-bag that (ufüally} bangs at a Mules
nofe as be trauels; allo, a Barnacle for ax unrulie bor-
fes nofe.
ufequin: m. A little dogs prettie fnowt ; alfosan effe-
minate,or perfumed Courtier,that makes lone to euerie
wench be accompanies ; alfo, a place to mufe im,or gaxe
out at,as an open window,coc. Sarr)

Mufer. To mufé,dreame, [ludie, bethinke bimfelfé of; to
pane, or linger about a matter, 1
I mufe quelque part. He Jlayes fomewhere,or other.
Faire mufer. To amufe, put into a dumpe, drineinto'a
[ludie; to deférre,delay,driue offymake flay his leifure,
or daunce attendance on bim.

Tandis que le loup mufe la brebis entre au bois :

Pro, while the Wolfé mufes the Sheepe efcapes or,as

in Loup. al

Tel cuide aimer qui mufe: Pro. Some meane to loue
who doe but loofe their labour; or,fome think they loue,
and yet but loofe their labor.

Muferolle; f. 4 Mufroll for a borfe.

Mufct. as Mufette (in the later fence.)


| Mufette: f. 4 little Bag-pipe ; or (more properly) as Vi-
es


elle; alfo,the Shrew-moufe
Muficalement. Mufically,melodioufly,barmonioufty.
Muficien: m.A Muficians a profefor of Muficke.
Les mauvais muficiens ne font iamais ennuyeux
deux mefines: Pro. Few men grow weaïie of their


pein ; few men difiaft their ovone barfhim-
La ent to 3
Mul ier: m.enne: f. apres the Mufes.


Mufimone.A heaflthats bodied like a Sheepe,and coa-
ted like a Goat, @Rab,
Mufique:f. Muficke,gmelodie harmonie.
Vn Afne n’entend rien en mufique : Pro, da Affe


A Pollardor Cheuins af,


hath little skill in ba
Mufñi “he.
5 M à

’ Evefque devenir.
poore,of noble bafe, of venerable miferable;to


mufhier. To become. of rich


from


d'Evefque Aumofnier; but Time(and perhaps Reafin)
bath changed Aumofnier izto Mufnier:) ~ .
Mufhier: m. ere : £ Ofor belonging to,a Miller.
Pulces mufnicres des Hoftels-Dicu de Paris. Lice.
Mufquardin. 2s Mufcardin.
Mufquat:m. Muftadine; or, a kind of firong, and
beadie Wine.
Mufquat: tm, ate: F. as Mufcac,
Mufqué: m. ée : £ Musked , bemuskéd; muskie, of
Muske ; fiveet as Muske.
Aiguille mufquée. (The musked) Pinkneedle,or fhep-
Magee eee
ét: To bemuske,to perfume with Muske.
Mufqueré: m.ée: f. as Mufqué. ;
ee: f, as Mofquette; al/o, a certaine yellow,
bard-rinded Peare.
Mufqueux: m. eufe: f, Full of Muske; alfo,as Muc-


qucux.

fern ; f, A kind of fhell-fifh that fomewhat refembles
a Muskle.

Muffe: f. A fecret corner, prinie boord, biding hole ; an
odd nooke to lay a thing out of the way im.

Muffé: m. ée: f. Hidden, concealed,kept clofe,conueyed
+ 4 the way; alfo, lurking, skowhing, [quat, layed
clofe.

Muffler. To bide,conceale,keepe cloft,lay out of the way ;
alfo,to lurke,skowke,or fyuat in a corner.

Muffette: £ little bole corner, or boord to bide things


in.

Muttelle: £. 4 Powte,or Eele-powte,

Mut: m, as Muflette.

Mut. as Muet; Dumbe ; whence; RIVE
Chiensinuts. 4 kind of white bounds, which nener
call on a change; al{o tyne-hounds; tearmed othenwife,
Limiers de mut.

Mutation: f. 4 mutation,change alteration; changing;
exchanging ; alfo,a fhadowing with colours of a aft,
vent kind; Looke Nuage.

Mute. Looke Meute.

Mutilation: £. 4 mutilation, mayming, diminution; the
cutting of a principall member from the bodir.

Mutilé: m.ée : f. Mutilated,Jamedmdymeds alfi;de-
fectine imper fecl,wanting a principal member,

Mutiler. To mutilate, mayme, lame ; to make imperfect,
orrdefettine; to cut off,diminifb, or take avpay a part


Mutin: m. ine: £ Mutinous,tumultuous,turbulentvne
quiet; flirring, feditions, faétious. ie.


Homme mutin, brufque Rouffin, flafcon de Vin,


OF re toft fin: Pro, Looke pe à >
utinateur: m. A miuttiner ; a vaifer of broyles, begi
more breeder of tumults ; a fire-brand off.
ition, pike bss ,
Mutination: £. A mutining; or,as Mutineriey
Mutinement : m,4 mutining,a factions repining,a ture
bulent flirring, ~ , L
Mutiner.To mutine ; frtionfly to répine at, feditioufly
to flirre, or be the author of a flirre,againft a fupetior,
Mutinerie: f. 4 matinie ; tumult, (edition, infurrettion,
uprore ; a flirre trouble, bufinefe,ruffling, burlyburly,
Mutit, To mute,asa Hawke. ¢
Mutuél: m.elle: f. Mutual, reciprocall,interchange-


able. |
Mutuéllement. Matwally,reciprocally,imerchangeably,

on equall tearmes, ov one for another, | ;
Mutules: m. Brackets, Corbells or fhouldering peeces


: ~alfo,(& the operly) Compartiments (in Building.)

© a hig eflate toa lov ones (The originall was,Devenix Mae Made té es +

a ‘ fii iy Muyage.
7

f Go gle ie


UNIES 97 à ee


1,


e


ae oe


etic tie En RIRES
A d'a : 1 :


Ya TU VR


é
ae


+


MYR


becaufe fhe is not verie venomons)not much feared,nor
often burt, by fuch as know ber.
ycacoulier: m, The Lotesor Nettle tree. | \

Mÿ-chemin. à my-chemin. Halfé-way, in the mid-
way.

My-cornu: m. ué: £ Halfe-borned.

My-croift: m. Halfé-increafe; or halfe the profit thats
made,balfe of that which comes,of a thing, whence;
Bail de beftes à my-croift. 4 letting out of cattell to
the balues.

Bailleur de febves Amy-croilt. A coufener,cheater,
conycatcher,guller.

Myere: m, 4 Phifition,Leach,or Surgeon ; whence;

fanglierle myere:


‘Apres le, cerf la biere, apres le
Le Tobe they be angry,


Pro.(So dangerous are thofé beafts
unto fuch as they can reach.)
My-forchu: m. ué: f. Halfe-forked.
Mygale. 4 forew Moufr.
Mu Mid sey nome d qRab
=iour. Mid-day,noone-dayes. is
Mylord. See Milort. . :
Myne. a Mine. :
Mynfler. Looke Mincer. sty
Myope. À kind of dull-eyed Serpent, which bath feet
though they be but little ones.
n. as Myrobalan.
Myre: m. The male Lampurne,or Lamprey;alfo,as Mire;
ve Lee ; 6 my 2
repfique. Balan myre uc. The aromaticall,
Pol Nut, or yin Eu Ben.
Myrique: . The fhrub Tamariske.
Myrmecique. Efcadrons myrmeciques. ats,
Myrobalan: m. An Eaft-fndian Plumme called, the
Myrobalan Plumme , whereof there be diners kinds
diflingui{bed by fewer all names (as Bellerics, Chebu-
Jes,Emblics,&c.)
Mponean ciurin. The pellow,or Citron Myrobalan;
whofe tree is leaned like the Seruife tree.
Myrrhe: £. Mirrbe,or Myrre ; a fweet Gumme whereof
“we baue but little now a dayes,trueor unfopbifticated.


© Myrrhe blanche. white Mprrbe, the beft kind of


Myrre. ;

Myrrhe Boetiq the cut vot =

ror ty Boetian ‘en RÉ Rs esa ak —
: State. The beft kind of Myrrbes which (as

Plinie thinkes) ifues from the tree of it felfe; but is in-


deed the iuyce, or gummic liquor of the fatteft Myrre,
trained while it is new, and otherwife tearmed, Sto-
rax liquid


M et Mirtle tree,or fhrub ; Looke Meurte,
iyrtil: m, À Mirile berrie ; alfo,the leffe kind of Myr-
= tle,called Noble Myrtle. : ,

Myrtilles: & Mirtle berries. —-
tin: m, ine : f. Of, or belonging to,the Mirtle tree,

a Er
“Huilemyrtin. Mirtle oyle; oyle extratted from Mir:

he ~ qples qleextr aie

anthrope, as Ms

MODE sme rele ito?
Myftatidique: com. Seeming myfticall; that mokes 4
vita w of facreds et in truth is nothing.
Ayltaudiquement. 2%) or facredly in few,


“io GO. -Qle


Muyage. Bailler terre à muyages,To let ground for a
ete water of. Muyds of Cormyto be payed in lieu
Rent,
Myagre., A great,thicke,and grecnifh Snake.or S
DE pes Salts pay Mice 3 and is ref (and


N À G


N 2 ae or propbanely in effeét.
: m. A Prieft. Rab,
yitere: m. Miflerie; a religions fécret, bidden rite,
objcure and high point of Religion. t
Sans autre in Without other ceremonie, witb-
ont more adoe. :
Myiterieus: m.Miflerious, full of mifterie verie mifii-
cau.
Myftique: com. Mifficall, fecret,facred.
Myilicuemenn: nals ter acd
Mythologe: m, An expounder of fables
8


logie : £, Am expofition or moralixi of fables. |


M
Mythologifer. To expound,or moralize,a fable.
se m, €e: f, Halfe vaulted,balfe arched,


N


Abot: m.Anill-fanoured dwar fe,elfe,twattle.
abote: £. A woman dwarfe, |
Nabotte : f, The fame,

Nacelle: f. 4 Skiffe,Cock-boat Wberrie, fmall long boat;
bence alfo,a Boat-bowle,or a cup fafhioned like a Boat.

Necke. as Nacre. Be
acqueter, as Naqueter.

Nacre: £,.4 À À aps great, and long fhell-fifh, the out-
fide of whofe fhell is rugged,and browne of colour, the
infide {mooth, and of a his bue; the forme (broad
at the one end,and narrow at the other) fomewhat like
a meee bellowes;(it is but feldome,or neuer found on
our coafi.)
Nacre deperles. Mother of Pearle; the beautifull
fot of “meg fifo,wherein the befi,and moft Pearles

un


e found.
Nadair. The Point which is direëlly oppofite unto the


Zenith, iuft under our feet.
Nadel: m. 4 Slow-worme,or Blind-worme.
Nadelle: f. 4 Smy,or fea-Groundlin. °
Nafe. See Naphe.
Nagé: m. ée: f. Swumme, floated on.
Nageant. Swimming floating.
Le mal an entre ennageant: Prov. The unfeafona-
bléyeare begins with raine,
Nagement: m. 4fwimming,a floating, —
Nageoir : m, 4 en ae water fit to fwim in,
Nageoire : m.The finne of a fifo; alfo,a round-fet attire
of fine, and well-flarched Lavene or (ambricke, worne
(for the moft part) by widow-gentlewomen, betweene
their baire (which it ouer-peeres) and their boods,
Nager: m. as Nagement; a (rimming ; whence;
I n’eft nager qu'en grand eau: Prov. There is no
assurer to the fea.
gst To fwimme ; alfo,to float. ? ;
ager en grand'eau. To fivimme in a fhacious wa-
ters to pratti(e-in a foueraigne Court,fiudie in a famous
Uniuerfitietraffique in a great Cities generally to fre-
quent,or negotiate in,places of moft bonor moft compa-
nie or where aman may baue mofi (cope.
agerentre deux eaux. To diue.or fwimmevnder
the waters alfo,to fland on doubtfüll,indifferent,or vn-
certaine tearmes ; to play on both bands, bold with both
fides apply bimfelfe unto the time ; alfo,to chufe,or pro-
ceed ina courfe betweene two extreames; alfo,to be in
danger,or in an ill cafe, wbatfèeuer fall out, bowfoener
Cour jo ede à qui l'on foiftie
Cc ardiment naver à qui l’on fouftient
le A a og fuuouride of set time ov of autho-
vitie may boldly (wimme where another Jinke, À
1


»


Ine faut apprendre aux poiffons à nager: Prov.
We mufi not teach a fifh to fwimme ; a fcboller to read,
amaifter toworke, rc. 6

veUr : m. A fivimmer. :
Les bons nageurs font à la fin noyez: Prov.Good
fwimmers at the length feed Haddocks.

Nageure:£. 4 fwimming; à floating,

Nagueres ;ou,n'agueres. Not long fince now of late,
eve-while euen now,

Nai: f. as Nef; A ship. eur

| Naif: mnaïfve:£ Livelie, quicke; naturall,kindlie,

| right,proper,t'we,noway counterfeit,

| __L’humeur naifve. Theradicall humor.

| Naifvement. Lively,naturally,properly,yightly, truely,
in it owne kind,

Naifver. To reprefent in linelie colours, to prefentin it
owne kind ; to defcribe rightly, or properly; to make
feeme quicke, or it felfe. ,

Naifveté : f. Linelineffe, quickne[fe,kindlineffe, proprie-

“ *tie,naturalne(fe. ‘al

Nain: m. 4 dwarfe, or dandiprat,an elfe,or twattles
one thats no higher then three borfe-loanës.

Naine : £. 4 fhe dwarfe,or woman dwarft.

Naintre,& Naintreffe. 2: Nain,& Naine.

Naifé: m.ée:f. Stceped, or foaked (as bempe)in wa-


i! ter,
“| Naïfer. To flcepe,or foake(bempe)in water,
| Naiffan i


cc: f, Birth ; a beginning, (pringing, rifing, firR
| appearing ; alfo,ones. auncient inheritance,
Naissant. fon propre naiffant. His auncient inberi-
| tance ; land wheretohe was borne, or comes by def
cent.
Naiffant conventionnel. Money giuen,by a father,
or mother ,to be imployed on a purcbafe for their child;
| . o7,the land purchafed with uch money. .
Naifsant: m. ante: f, Beginning, (bringing, vifing, fir
appearing,or comming into the world.
Heritage naiflant, The land whercto one was borne ;


| _. land that comesby lineal deftent,

: Nailtre Weeteoathodr ingendred, of to rifé,pro-
ceed grow, {pring take beginning, from ; to be produ-
ced,or pooner Age

Naizer. as Naifer.

| Nambot: m. Adwarfe ; elfe, little flarueling; adan-

diprat,or low dapper ling.

Namp3:m. Mowables; chattels that moue,or may bee
remoued ; alfo,diflreffes.

Morts nainps. Goods,houfhold-fluffe any dead moua-
bles or chaffer which may be remoued.

Vifs . Cattell beafis, foule, fifh; any goods that
linc, or moue of themfelues,

Nampt: m. 4 ay 3 a beaftor mouable diftrained ;
alfo,a beaft feixed for Trefpaffe,or Damage fefant ; al-
{0,4 ftifure,or diftraining; (ia which fence our common

s fé Naam.) APE re
Obligation par nampt. À bond,and pawne to boot.

Namp &N. tifsement. as Nantir, & Nantif-

N'ncelle € ar Naflle :
an it, 4. €. %

| Nani; ou,Nanin. No,not fo,by no meanes.
| Nanti : m.ie: £ Gotten, feed on; poffelfed of ; alfa,de-

liner ed into the poffeffion,or bands of alfo affetted un-

to; faflened,or tied on; ted, or pointed out, for ;

 Or,to whom a thing is on whom it is fi 3

for whom it is appointed, by Order, or in ordinarie


ti »0 Ces. LUE - 4
Crediteur nanti de gage, That bath a bis
better fecuritic, . ornate permet


Go gle


NAQ


Rente nantie. Dontlecontra& a efté exhibé au


Seigneur, ou à fes Officers, pour acquerir droid.


reel,& hypotheque.
Sergent nanti de deniers. Into whofe bands the mo-
neyymade by the fale of land, or goods in execution, i


pat,

Nantilles : £ Freckles,

Nantir. To configne,lay downe, deliuer into the hands
of, to gine a feifin,or polfeffion of; 10 tye fa! ; affcét,ap-
Pormt,or point out,one thing for th’indemnitie, or afu-
rauce of another,

Se nantir de, To feize on, to get the polfeffion of.

Nantiflement :m. 4 confignation , delinerie, laying
downe of; a yeelding of feifm, a giuing of poffeffion,un-
10; alfoya publicke, or legall affectation, faftening, ap-
Pointing, or pointing out of one thing for the fécuritie,
or indemnitic of another ; alfo,a (eifure, feifing, ot get-
ting the poffeffion of.

antissement de I’ execution. font les gages
puns par Execution fur vn debteur.

Napel :m, Helmet flower, great Monkes-bood ; (a ve-
nomous bearbé.)

Naphe. Eau de naphe. Orange- flower water.

Naphte: £ (Held to be liquid, or foft, Bitumen, or the
Strayning ther of,is in truth)a foft, & fulphurous earth,
or mould, which is eafily inflamed by any fire thats
necre it,and once fired will not be quenched,ejpecially
not by water.

Napleux:m, eufe:f Pockie, full of the (French)
pockes.

Napolier: m. The Burre docke , Clote Burre, great
Burre.

Napoller. as Napolier.

Nappe rf. Atablelot,

Naquaire.  lowd infirument of Muficke, fomewbat
resembling a Hoboy.

Naque. as Nacre.

Naque-mouche:m..4 Flie-catcher; a gaping boydon,
an idle gull,

NaquertsTo gnaw,or bite often and with a barfb found,
as a dog doth when bee gnawes bis itching ballockes;
grbence, ce chien naque le cul; (which is alfoane~
quiuocation to,n’a que le cul.)

Naquet : m. The bey that ferues, or flops the ball after
the firjl bound, 10 make a better chace, at Tennis; a
Ceurt-kecper,or Tennis Oe boy,

Naqueter. To férue (or flop)a ball at Tennis ; alfe, to


* wait ata great mans doore; (and thence)alfo, 16 ob- | :


{om duetifilly attend on Me rt REENT

aqueter les dents, To chatter the teeth,
Naqueter dela queuë. To wag the taile.

Narcaph
led by fome;red Stirax, +

Narcisse : m. Narciffns,Primrofe peereleffe ; the Daf-
rer el Daffodowndillie. : t

arcifle Conftantinopolitain. The deuble-flowred

Daffodill of Conftantinople ; alfo, the white fea Daffo-
dill or white fea Onion,


Narcotique: com, Sinpefattine,benumming deprining


of fence, ivi
Nard: m, Spike,or Spikenard ; (an bearbe.)
ard baftard, Lavender Spike. ay
Nard Celtique.French Spikenard,monntaine Spike-


nard. Reg tr
Natd Gaulois. The fame ; or a baftard kind thereof,
which we alfo call French Spikenard, May ae A
Nard Indois. indian Spikenard, Scie
Nard d'Italie, Lawender Spike ; pee


the: f. 47 Aromaticall Indian wood, cal.


|


mon,or blew-flowred one. 1m 1 :

Nard de Lentice. as Oignon d’ Inde. :

Nard de montaigne. Mountaine Spikenard.
Nard ruftique. wild Spikenard ; Valerian | Capons-
eaile,Setwall 3 al/o,bearbe Auens, Bennet, or Bleffeds


alfo, Haflewort,Fole-foot, Afarabacca ; (for enerie one’


of thefe bearbes is called by the Latines, Nardus ruf-
tica,
Nan fauvage, as Nard ruftique; But efpecially,
Setwall; which is calledin Latine as well Nardus
fylveftrisyzs Nardus ruftica.
Fes Syriaque. Syrian Spikenard, Indian Spike.
nar
Nardin :m.ine:f. Of Nard,or Spikenard ; whence ;
Huile nardin. Spike oyle.
Nareau: m. A narrellor nofetbrill.
Nargues, Tufh;blurt, Pip, fiesit cannot be fo,
Naricard: m. .4 bottle-nofed hoyden, a great-nofed
goofe ; or (generally)one that bath nofe ynough to fpare
for bis neighbours, or (as we fay in ieaft) one that hatb


no-nofe.
Nariller, #5 Naziller ; (efpecially in the later ence.)
Narilles: f (4 Hawkes)narrells,or nofethrills.
Narine: £. The nofetbrill,
Narquin. as Narquois.
Narquois : m. A Coufener,lmpofler counterfeit Rogue ;
| mai properly one of thofe cheating and filching vaga-
bonds,that call tbemfèlues Ægyptians,or Bobemians ;
= alfosthe gibbridge,or barbarous language, ufed among
! them. ai
| Narrateur:m. A Narrator, relater, declarer, teller,
__ fhewer of.
Narratif:m. le nar. de lettres. be fubiedt,or contents,
of letters,
Narratif: m.iue: f Narratine,declaratine,declarato-
rie; reporting,relating expre fing.
Narration: f A narration, declaration, relation, tale,
diftourfe,report, :
atré :m. as Narration.
Narré:m. ée: £. Told, faid declared yelated, reported,
expre(Jed, fignified, fhewen. ;
Narrement: m.4 telling,declaringreporting,relating,
expre(fing, flewing, [aying.
Narrer, To tell declare, (peake utter, [ay,velate report,
|. expreffe, difcourfe. x
} Narreur. as Narrateur,
Natal: m. ale: f. Ofor belonging to,the nofe.
eine eeke Veine.


Ve . Seeke +
| Nafarde:f A flip; rap, or flirton the nofè; alfo,a
‘ Fumpemocke,ieaft, flowt.
Nafardé :m. ée:f Filliped,or flirted, on the nofe; al-
v\derided,frumped.
rder. To filip ; to rap,or flirt, onthe nofe; ao, to
frumpe,or breake a ieaft on; play with the noft of; al-
So,to fpeakein the nofè ; whence;
|_Cette corde nafarde. This firing iarretb,
| Nafeaux :m. The noféthrills or narrells.
ee: de naleaux. Swaggerers,cutters, .
itort: m. Nofe-fmart, garden Creffe, towne Kars,
towne Creffes. ae f
tt fauvage.lberis,wild Creffes ; Sciatica Cref:


4


N A T


10 fwimme,lay under them.
Naffel: m. The chinne-band of an belmet. vis aint
Naffelette :f. 4 finall skiffe;feull,or cocke-boat,
Naffelier : m.ere: £. Of,or belonging to, a skiffe, cocke-
boat,or long boat.
Naffelle : f. Askiffewherrie,or cock-boat ; a finall boat


(of what forme [oeuer ; ) alfo,a boat-bowle,or cup ; al. :


fins bollow in a piller &c,called,a Cafemate.

Naflerie. 2s Nafsiere,

Natsidure : f. Any fwelling, or tumor in the bodie, at it
firft vifing, and before the kind thereof can be difcer-
ned: Langued. hiner
afsiere: f, A Leape,weele,or Weave to catch fifvin.

Natte: £. 4 kind of Pole-recd,or Cane ; alfoyas Naphte.

Natal : m. le nat, de. The birth-dayof. — *
atal : m, ale: f Natal natiue ; natural ;of,or belong-
ing to,a natinitie,or birth,

Natoire:m, A place to fivimme in.
atice. as Nerite,


Natif: m. iue: £ Natine,originall borne or bredin,def:


cended of.

Nation: f. A nation,a people.

National: m.ale:f. Nationall,ofa nation.
Concilenational. which is beld by the Diuines of one

»onely nation,

Nationnaires, mes nat. My countrey-men; tbofe of my


nation, : 1

Nativité: £ Natinitie,birth.
Lanativitédenoftre Dame. The feaft of the Nati-
witie of our Ladie,kept folemaly in many parts of Chri[-
tendome,on the 8 day of September.

Natreté : £ Kuauerie,roguerie, gullerie, cheating, wili-
ne(Je,confenage.

Natte: f 4 mat.

Natté : m.ée:f. Matted, -

Natter. To mat,make mats ; furnifb,bang,or couer, with
mats.

Nattier :m. A Matter; or maker of mats. .

Nattier : m. ere : f:Of mats, feruing 10 make mats,

Naturalifte : m. 4 Naturalift, or natural Philofi-


pher.

Naturalité : £ Naturalitie,naturalization. ’

Brin m,ce:f, Naturalixed, made a naturall
ubiedt.
aturalizer.To zaturalize; to make a natural fubicét,
or admit into the number of his naturall fubiedis.

Nature : £ Nature ; effence being ; alfo,an(in-bred)con-
dition bumor qualitie, difpofition, inclination, proper-
tie; manner, fafbion.

Nature faiét chien tracer: Prov. Looke Tracer.
Nourriture pafle nature: Prov. Nurture pafethia-
ture,good bringing up any breeding.

Naturel: m. Nature, or natural diffofition,in-bied
condition,qualitie, propertiesalfo,a Naturalifi,or natu-
rall Philofopber.

Naturel : m.elle:£ Natural; of, or according to ma-

ture; kindlie eats :

Frui&s naturels. Fruits natural; fuch as a thing

elds either of itfelfé, and in it owne nature,or by ibe
helpe indien indufivions culture. pe"

~ Tour naturel. Sceke Jour. !

Quint naturel. The portion of younger brethren in
tb'inberitance left by their father viz. a fifi part ther-
of, whichis divided among them: (But this in fomepla-
ces onely; See Quint,
t. Naturally by natarekindly rightlpac-,
cording toit owne propertie. > ;
Nau. (Naufs Plarall)as Navires 4 foip. = &
, au.


153 adlanatécbls he dis Lt


Let MShà reas


710 ~~ ri dé +2 ic Lil Le CE See = Late hs Ol, Vee Bad Boe iri were od
LU \ a

;
N E A à


a round,and open boat, and fwimming euer (except in
time of ‘danger with ber bellie,er th'infide of ber het,
upwards,

autonniet : m, A Shipman,Saylor, Mariner.
Naux. feftes naux. for feftes de Nocl: &Poi&,
Nayer en l'eau. as Noyer.


Nayf. Seeke Naif,


iat baa Æ Queafie-fomacked; readie, or


apt to vomit. Nazal: m, The nofe-peece of a belmet ; the part thereof
Naudin: m. A noddie, ninnie; goofecap, coxcombe : | __ which conereth the nofe.
qNorm. Nazard:m, A kind of barfh, or iarring wind-infira-


ment,
Nazard:m, arde:£. Jarrine.
Nazardant. Filipping, or flirting on the nofe ; alfa,
frumping ; breaking ieafts upon; alfo, iarring,
Nazarde. as Nafarde; Al/o,a kind of peare.
Nazarder. Seeke Nafarder.
Nazdecapre. Goodman Goats-nofe : ŒKab.


Wire as Navire ; A hip.

Naveau: m. The : Navew gentle, SFA Navew, long
Rape(a fauorie root.)
Naveaux. ed fometimes in equiuocation of Nez-
veaux ; naturall calues, fooles bred, affes by birth.
_Naveau blanc de Jardin, Th orditiarie Rape,or Tur-
ne.


Naveau rond. me à Naze :f. A nofe :€Gate. —
Naveau fauvage. Ramp Nazeaux, Looke Nafeaux.
Navée :f, vneNavée de. 4 1 Bip fill of. Naziller, To root with the nofe; alfo, to thrufh bis nofe
Navet: m.The/mall Navew gentle,the leafi(and dain- into euerie companie,
tiefi)kind of the French Navew. Nazilleux : m. eufe: f. ell nofed ; or, hauing a goodlie
Gros navet. The great, and bitter root of wee Brio- nofe. ;
nie ; or the hear be it felfe. Né: ip née: £Borne ; bred; rifèn, defended, proceeding
Nauette:f. Rape-feed; alfo,as Naveau; a, d aWea- om ; 5 growne,i(fuing,or come out of.
vers fhittle. Tefte de cerf bien née. 4 Stags head tbat bath all
NE de la navette. Looke Touér, | it rights. T2
:m. À fhip. à NE tout coiffé, 4 verie rich,or a verie bafhfill,man, *
x ge : mt, Shipwracke. Né à cour le poil (le Diable’ a chié en volant.) 4
NE m. eule:£ wracking, Jriprrrack. bring- eT wire gallant , braue man (lroni- |
Naviculaire. Osna. The fecond bone of wiafap fo | Ne. (Adverb.) Not,
tearmed becaufe fafbioned like a boat. Qu'ilne foit ainfi, voicy la raïfon. as the Latine
Navigable:com. Nauigable, failable, paffable y y fhig- Quin ita fit: viz. That it is fo: (Held more elegant
Nik then without ne, which to make. negatiue the word
vigege m, 4 Navigation; 3 Allo ; a Nanie, or pas muft be added after foit.)
~ Fleet, Ne. (Conjunét.) Nor,neither. ,
Navigation: € Nauigation, fayling. Neance: f, A denial, -denying,or gainfaying ; a Traners -
Navigé: m.ée:f. Nauigated, failed, in law. ee
Naviger. To nanigate jor faile, Neant. Nothing,nought ; (a word euer fet downe in the ve
Navite: com. A fhip; a barke, faile, or veffell for the beginning or end of an account whichis not allowed.) oe
fea; alfo,a Naute,or Fleet of {hips ; alfo,the bollaw, or Chofe deneant. 4 trifle, nifle,toy ; a frivolous, vn- aA
ball of the band, Seafonable,or fleight matter. ee
we m. Frs fare; the money paied for paf- Mettre à neant. 70 abrogate, antiquate,abolifh, * SR
| - fageimafhip void,make void; alfo, toruine, fubuert;rafesdeface, 0- | “E
AE To fs bis fraught, paljage, fare. uerthrow, | ae
ule. 45 Naulage. Tourner à neant. The fame, 3
e.The fame; whence ; Barques de nauleage; Pour neant demande confeil qui ne le veut croi- | 4
Ste » paffage barkes. re : Prov. In vaine tb'incredulows counfel asketh, | 4


Naumac hie: £.A fight at fea, ©


Pour neant recule quintalheur attend: Prov.
Navré:m.ée: if. re afficted, vexed 3 nip- be y ads


that ill lucke attend giue backe unto no end.


~ ped forely, wrung extreamely, Pour neant va au bois qui marrein ne rogn oifts |
Navrer. To wound, burt; erase ¢, wip cruelly, | ~ Prov, Tono purpofe goes be who knowes not nes ob -
‘pinch extreamely ; vex,a EE tothe wood, 3


~ Qui voitenfant il voit neant: Prov. Man (fes:
the Pfalmift) being weighed upon the balance ibe ber
ter then nothing it felfe ; what then can a child
the nought of nothing ?
| Neantise: E Trihigs idleneffe, bafeneffe, coward,


Navreur: m. A wounder,or burter.
~~ Navreur de gens. 4 cheating fhifier ; common bor-
| voiver,! er ofallhe deales with.
; Ne wound,burt,bloudwipe, fore nip, forewd
… pinch,cruell blow ; alfo,a wounding,or burting.
Naufea te 2€ = again the flomacke,
that makes one kr ps
e:f Awi Peu jéur ie einai; adif-
pofition, without pes et pues 3 alo, a loatbingon ab-


vunwortbine
Neant- REP Sie mien À and yet,
Neant prix. 4 verie low rate,a verie Jar price.
Neble:£ 4 (little)clowd; amift,a


| g,of meats. Nebuleux:m, eufe f clowdie; mi ey foggies
‘Nau sm, The Maifle owner ef afpip: qRab. | Nebulon:m. A kau all iain artes pautrie
| Naut: mas Nau; Du <1) GF trad companion ,(coundlrell, (curuie fellow, ; :
| Nautil. as Nautile. ENT | Neceffaire: com. Neceariesned fil; orgent 5 ene
| Nautile. The fheliie Pr chee sade met like


table,unanoidable, :


RE


oa


NEG NEL
‘ Neceflairement. Neceffarily, needs, of meceffitie, of | Negocier. To negociate; manage bufinelfes, bande af.
ce. ? wea if ‘ wi follow caufes ; deale,trafficke, ri in pai ]
} Neceff taire fcom. Needie, neceffitows; or, as Necef- | Negocieux:m.eule:f. Bufie,eccupied,euer in abtion,
oh t aire, 3
ae Neceflité:f.Neceffitie,need;a bard frait,narrow pinch,
Cu great preffure,vrgent occafion. Pet
Les necessités de nature, ‘Theafing, or purging of
the bodie; fuch things as muft needs be done,
Chemife de necefsité. A charmed fhirt which (as
i Some imagine) preferues men in battailes and eafes wo-
i men in their trauell ; fo tearmed, becaufé tis not to bee
ee ufed but in times of extreame nece/fitie,
Fe” Nece(sité eftla moitié de raifon: Prov. We fay
that neceffitic bath no law.
Necefsité faitrrotter les vicilles: Pro. Need makes
Gi thold wife trot (fay we.)
‘à Necessité rend magnanime le couard, & le pufil-
ET lanime : Prov. Neceffitie addes mettall to the mea-
cocke ; makes the cowardgrow couragious,
¢ Tel aneceffité quine s’en vante pas : Prov. Sime
are in greater want then they will vaunt of,
Ne :m.¢e:f.V ged, preffed.inforced compelled,
by neceffitie,
Necefliter. To neceffitate ; to urge, preffe, confiraine,
compell, force by neceffitie.
Neceffiteux :m. eufe:f. Nece/itous, needie,poore, in-
digent,begperlie,in want,
FT Neétar : m. Near; the drinke of the Gods.
ss Neétar: mare: f. Of Nectar ; mofl feet as Neëtar.
‘Nedtarin: mine: f Nectarine, of Neétar , diuinely


exer dealing, much imployed, full of bufine[e.
Negotiation; &c. as Negociation ; &c,
Negre:com. ANegro,a Moore, ;
Negrier ; m. Acertaine wild vine that yeelds a blacke
grape.
Nevriez. as Negrier ; Alfo,the blacke grapes thereof.
Negroeil. as Nigroil,
Neige:f. Snow.
eiges d’ antan.Thines paf, forgotten,or out of date
long agoe,
Neige en rofmarin. The befprinkling of a Rofemarie
branch with falt,or froatbie creame.
Queftions de neige.Foolifh queftions,idleyand frino-
lous demaunds,
Il a piflé en beaucoup de neiges: Prov, Hee bath
outlined many a bitter Winter.
Neiger. To fnow, :
Neigeux : m. eufe:f. Suowie, fill of fnow.
ae : com. Duskie, fwart,blackifh, of the colour of a
egro,
Nele : £. Cockle(growing among corne.)
Nelle. Seeke Neéfle.
Nes, To varnifb,enamell,or glaxe with the fiuffe Nel-
eure, ;
elleure : f. An enamell, varnifh, or glaxing , one part
whereof is of fine filuer, two of poh cg 5 de of
lead; zh mars 0 enamelling witball,


fiveet,as Neblar. Nemorale: f The mood Tortoife. ‘

: Necyomance: f Diamation by conference with dead Nendea. No indeed-law,marrie no forfoeth ; (a womans 4
rk bodies raifed. vil . oath,ov negatiue.) : “4
Ge Neéfle. Grosde neëfle. 4 peece of coyne thats worth | Nenuphard. as Nenuphar. à
iy; ~ about iij.d.fterl. Nenuphar : m. Nenuphar ; the water Lillie, or water ;

: Nef: £. Afhip; afayle,a veffell for the fea; alfo,the bodie Roft, yl
of a Church. Nenuphar blanc. The white water Lillie. |
Neffle: f, 4 Medler,or Open-arfe. Neoupbat iaulne. The yellow water Lillie,yellow À.

x Nefflier :m. 4 Medler tree. water Rofé. | | |

3 Negatif: m. Negatiue,inficiatine,demying,, [ajing nay. Nepheu. Looke Neveu,

#4 | Negation :£ A negation,deniall, inficiation, denying,, ee Ne pafsion, Paine in the reines, by graueR, À V a

D fay. orthe flone, 4
**. ‘| Negative: £ A aegatine;deniallnay, Nephritide. The fame; alfo,the flone, or grauell fetled 3

a e- Negatoire: com, Negatorie, inficiatorie, negatiwe,de- in the reines, 4
E. - |. nying. ? Nephtocassses. (in flead of Nephrocatarticon) |
44 Neglige Negdigently , retchleffely, carelefly, byficke aps the reines : &Rab, “sf
2 dl: vale, flortbfully,, fleepily. Neptunales: £ Neptunes feafts,or boly-dayes.
“a Tout eft fait negligemment läou lyna l'autre | Neptune:f Neptune ; the God of the fea.
s'attend: Prov. le one another trufistheworkeis | Neptunien: m.enne: £. Ofthe feas nature, of the fea.
left undone ; (and fo betmeen two flooles the taile goes | Neptunois:moife: fa Neptunien.
to the geet) Neraut:m, A certaine vine whofe wood and grapes
Negligence: . Negligence ; retchlefnelfe, carelefnefe, are verie blacke : it is leffe burt by frefts then any o-
. ied snele floath,laxineffe, lithernefe, flee- ther,and yeelds a verie dee -red wine, ;
pinelle, drowfinefe. Nerce. (The name of a God of the fea; bence alfo) the
Negligent. Negligent; retchleffe, careleffe; flacke, re- nit: TA
| mifies lazie, lither, idle, floathfüll; drowfie , fleepi eret. le fol neret. Js about a quarter leffe then the
Negliger. To negleét, defpife, regard lightly, palfe ouer Tournois, or,one part in fixsmiore then balfe the Pari- |
… fleaghtly, make (mall account of, fet little by ; a tobe fian; for 608.0 are worth 36 s.of Paris.” à
egligent retchleffe, careleffe ; beedle ; 20 flug it, to. | Nexf:m. A Synnom; (and thence,might, firength, force, ;
unto. Ope | power; )alfo, any band of yron wherewith a prifiner
“4 bufineles affaires charge, implayments: | i fer |
straficke,dealings labour, trouble comber.… | Les nerfs, The knwckles that flicke out en the backe of f
A Negociator ; trader,dealer; fac per à : |
citor; follower ,or manager of “| Nerfcaverneux. A mans yard.
£, Negociation, imployment, bas ha aggre oe a 4
buf erf feru, (Isinaman) frenzie, ormadnelfes (ina d
Per ste otber ioynt of J


Neri-


et
. a

LÀ
44
LOU
vi


j


| Nerion. The


op se sor knurle in trees;
i soitalae nome 2 2130 ef dre princi |


2


forub Oleander, Rae treesRofe Lawrell,


Roe baytree,
Nerite: f. certaine little,yound,and (mooth fuell-fih,
or fea-fnaileverie like the Periwinkle,
erme. Nothing, FAL AMO) $94
erprun. Buick-thorne,way-thorne,Rhein-bervies, Lax-
. atiue Ramme, ah .9
Nerquois. Looke Narquois,


| Nertes£. The Mirtle flrub,


Oifeau de nerte. The Mirtle Thrufh; called fo be-
cane fhe feeds much on Mirtle berries. .
-Nerver. To tye with finewes. zt |
Nerveures : £ Strong, or finewie bands; bence alfa, as
Nervins ; al/o,welts ;alfo, carued flreakes in wood,or
flone : |


Nerveufement. Strongly, ff, forcibly. Ê
erveux: m.eufe:f, Simewie, full of finewes; alfe,
Grong, fiiffe,pithie, forcible, . .

Nervins : m, bolt-ropes ; the cords wherewith a faile is
hemmed.

* Les nervins des bonnettes. ‘The latchets wherewith
bonnets be faftened toa fayle. |

Nervofité :f, Neruofitie, fnewie ‘ftrength, fulaeffe of fi-
newes,

Nervu: m. ué : #5 Nerveux.

| Nes. Looke Nez.
Nejple: £ 4 Medler,or Open-arf,
Nesplier :m. 4 Medler tree,

Nesquin: m. 4 bafe flow ; or as Mefquin,

um, # Neflun ; (am old word.) :

Neflun. No one,no bodie not any.

Net: mnette:£ Neat, cleane, pure, cleere; fpotlege,
| Unlpotted; polifhed, finooth; briske, fnug sfaire,
Bien au net, Exadlly, perfectly ; alfo, verie neatly,

Cela eft au net. That is fairely written.
Mettre au net. To cleanfe, make neat, finoeth or trim
| wp; alfo,tocleereexpoundexpreffeexplaine,
sys le coeur net de, To be fully vefolued of or fatif:
ed in. .

Netieures. Looke Nettieures, :

| Netre dene. for Noftre dame.

Nettelet: m.ette: £ Prettie and neat; minion, briske,
Siiug,trickfie, fmirke.

Nettement. Neatly,cleanely, purely,cleerely ; fmoothly,


| finug.
Neweté:f Neatne(fe, cleanneffe, cleanline[fe, cleere-
neff ; puritie, finceritie ntegritie, perfect bonefiie,
Nettier. as Nettoyer.


; | Nettieures: £ The Sweepings of a boufe ; any clean-


| _fings.
Nettifloir: m. 4 combe-brufh.
 Nettoyable :com, cleanfible,or cleanfable.


Nettoyé: m.ée:f. Cleanfed, wiped, Scowred, purged,
| cleered, finoothed, (wept,

Nettoyer. To clean(e ; wipe, fiveepe, (comre,purge: ub
FA pa get the filth off ; to cleere ; fimooth make euen,
or plaine,


+ ne
Nett au balay. To 3 to make cleane.
serie, alae hebind ren eo away, b
LE ie ar i ao
cuchu : m.ué: f,Kapttie,knobbie,rough uneuen,
Neud: m. 4 knot ; a knob, orbard bunch; a ioynt in
alfo, the chief
pall band,or hindge whereonit re, bangs.
} a > Frog - e ~ -


. Neud de la gorge, as Larigau


Go gle


- ‘A dur,ou mauvais neud mauvais coing : Pro.Said


“when a quarelling , troublefome ; ‘or litigious fellow
hath met with bis match, ae
Neve: M, A mole frecklé,or other the like natural mar
or blemifh on the hee el ts
Neusnen Simply, abfolutely; immediately , forth
Neveu: m, .4 nephews the anne of a brother, or fier.
Neufva ne dE New, fre te ve
knowne;vnufèd,vnbear d'of before,

Ileftibien neuf. He à a verie nouice ; be is verie ig-

worant,unexpertyaw; be bath but final experience

ia the world, >.

Faire pieds neufs. À woman 10 be delivered of a

. child; berfétocaft bisboones,  -

Neuf, Nine(z number,
eufain : m-itie: £. Of nine ; far nine daÿes.
cufaine: £ A#intb; a proportion, or tbe number, of
wines alfo,a terme or the face, of nine tapes ; allo, a

vow of nine dayes, or for the performance of a thing
mine dayes together ; alfo, prayers made for a dead bo~
die the ninth day after bis deceafe.

Neufiefine. The ninth.
Droié de neufiefme.A ninth part of the cleere yeren
Le of moft of the Benefices in Britaineexaéled by
the Pope. 4

Neufiesmement. Ninthiy.
cutme. as Neume.

Neufyaine. as Neufaine; whence ;

Lafain&e neufvaine. The nine Mufes,

Neume: m. 4 found, fong, or clofe of fong after au An-
tham ; or the long holding of the lajt note of an An-
tham, rc ; vfèd much in the Quires of Cathedral
Churches,

ost *f. Nentralitie ; indifferencie ; the being on

' fide


neither fide,
Neutralizer. feneut. To land newter; to take neither
" part,belpe neither fide; when two are at oddes to Line
‘| them the looking on.
Neutre : com, Newter,taking neither part,helping nei. |
ther fide; alfo,of the Newter Gender.
aoe Neutreswbich is neitber ill nor whole, fick nor
07)


0,

aps See Neufaine, }
€z: m, The nofes alfo, fence or fmelling ; alfo, wit. or
underftandin nt ral haces ante
Nez d'as de treuffle, A nofé Bke an ace of the clubs;
a broad flat nofe us : 1
Nezde dire. A nofe of wax; a thing that maybee |
brought unto any forme wrought into any fafbion, tar-
ned ov changed any way. : :
Nez coupé, Saint Anthonies nut, Bladder nut, wild | :
Piflachoes, ;


Nez qui coupe. A notable ppirit; fearchin wit,pler- |
cing apprebenfion,foarpe nl aon
Haut nez: Chien de haut nez. 4 dog of a deepe
nofe, or good fent ; alfo, a dog that bath wide nar-
veus, © 4
. “Anez frotté de vinaigre. Looke Vinaigre.
Le nez luy croift, Said of one that hath quietly fival.
lowed, and bafély difgefled a publicke affront , or dif-
grace: ;
Le nez aufsi plar comme vne Andouille, A nofe as
flat ai à Flooke (fay we; ) Looke Andouille,
Lenez faiétàmanche ‘de rafoir. A high-raifd, or.
bawke ,nofe. ARRET Strat |.
Le nez tourné à la friandife. Saied of lickorowsor |
deacherous wench ; or one thats not fo good ws fhe}
Should be, 5. pe ae
van- | :


a ee


Be, À: Li fret ei
“1


| NEZ
Avantagé en neZ.That hath a formard,or füll-grovn


nofe. :

Avoir be nez. s'il a du nez. Ifhe baue any wit ,con-

ceit,or iudgement. A's 2

Cela n'a point de nez. Is done foolifhly unband/ome-

ly, without any manner of garb; bath neither decorum

without nor fauor withitty thy »

Bailler fur le nez du Roy. Tocoyne.falfe money.

Donner de la porte fur le nez 4. Toexclude, flout or

keepe ont ; orto {hut the doore againf.

Fermer I’ huis aunez à. The fame...

Laver le nez à. To féhoole,cenfure,chide, reprebend,

rattle foundlysreproue bitierly. ”

Lever le nez. 70 bold up the bead, pluck vp the heart,

grow cheerefüll,wax couragious, j

Marqué fur le nez.C’eft vn Mouton de Berry, iléft

marqué fur lenez; Looke Mouton. : 4

Mettre le nez par tout. To thrufl bis nofe into enerie

corner ; bufily to fearch into, or meddle with, eusrie

thing.

Se Mende aunez. To acknowledge a fault, or find

bimfelfe in th’ errour, wherewith another is charged;

whence;

Ceft à luy à s'en prendre au nez. He may well y-

nough affurne that imputationstis for him to applie that

cenjure to bimfelfe ; alfo,tis long of bimfelfe, be may e-

uen thanke bimfelfe for it.

Se prendre au bout du nez. Looke Prendre.

Pris du nez. That hath the murre, whofe nofe is flop-

ped or fuffed with cold,

_ Refaire fon nez. To picke,or gather, up bis crummes
againe,
Ne regarder plus loing que le bout de fonnez. To
be negligentscarelef[e improuident, without any man-
ner of forecaft.%,

Il fe retira avec yn pied de nez. He flunke away, or
ot bim backe, with fhame ynongh : ( fometimes pied is
eft ont, but expreffed with the hand;and then they fay;

Ife retira avec autant de nez.) ; |

Saigner dunez, 4 mans heart to faint, or faile bim;

Looke Saigner. ep Baty

Il fe tintfort par le nez de ce refus. He remembred


this refifall with a defire of reuenge , although at firft
he forbore to take notice of it. i


Ils luy torchent Jenez de fa manche, They wipe bis.


nofe with bis owne fleeue,bis taile with bis owne fhirt;
they allow him meat, or meanes, out of bis owne mo-


ney. a a
Tordre lenez à, Towrefl, bend, ov plie a thing to bis
one purpofe, rk

pee ct lenez à. Totronble,vex, moleft; baffle, a-


fe.
I] faut laiffer fon enfant morveux pluftoft que luy
- arracher le nez: Prov.Better an inconuenience then
a mifchiefe ; let the Henne line altbough fhe bane the
4 i >,
Nive bi Ano, nay, negating, deniall, refifall.
i. Neither ; See Ny.


 Niaïs :m, 4 neq ings a young bird taken out of a neaf


| Bence,a youngling, nouice, cunnic, ninnie,fop, A
= arts HS) bague (Je,and un-
lace deta a ble, ape nd fre
ter apace >
NE Si i ques in je
fepars


f


N

Niance. #s Neanice,

nt : m. A denier. :
lant: m, alte: f. Denying. : à |

Niard. faulcon niard. 4 Nias Faulcon, 4

Nice: com. Lither, lazie, floathfüll,idle; faint, flatke;
dull, fimple. :

AGion nice. An Action upon a bare promife, without

article,or couenant. :

Promefle nice. A fingleor bare promife, without co-
_ wenant,pawne, furetie,or obligation,

Nicement. Legily, litberly, floathfilly ; faintly, flackly,

nes dully ; fimply,barely, finely. L
iceté. Sloath Jutberne fe lazineffe idlene fe; flackneffe,

wonelfe ; fimplicitie,or fimplenefe.
icette. pucelle nicette. 4 flow, dull, fimple, foolifh,
or nice girle, |

Niche : f A Niche’; a'bollow feat, or flanding for
a flatue,or image made into a wall.

Nichée, as Niée.

Nicher. To neaftle, build or make a neaft in,

Nicheul : m. 4 neaft-egge; th’egge thats alwayes left
in a Hennes neafi.

Nichil-au-dos. doublet whofe back is of courfer fluffe
then the forepart ; and hence,any thing that makes an
outward (hew of goodnelfe,or worth, which immaraly
it wanteth,or commeth {hort of. —

Nichilodo, The fame. .

Nicolas: m, Nicholas; a propername for a man; and
particularly the name fs Saint (Patron of the Ruff-
ans,erc ;) whofe feaft is the fixt day of December ;

ence ;
_ Sif hyver eftoitoutre lamer fi viendra il a S. Ni-
colas parler : Prov.

Nicotianc :f. Nicotian,Tobacco; (firf fent into France
by Nicot(the maker of the great French Dittionarie)in
the yeare 1560, when be wasEmbafjador Leger in
Portugal.) |

» Petite Nicotiane. Nicotian, yellow Henbane, Eng- |
lifh Tobacco ; or,as Petum femelle.

Nicquet : m, 4 Burgonian(ba/e)coyne wher of three are
worth 5 d.Tournois.

Nid: m, 4 neafl oe aos
Nid d'oifeau. Goofé-neaft,Birds-neaft, an hearbe.
Nid de la Pie. Monté iufques au nid dela Pie,
bis fil beight; as bigh,ov as great, as ener be can be,
Nids de Tirans, Cittadells,and Caftells ; tearmed fo

the common people awed by them,
s’en va prendre la mere au nid, Leoke Mere,
_ Nid tiff oifeau envolé: Prov. #e loafe an opportus
nitie while we fpend time in preparations,

‘A tous oifeaux leurs nids font beaux: Prov. Eue-

rie bird likes bis ovene neat; euerie man thinkes well

of, or 15 in toue with, his oxne houfe, érc.

Tel oifeau tel nid : Prov, Aboufe like th’inbabitant;

fuch bird [uch neap. .
Nideur :f. The flench,or fulfome fauor of things broiled,

or burnt.

Nidoreux :m. eufe £ Smelling or fauoring of (alfa, fil-
fome as the finell of) broiled,or burnt things,

i t. as Nidoreux.
Nié :méc:£ Denied, faid nay vnto, difaduowed.
Nieble. as Niellé “pole
De A neece; the daughter of a brother, or fifier.

i i ;


of Sa
< 7 Je . . i oe, iswi-
operon ee ct
Jhops-wort,Swect-fauor,S.Katberines flower, Niclle


NIV

Niphlefet. Membre viril: Rab. ‘

Nique, faire la nique. To mocke by nodding, or lifting
upof the chianes or more properly,to threaten or defie,
by putting the thumbe naile into the mouth; and with a

- derke (from th’upper teeth)make it to knacke.

Les maux terminez en ique font au medecin la ni-
que : Prov. Such be Hydropique,Heéique,Parali-
tique, Apopleétique, Lethargique,&c, becaufe they
are hardly,or neuer,cured,

Niquetyas Nique; 4/0, a knicke, tlicke, fnap with the
teeth,or fingers ; a'trifle, nifle, bable, matter of fmall
value ; alfo,as N icquet. : '

Niqueter, Il n'y a que niqueter.There is no caufe of,
or place for, mockerte ; there i no fanltto.be found,
Nifi. foubs peine nifi. Vader the paine of curfe, or ex-
_ communication. “15
Niflole:f Awhitifh Dog.fl , which is indifferent good:

meatsor atleaft,the beft of Dog. fifhes.

itouche. faire de la fain@te nitouche. To play the’
hypocrite, or make an innocent few ; 10 feeme not
tothinke of or not to care Sor, a moft affested thing.

Nitre:m. Niter.; a(Saltarefembling) fubftance of colour
light-ruddie, or white, and full of boles like a fhunge: |
(diners late writers ignorantly miflake it for Salt-pee-


NIE


_ Nielle baftarde. Cockle, field NigeHa,baftard Nigella,

. Nielle blanche, white Nigella,white Gith.

Nielle des bleds, as Niclle baftarde.
NielleCitrine. The garden Nigella, whofe (ted is of
a pale yellow,or Citron colour, PIE
Niclle de Damas, Damaske Nigella,

Nielle domeftique. Guvden Nigella...

Nielle jaulne. as Nielle Citrine. nel

Nielle noire. Blace Nigella ; (a firanget in England

aswell as the white one; at leaft our Gerard mentions
neither of them.)

Nielle odorante: Ordinatie Gith,or Nigella,

: Nielle Romaine.The fame; called alfa by our Herba-
fis, Nigella Romana, . À
Nielle (auvage, wild NigeHa, field Nigella:

Niellé :m.éc:f. Mildewed, blafted. AUS

| Niement : m. 4 deming,difaduowiag ; or gainfaying.

Niepce :f. as Nicce. ;

| Niet. To denie,difaduow ; faynay,gainfay,

|. Qui toutme donne tout menie: Prov. Hee that

|. grants me all,gines me nothing, aske.

4 Rire An Alpen tree,

ieu, & Nid; A neafts wheace;
Ocuf nieu.A neal egge ; th’egge which is continually
left ia a Heanes neaft. i
| Nicur: m. A denier.
| Nicufes. les n.de la maifon, The fiveepings of the boue.
| Niez. as Niais; Alo, a Nias bawke; alfo,an airie of
| bawkes.

| Niezer. To deale fimply, or fllily ; 10 carrie bisafelfé like

 anonice,or ignorant reddic..

| Niezeté:£. Simplicitie, fillineffe , childifinefe, igno-

| __rance, rudeneffe,

Nifler, T ofnifter, or finffe vp faiuell ; to draw it up by
drawing in the wind. : shad


| Nigaud: m.4 fop,nidget,ideot; a doult,lobcock;vaine,
+ | trifling,ov lojtering fellow, |
| Nigaude:£ A fille, fond, idle, trifling wench,
| Nigauder.as Niger, | ft
| Nigauderies : £ Fopperies, fooleries, fond, idle, trifling
rankes,
: Nigau d. as Nigaud, ‘
| Nigelle:£. Gith, Nigella Bifhops-root , S. Katherines
c.


_ flower ; Looke Ni
" - To trifle; to play the fop,or nidect.
igerics: f Nidgeries, fopperies, foolerses triflesnifies,


ter.)
Nitre d'Afrique. A kind of light,and brittle Niter of
a purple colour.
Sel Nitre.Salt-peeter candied,or fined like white Su-
ga7-Candie.
Nitreux: m.eufe: £ Of Niter,full of Niter, falt,or brac-
kifh,as Niter.
Nitriere : f. The place wherein Niter is found, or got-
ten,

Nitrofité :f. Nitrofitie ; tbe faltnefte, brackifinele. or
Sharpe taft of Niter. - ant,
Niveau :m, 4 Ma/ons, or Carpenters Leuell, or Trian-

gle; th’inflrument whereby be is guided in the laying

of bis floores ec ; alfo,a Mariners Sounding plummet;

alfo,a Periwinkle (fifh.)

‘A niveau, Leuell,cuen- floored,

Au niveau de. Euen, or lenell with; direéily along

with ; vpon the fame ground,or floore.
Nivelé:m.ée:£ Leueled, meafired, (quared,or laid

exen by a leuell ; alfo, founded with a plummet.
Niveler. Toleuell; to meafure, fquare,or lay euen by à

leuell ; alfo,to found with a plummet,


| fiuolous bables.~ ; Niveleur : mz A Leneller ; one that meafures, or layes
|: Nigeur: m. A nidget, fop, trifler, euen,things by a leuell,
| Nigcufe:£ A fondor idle wench. Nivellement :m. A levelling; alfo,a founding,
: Nigroil : m. The fea Breame, Niveter. To be idleor lazie; aljo,to fidge, or be fidling
Nigromance: f. Nigromancie, coniuring, the blacke |. bere and there tono manner of parpofe.
7 f f Noble: m. 4 Noble,in monty, ~
Nigromancien : m. 4 Nigvomancer,pr Coniurer; oné | Vn Noble Edouard, 4n Edward Noble; ag old Eng-
that practifes the blacke Art. © : ‘olf lifh coyne of gold, worth about 15 s.fterl,


“Nihil. as Neant. ;
eee nihil en. To difaaaull,annibilate yafe,blotjor


Ë t out,

Nihil gris, 4 daft, or foot, which ge 4 one
moake aces wheri 3270, 5 melte es
eres: boufe ; Meet Gtis vatill it come
fection ; for then it is white, and tearmed

Nihilblanc 0 - Rakes: :
Nihilité : £. Nalitie; the being nothing,or of no-value.
Nille: £:rhe turning peg ofa Viclle; alfo,the ware-band

| _ ofa aes > 2 AU AE JV


Noble à la Rofe. 4 Rofe-noble. Saas.
Noble: com. Noble; ofa Gentlemanlie race, of gentle
bloud ;al/o,noble, gentle, generous of bumor; worthie,
gallant; excellent, famous. :
: Les Nobles. Gentlemen (of what ranke,or qualitie
ory are filed thus by the French, without an
Such diftinétson ( betweene Noble, and Genile) as
make. “
La Noble fleur. Flower geatle,F lower amour,Flow-
ervalure. :
» Les parties Nobles du corps. The braine, heart,li-
bre thofe parts of the Lodie which feed, or depend
+ onsthem. ‘ ; 7:
Les vilains s’ entretiennent, les Nobles & i ,


Kkk


sa


= af eee


4


n $
FE à
a

‘i

Ne

* a

2

i

4


ee JE


…


| N O I

beaflent: Prov. Clownes intertaine one another cold-

ty, Gentlemen courteoufly.

Noblement. Nobly,generoufly, Gentleman-like ; wor-
sbilp gallantly couragioufly, freely.

Terre tenué noblement. Land held by Knights fer-

| uice,or fome other Gentlemanlie tenure,

Noblesse: f Nobilitie, gentrie, generoufneffe, gentle-
mianline[fe; alfo,a noble inberitance,or boufe,
Lanobleffe(d'vn Royaulme.) The Gentrie,or Gen-
tlemen (of a er ranke foeuer they beld,or
what title foewer they bane.

Noc.Con, Turned backward(as our Tauc)to be the lee
offenfiue to cbaft eares.

Nocher: m. 4 Pilot,or Steeres-man; the Mariner that
direéts,or gouerns, the courfe of a fhip.

Le vent, la cempefte,& l'orage, monftrent du no-
cher le courage: Prov. The wind and tempelt being
outragious,trie whether the Pilot be couragious.

Nocturne : com. Nightlie, by might,in the night time.

Nodeux: m. eufe:f. Kaottie,nobbie, full of knurres,
ioynts or bard bunches.

Nodofité: f. Knottine(fe,knobbineffe.

Noé. as Nouë,

Noel: m, Chrifimass the feaft of the Natinitie of our Sa-
uiour ; alfo,a Chrifimas Caroll, See Nouél,

*A Noel au perron, à Pafques au tifon: Prov. 4t
Chriftmas in the Sunne, at Eafler by the fire ( you mufi
warme you.)

Tant crieon Noel qu il vient: Prov. So long is
Chriftmas cried that at length it comes; Looke Ve-
nir.

Noër. To fivimme ; or togird, er iert, forward in fwim-
ming ;(an old word.)

Noeud. as Neud,

Noeuf. as Neuf.

Noialliere:f. APepinnerie or part of an Orchard wber-
in the kernels, or flones of feucrall fruits are fet, or
fowed for increafe.

Noiau. as Noyau. |

Noié: m.¢e:f Drowned; whirkened,onerwbelmed,as
with water.

Noier. 4s Noyer,

Noif:f. Snow: (Norm.

Noir: m. Blacke colour; blacking.

Le noir. Blacke game ; as the wild fivine,drc.

Noir: m. noire: £ Blacke, fableydarke,obfcure.

Des noirs cappets ;ou chapeaux noirs, À certaine
bearbe whofe blacke flowers refemble jimall bats; Di-
ofcorides,and Plinie call it Lonchitis but Mathio-
lus prote(is be neuer knew that any man bad foundit.
Beftes noires. Wild fivine. Je

Bife noire. A North-eaft wind blowing in clofe wea-
ther, |
Monnoyernoite. Braffe,copper, or yron coyne, unfil-


nered.
ain noire. Blacke Oaker, or the blacke marking-
1S) ne.

Veine noire. Looke Veine.


Vin noir. Tholdeft,thickeft and deepeft-coloured;red


b Tnveh f Diable qu'il eftnoir.He à not fo bad as be
: _ ie os not fo curft, farious,or vntraëlable, as
to

sical gemae yond blenc oeuf: Pro. À blacke Hen
loss ambire cage ; many a foule woman brings forth


Norte son. Blackifh,obfiure , duskie, footie ; o-
 sercafh 52 ; ÿ


N OI
Noirault: : ; i
a ae £Swart, browne dunne, duskie,
Noir-beau. 4 kind of deg.


Enfer.)
Noirceur: £ Blackneffe,ob/euritiedarkneffe.
Noirci: m.ie: £ tds le ened phen.


Noircir. To blacke,blacken; bleach,darken, obfcure,of-


wit à a 4
oirciflant. Blacking ; darkening ,ob/curing.
Noirciflement: m. A blacking ; darkening ,ob/curing,


ae £:
Noircifleur : m. A blacker, blackener ; bleacher, dar-
Noirciffure: £ Blacknef[e,darkne(fe,objcuritie ; fwart-


Noirelet : m. ette :£. as Noiret,
Noiret :mette: £ Blackifh, daskie, obfcure, footie,


Noireté : £4 Noirceur,
Noireton: m.onne:f. as Noiret ; or, 4 little blacke.
Noirettes: £ Blackifh clifis ; alfo, fmall Wallnut trees,
Noir-mordant. (The name of) agreat, and verie ve-


Noirté. as Noirceur.
Noir-ver :m. 4 wilding ; or an apple, or peare that is


Noise : £4 bra


NÉ bath,
oifelier: m, A ha/el; a bafel nut,or final nut tree.
Noifelle :£ Ahafel nut,or finall nut,

Noifer. To brawle, chide, fcould, brabble, fquabble,


nent to fuit,or bold debate,againft,


Noifeux: m.eufe: f. Contentious debate full,quarelfome,


oit-brun. A blacke-browme,or darke- browne colour,
Noir-brun enfumé, # Couleur d’ Enfer, (wader


red,effufcated,ouercaf.


offuféating,ouercaflin
kener,obfturer.


neffe,blackifhnee,browneffe;alfo, as Noirciflement.


(wart,browne,dunne,


nomous blacke Spider,


not perfectly ie : ENorm.
se ble, brawle,debate,wrangle, (quabble,
chiding, altercation, Seoulding ; a quarell, firife,oddes,
variance difference difcord,or difagreemet,in words ;
aa noife,bruit,rumbling, flurre burrie, coyle burli-
ur


Cercher noifes pour noifertes,To pick a quarell vp-


on a finall occafion.
Qui femme a noifea : Prov. He that a wife bath


wrangle, brangle, fall at odds,or beat variance,with;


oifette: £ A fmall nut, or bafel nut; alfo,a Filbeard ,
alfo,a fquabbling or fmall debate;a contention of little


. importance,
Noifette des Indes. The drunken Date,called by the
Arabians Faufel and of fome ufe in Phyficke.
Cercher noifes pour noifettes. as under Noife.


litigious, troublefome, brabbling , wrangling, moft vn-
quiet,
Noifif : m.iue: £. as Noifeux.
Noifille : £4 finall nut,or bafel nut.
Cafler la noifille. To cog a Die.
Noifiller :m. 4 bafel,or fmall nut tveé. rt
Noifillier: m.ere :f. Fall of, flored with, fmall nuts,
Noifillon: m. 4 bafélaut,a fmall nut. | |
Noifillons desDattes. Little Date fienes.
Noix: £4 Wallant ; alfo,the fir bone of th'imflup ; tbe


buckle bone.

Lanoixd’ yne arbalefte. The nut ofa Croffebow.

Lac Acypres pe clog. ica
o ou de galles.A Gal ;al/oan Oake-apple.

Noix Indi que, Th'Indian aut Cocus (an sxcest


~ Noix Awallnut. .
Noix de Jupicer. Thefame ; called fo insole ;
_ Noix


À \
ae Se Sr Adi


NA


soute dla ey Cree


TIN Lo) -M


Peru.
Noix mufcade. À Nutmeg,
Noix Perfique. 4 #allnut. | {
Noix de pin. 4 Pine-clog,or Pine-apples alfo,a Pinet,
the nut,or fruit of the Pine-apple.
oix Pontique. The red Filbeard,
Noix royale. AWalnut, i
oix vomique. Nux vomica, or, the vomiting nut:
Some bold it to be the fruit of the Spurge Myrfinites;
others no fruit but the root of an bearbe ; bow/oeuer,it
is of a poifinous, deadlie and flupifying qualitie.
En cela gift le gouft de la noix. There us the pleafure,
+ therein refis the (port of it ; or therein confifis th’onely
point or chie fe fabllance of the matter. t
Nulle noix fans coque: Pro, No nut without a fhell.
Qui a des noix ilencafle, & qui n’en ails'en paf-
fe :Proy, Nuts are time-trifles; it isa pleafure to baue
them, and tis no great lojfe to want thems for ofien-
ge thew crack doth coft more then their kernels ave
ar th,


Noix chaftaigne. Th'earth nut, Kipper nut, earth
Cheftaut, .
Noix-prunes. Plammes that come of a plumme grafted
on a Wallnut tree,

Noleage : m. as Nolle, ‘
Nolle :€ ‘The fraught paid for lading, the fare due for
paffage,in a fhip. ;

OM: m. À name; the tearme or title, whereby a thing
called; alfo,a fame,bruit report ; whence, Uenase
nom.
Au nom de voftre beauté, oferions nous, &c. By
Tike {weet fauour may we,or may we for your beauties
are, t
ombles d’ vn cerf. The numbles ofa Stay ‘
Nombrable: com, Numberable,numerable, 4
Nombre: m.4 number;a tallie, fumme lift, eckoning,
account; fore companie multitude quantitie of; alfo(w
old French)a Band, Regiment,or Cobort of fouldiers.
Nombre fourd, Looke Sourd. TA
Quatre mille de nombre fai@, Full fowre thoufand,
Nombré: m, ée: £.Numbred ; told, echoned, fummed;
counted. iA
mbrée: as Denombrement; or, lift, catalogue,
Ne |
‘Nombrement : m. 4 aumbering; reckoning, telling,
Sistmming, counting, A
Nombrer, To number ,tell,reckon, fumme,count, ‘1
Nombres. as Nombles. LS
Nombreur :m. 4 sumberer,reckoner, teller, fummers
counter. Brel oA ol
Nombreux :m, eufe:f. Numerous, manifold, many
alfo,con/ifiing of,or dir efted by number; ywhence,nom-
N a cs loix. Lhe aU Ete
ombril : m. The nauell, * ” Hz yo
Nombril de mer, The Sea-nauell ; a ruddiese’> wri-
then, as bard as a flone. + :1re1ÉvolA
Now ilde terre. The hearbe Sow-bread, Hogs=
vead,§ D ee ol
à Nombril de Venus. Ladies Nauell, great Penaj
wort,wall Penniwort Venus garden, Hipwert. sd
Nombriller :mere : f, Ofor belonging t0,the nanell.
aes be 4 her women. tie
de eat belies , and are thereby lighten
‘ areal par of then burthen, * tote ino a
M No :M..4 ! eh … ee ri AT
| Nomination: £4 nomination,or denomination ; a cal.


: | “Co gle


Noix methelle. 4 fleepe-procuring nut, or fruit,cal-
. led by Gerard, the Thorne-apple, or. Thornie apple of


Nonciateur. as Nonceur. ;


ing.
None: f.The


AS ae EDA i hal thn:
N ON R
ling naming cleaping pearming,or filing ; alfo,the no-
minating choice or election of aman; th'appointing or
noamting him out, for an imployment,
ommeé:m.ée:f. Named, called, cleaped,ecleaped,
bight 3 filed, entitled, isarmed; minged, mentioned,
alledged ; nominated appointed.
{A our nommeé. On a day certaine,
A point nomme.Exprefly of fet purpafé: alfa, to pur-
ne €,0r,at th’ appointed time ; Looke Poinét,
ommée : f, 4s Denombrement ; 07,4 lifisroll, cata-
loguesregifier, faruey.
ommément. Namely,byname, particularly, efpeci-
aber eff, Fs >? ly, epec
oinmer: 4 name ; call cleape, bight, entitle,tearme,
Site ; alfa,to ming,mention,alledge,or fpeake of; alfo,to
nominate,or appoint by name.

Nomimneur : m.4 aamer; alfo,a denominator; the figure
thats under the line in an Arithmeticall fraction,

pee Fong if The making, publifbing,or proclaiming
0j 4: le

Nompair: m. Odneffe,or an vneuen sumber off

Nompait. as Nompareil ; 4/o,odde,

Nompareil : m. eille :fPeerelef[e,paffing excellent,
beyond camiparifon.

Nompaicille :£ The name ofa delicate peare.

Nomnpareillement. Peerelefly, paffingly, firpa fingly,
excellently. .

Non.(Subftan.)yn non dela tefte. 4 nod that jm.
ports a denial,

Non. not.

Non pas ? .4rt thou not ? is it not 2 ee.
on que, Not onely ; much leffe,or much more,

Nonain: €. 4 une,

Nonante. Nineiie; fourfeore and ten,

Nonantiefine, The ninetieth.

Nonce:m. 4 Nuntio, mefen er, tiding-bringer ; and

Kerr Embaflador from the Pope.
oncer. Totelldeclare,relate;report,bring tidings,de-

= fuer newes of ; alfo,to (hew,betoken, fignifie. :

Nonceur : m, 4 re orter,teller declarer, tidim =bring-

€, fhewer, fenifer,

Nonchalamment.# cedlefly carelefly,retcblefly.
onchalance:f Carelefnefesretchlefneffeheedlefnefés
mee paced cael

None nalarie Carelefesretcblefe beedlefe negligent,
idle, (ecure, ©

Nonchalemment, 4s Nonchalamment,
onchalence 1 Carelefaeffe retchlefne(fe.

Nonchalent. # Nonchalant: à RL +

Nonchaloir, To negled, or be caveleffe of; not to vec-

gkon,peedor accompt of; to liue infecuritie. — . 1
onchalu: m.ué:f, Negleéted,not heeded, finally ten
ded,litile cated for, ea ;


onciation :.f. A report, relation, mel ge ; 07 4 re-
porting , relating, newes-telling é =~ "brings
‘furth, Quarter or ninth houre,of the day,
: bappening in res in t-afternoone; in
ree ” 1: jo af
ones. The Nones of a Moneth; the dayes next a er
the Kalends\; In March, May, Fis ie,and October there
be fix,inthe ref) but foure,of them. |
Nonnie,(Adyerb.) Neuer a bit,not a whitot at all, by
no manner of meanes,.
fonce if, ANumme, 9 |
onne: f A Nanne ; alfo,as None ; the ninth boure of


«the day. | ae =
. Ktky Non |


à
—
4
wh
2
fe
a


N O V


N O V


Bloudwort,Swines- grafts wiv
Nouël:m. (The feaft of) Chriflmas ; ao, a Chrifimas
Caroll,or fong made to the bonour of Chrift;a!fo,a voice
of acclamation, or congratulation vfèd by people wel.
comming (uch as are gracious with them; See Noel.
| Nouel nouvelet. The burden of a Chrifimas Caroll :
aoversbre. Nowember.
Nouément: m. A kuittinz, tying, or faftening with


ots,
Nouément de jeunes arbres, The knotting of young
trees; their fbringing,or {hooting out from knot to knot,
or joynt to ioynt,
Novenaire. A ninth ; or the number of nine,
Novenaire: com. The ninth; alfonine.
Nouér. To knit ; ta tie, faflen,or bind with knots ; alfo,to
Anot(as a tree thats in growin -


Il ne peut nouér au bout de l’ an les deux bouts de
fa ferviette enfemble, He a cleane Gentleman; or
bath nothing left bum,by the yeares end.

Noverce :f. 4 flepdame,or flepmothez. ,
ouët : mA little knot; alfo,a little linnen bag,or poke,
bard tied vp.

Nouéure: f 2s Nouément.
cuëufe: £. Centinodie ,Kaotgraffe,Birds-tongue,Blouds
wort. 4 DA

Nouëux : m.eufe: £ Knartie knobbie, fall of kuwrres,
ioyats bunches ec. :
ovice: com, A nonice,a young Monke,or Nunne ; one
thats but newly entred inte th Order ; alfo,a yongling,
or beginner,in any profeffion, -

Novimeltre: com. Of nine monethes ; or, at nine mo-


neths end. re A
Novitiat :m. 4 nouice ; th’cflate of a nouice, or-the
terme wherein one is iz the flate of a nonice; alfo,a be.
ginning or entrance in any profeffion. (A
Nourri: mie : £ Nourified d; nurtured, fofiered;
nuzled in, brought up to. Viger ari Hit
Fleur de lis au pied nourri d’ argent. Conped,or cut
off; (a tearme of Blazon.) !
Nourrice: f. 4 Nufe. ;
Vnembonpoint de nourrice, 4 plumpe, fal,or fog-
NÉS conflitution of bodie. + Sr
Ourrin : m. The frie,or brood of yong fifh, referued for
athe faring ofa pondre. en
Nourtir. To xourifh, feed fuflaine, find, nurture, fofler;
nugzle in; breed,or bring up to, NA Pa
eft bon pere qui nourrit: Prov. He that
Maintaines,or keepes a man, may well betearmed bis


ter, F 4
: Qui veut avoir bon chien il faurqu'il le nourriffe:
…Pro.He that will baue a good tog mujt breed bim tot:


ty
oA


Tel le chié nourrit qui puis mange la courroye de
fon foulier : Prov. Laoke Chien... .: 1...
Nourriflable: com. Nourifhable,
Nourriflant : m.ante :£ Nesvifhing. …
Nourrifle:f.4s Nourrice.
Nouttiflemeni
a nurturing, fi
Nourriffeur: m,
her


Arai, cdi aires
ran fo , ng y RS fifter


et +: pe busbandya fofter father...» 4


dat


nt, nutriment, fuflenance,
ancesalfe,nurture.or bring.


ed up about a boufe ; or


| an nes N
x
|: N
froin
g)
N
'N
N N
er .
N
N
pres
Nourri j
bod:


the breeding thereof’; whence;
Nouritures. The tending, feeding, or fattening of
Swine, cattell, or pulleine; alfo, the commodities, ot
pronifion yeelded by a countrey boufe towards that part
of busbandrie,
ourriture pafle nature: Prov, Nurture fürpafetb
natures.
Nous. we,us.
Nouveau: m, nouvelle : € New: Fcfhrecent; frange,
rare; lately done, or made ; uncouth unufed,vabeard
of before,
Ouveaux acquefts, Looke Acquefts,
Faits nouveaux. ce font ceux qui n'ont efté arti-
culez au procez principal; ou encores qu'ils de-
pendent d’iceux, ils nefont toutesfois les mefincs
faiéts, ains ferventdeles cfclaircir, & en donner
plus ampleintelligence.
Le laiétnouveau, Becfl,or Beeflings,
Les vingenouveaux. A certain lately-ereéted Court,
conling of twentie Prefidents and (Afffiants) Cour
fellors.
De nouveau tout eft beau : Prov.Euerie new thing
lookes faire.
De nouveau Seigneur nouvelle mefgnie: Prov. 4
now Maifler, a new meynie.
» Vieux peché faitnouyelle honte : Prov, Old fmne
breeds new fhame.
Nouveauté:,f Anoueltie; alfo, newmnefe, freflmefe 3
rarene]e, flrangene(fe,
ouvelan :m, 4 new yeare. /
Nouvelet: m.ette :f. Verie new; or prettie,and new;
of late date,of a final flanding,
Nouél nouvelet. See Nouël
ouvelis. as Nouvellis.
ouvelle: f. 4 nouell ewes; tidings ; an(unexpelted)
me) : frange rc port; adifcourfe, or tale vnbeard
of before.


Aflez en dit qui apporte bonnes nouvelles: Prov,
He fares no words that brings good newes.
C’eft au four, & au moulin oulon fçait des nou:
velles: Prov, 4 common mill,and oucn,affoord much
newes, À
: Hardimentheurte à la porte qui bonne nouvelle
apporte: Proy. Looke Hardiment.
Trop toft vient à la porte qui mauvaife nouvelle
apporte: Pro: He that briags ill news comes too foone,
Nouvellement, Newly, lately, affefh,rat long fince.
Nouvelleté = £45 Nouveauté; 4/9, Noueldipeifia; a
new,or late interruption,or impeachment of poffesfion;
« Looke Saifine... ‘ La bu]
Nouvellis: m. Fallowes; erund that lics fallow enerie
other yeare; or,as Novalese =... >
Nouzille. as Noifette,or Noifille,
Noyau: m. (The fonc of a Plum, Cherrie, Date, Oline,
. Be; alfo(but leffe proper ly)the kernel inclofed theïin;
alfo,tbe Nucl, or {pindle of a winding flaire; alfo, the
. monld thats within a pecce of ordnance when it is cafls
alfo,the nane of a whicele ; alfa, the brisket of a Deere;
Fendre f.
. Fendreaunoyau. To take th’effay of a Deere.
Noyé: m.ée: Drowned, id 2 or flifled with ;
ouerwhelmed in, the water : (A Bowler is faid to be
noyé,when bis bowle toncheth tend of th’ Alle, for
then it is out of play.)
Noyé en debtes, Sunke, undone, ouer fhooes, out at
… beeles,ouer bead and eares,in debt.
Les bons nageurs font dla fin hoyez: Proy. Good
 fivimmers are in thend orewbelmd, oe
< Kkkiÿ . Noye-|


Go “gle


f


i
—_—*


CS MO at”


N O Y
Noyement : m. 4 drowning,
Noyer :m. AWallñut tree. |
Noyer. To drowne;to whirken,or flifle with water,erc; |

| Lo ouervwbelme in,or plunge under tbe water.

. Cen’eft rien, ceft vne femme qui fe more" Prov.

3 A woman drownes her felfe,no force,

Qui a à pendre n'a pas a Moyer : Prov. “Hee thats
borne to be hanged needs feare no drowning

| Quand vn chien fenoyechafeun luy offre à boire:

Prov.Looke Chien. -
Noyeraie :£ A groue,or Orchard of Wa Unut trees,
Noynce. The kauckle of a finger ; (an old word.)
Noylctte:f. A finall aut, or Hafle mut.
Noylettier: m. 4 Hafle,or finall-nut tree,
No fieux. for mon fits; My foane : (Pic.
Nu..as Neud,.

| Le nud’ vne Colonne, The fhaft ofa piller, being
(for che moft par Lene os and bare of any ARR

Nu. as Nud; Naked,

Nuinu Meerelp, sesmediately direélly, without
mefne or means.

Nuage: m.# Nuée 30r,Atbicke, and lormie-threate~
ning clowd ; alfo, a reprefentation of thaive , or of
clowdes, in paintings alfo, a fhadowing (with " darke
colours upon lighter of the fame kind ; for if it be with
colours of another kind, it is not tearmed Nuage,bat
Muration,or,Changement.)

Nuag e de cc corbeaux: A great flight of Rawens, ob.

5 fare he skie with their thicke rahkes, .

Nuager. To clowd,beclowd,ouerclowd ;t0 Jade, ob-
feure,onercaft,as with clowds,

| Nuageux : m.eufe : f. Clowdie, fill of thicke cvs,
Nuañce:f. 4 fhadowing(with colours of one kind.)
Nuiux: m. Clowds, ;
Nubile scot, Mariageable.

Nubileux :m.eufe: £Clowdie ; mévi s flormie, tem


nities £ A cowdinefe, overage of


—— se


>
2


weather.
Nucque :f. Then enécke.
Nud :mnuë: £.Na +. bares creer dioered


ego spoore ithont aay clothes.
tid comme vn ver. As naked as ‘ay we.)
à Mere ànud.Tobare, firipsunconer 5 defpoylesor de- |
nt of clothes,
Meu vaueyn pied nud que nul +P RO A bare font
isbetterthen none."
+ On ne pent defpouiller vn home id Prov. A
naked man cannot be fir {fs of clotbés. 28 =
Nudité:£. Nuditie nakednefe,bareneff


nertie. La
Nudofité. Lane Noda are se
Nue :£. 4 clowd. © ju


Il penfe que les ‘mies fone p la d are
shinkes the clowds are brafen fpangles ; like our ; be
Abinkes the Moone is made of greene fe.
| Nué: m.ée:F. pera paren uerfoadow Gin
Fit in, fhadowed. — gp PA À \SIBRE 1 LR
Nue: st A coma raie simpa rite | Nm *
Dead wp
: En LAPS: A
lement. Na tu meat
à d En à


| Nuit: £ The night ; alfo,darkneffe.


-Harenc de lanuic&t. A red Herring,


- En pleine nui&t. 19 the darkeft, or moft filont part
- the night ; when all is baile oben Arad vf


fink,


Nuidtamment.Nighthy; by night,im the night; or
Nuiétée :f, The (pace of a night.

Nuié&-egal: ARMES.
Nuiéteux : m, eufe : iets eke


Nuir, as Nuire,
Nuire: To burt,offend,indommage,incommodate, ny,


Nuifance: € Nuifance, burt, offence, annepanét Parme
Nuifant : m. ante: f. Hurtfiull , barmefill, Pirée,


Nuifib
Nuifif: mue »£ a Nuifane
Nucanament ss alent À:
ul: m.n None,not ot bing, !
à “alfosblanhe des Puel oe goer |


z ur Mek vaut yn er nud que nul : Power batfe
: ET fée ouvrage de nul: ‘Prov. Sécke


Ouvrages
Nullement, 12 cafe atnoband , in 1,6
-meanes in not at all.” «À so ki Pt


Nullité : 3 : Anite fee a 70-


rex


ÿ: ai Nul. |
Numerable : com. Numer abe pumber abe 4
Numereux. # Nombreux, |” "2
Numero. “The number thats He on enctie Billet in À Lote


pa Pr acquainted 3 be} Ines, hat
Numerofité oti, im V0
Numme:m. FA among the aunéient
ut three-balfepence fterl, mee,
Nannie: Maney ror, barbe Two pei, tee
Nincope i ie: Ppa: ne, A
°° Teftament nut pe pe PT a


et write, but dec ae in onda bepet ufficies wi


| Ù éd Cie)


YN Vil


Nuiétd vnlievre. The tr or 2
ing to relief. att, ot pricke f a Hare ee


Herbe de la nuict. Looke Herbe: :
when enerie one’s a |


fie fa nuit, To fell up bis bon ld. 7. 70 | |
Faire vn trou à la mich To se - a abroad a-
nights ; totrauell, or take a iourney by night ; alfo, to
away on afieddaine, or at unawares.
done gy t Prove Like unto our, take
counfell of your pillow q
Ce qui fe faitde nuict fire de Tour : Prov. The
Day bewrayés whatfoener was done by might ; ory
the day diftoners the harme that night bath done.
Contre la Le 7 $arment les limaçons : Prov.as in :
ous achetons tout fors le iour, &la nuiét: Ptov. :
we all things buy faue day and night. ju "4
uiétal: m. ale: f Nigbilie, by night,of the night.


by night enerie night.
:m. Th’ Equinottiall,


blackes filent,bufht ; (as the night.)


hinder ,doe a difpleafure unto,
<dammiage,wtong, trefpalle.


‘gnifcbiewous, offenfine , noyfome ; Feith Ae
Je : com, as Nuïfant; or elie bu LE


art |


no value,
Nulmiel fee Prov. 6 bortie without ga D.


eNully


tee.
He entend lenuniéro. He is ach righ in Late


¥ (This kind of will is no more allow
France, shied bb Eds edly se el


nee No


N Y M


Nundination: 1:64 trafficking in Faires, and Mar-
Nuptial: malessupiall dell belonging to a wed


ding.


Le paftnuptjal. That which a churchman takes for


te al se ‘of a couple,


NE A Tree of the necke af the marrow of


Nutri 4 y: f, N'utritine nur.
Nuyét. Looke Nuiét.
Ny: Neither,nor ; (and fèmetimes) or.
. Pour vn denier ny moins. ‘Byone
* loffe F baue not mich theleffe.
Nyaie: f.L4n Airie,or nea ve
yore ‘Looke Niceté,
NyShigpe as Niche.


«A LE 3 x
nine hea Yes car ub ing at a


night,


Nha m, ale: f. Nimphall; af, or belonging 105 à


N Fe £.4 Nimphe; alfoa little excrefcence,or
NRA phée: f, The water Lillie or waterRofe,


hée grande. The great water Lillie whereof
Fa ps two kinds,a white,and a yelowone. (>
Nymphée petite. The [mal water Lillie (of t two


\ kinds as well-as the great one.)
Nymphette: f. little Nimpbe.


eux: m. eufe: f. Nimpblie, Nimph-like, sh


Marre of Nimpbes.


x {


oO H of x91 tir dc }


a.


tine Cafes whence, O Pierre'retotirne, &c!


O: An eno of calling 30r the este af the ole
*O. A Coniunétion fometimes ‘Uftdin flead a


_ vec; whence; Venez O moy; Im'en vay O vous,
O.4n Interieétion of griening wondering, wifhing à
\ exclamation,derifion,contempt,eérc ; and then fieni


Ob,alas,ay me, good Lord; Ob tbat, > pifh, ft ches 3
#
Bt Gore vf nt underflood ; whence Le brâue

ul cdl L'homme de ae lin ead 40


“ TT in peeches of wonder; anid mockerie, it


É2 era rate ARR Ole mefchan
aine. Eooke Aubaine,


ialiciers: nis Foure Church. officers,viz.a Deane)


Archdeacon, Almner, and Sexton,


sdiemment: Obediently,o sobfqisioufly dutifully, * O


Obedience: f. Obedience ; or as Obeiflance.
Obedient. . Obedient,obfequions,dunifull wato.


Obei: m. ie: £ Obeyedsobferued with datie, yeblded


unto with fubmiffion.


Obcine. Looke Aubairie. +"? 110


Obeit. ‘To obey ; to obferue dutifully pee unto


ly ; to be Loa KE wions,or dutifull unto ; to ‘3
| fue vd


“one Hse erg CO
Sbeiffance: :f Obedience,obeiffance; a dusifil br.
ning of,an obfèquious unto.


ant: m.ante; been, bmi,
obféquions,or duti lente x Le
©: Grande moifion' Prowl Sete
Moiflon. 'SSRRQUUR thes dos +3,23 andy
Obel: : m, The white Popler tree. ah wamet ivdO


i nn


op like a Pyramides."
Obelon. A fallade of} penis Hop-buds, (Rab,


O Opes té: E bck tie; Bis fare
#10 a ne m. ale ont obftacle,impedimenr
Obicer. Lovke Obijcer. gutincii
ve pene expenceo
Lena Obijcer:
Obier mn: The Opt, water Elder mar Elder Dre


Obijcer. To obieét,or lay againft ; to upbrajd, or tepit in


\ the diffs, oft:


peece
Obit: m. An Obit obfequie,buriall, finer.all,


nv fell, in the middeft of a womans prinities. ac
Objurgation : f: An obiurgation, chiding, rebuke, Pe
Obepahes com. Obiurgatorie,reprebenfiue ,rebu-
Orgue. To chide,reproue,rebuke, taunt reprehend,
Oblade: f, A kind of great-eyed,and little-mouthed (ea


X° Ruffe,or Jéa Pear ch, bauing a blacke (bot on theroor's
her tayle, @Markeillois. tee


Oblat: m.'4 Souldior who growne impotent or maymed


Oblatiott: £ An oblation an offering.
Obleétation: f. Obleflation,deligbr,
Obliages:Droia dob. A Nomine pœnæ,or fine pay-


Oblia e. ARRET SN A


re es £ DATANT id ap ch


Obligatoire : com. Ob ie.
Obie: m, An ove ais bo pr A


of qh oblige ; ind; 569 male houndersor bebol-


aces À A teh es ones, sav 4


OBL


É:m. bef

eau: m. 4 ‘bb Hawke;) alfo j
Speen (Hawke;) alfo,a young minx, or

on : m, The reed 5 or toole, wher,
{iit bol ey a be flesirs °° oniba tak


biect: m. \An'obied ; the fubicat of the fight ; any
ing one lookes on direétlys any thing that is before the


Obicet de tel moings.A challenging of witnefies,


Obieétion. as Obie& ; alfo,an obieftion.


lane, Whitten tree,


theteerb with ; to reproach, lay to the charge, “caf i in


Objurgateur? m. A chider,a rebuker era reprouer,


proofe,reprebenfion blaming.


‘king, chi


ia feruice, bath maintenance or the benefit of a Monks
place, ajfigned bim in an Abbe 3 alfo, the meant’, or
Obee of a Moñke; or of füch a Puldior,

blat de religion. À Nowice,a Probationty, "©


lecher Ta oblectate, veiice delight, make
 paflime, yéeld recreation, into,” RS ft


ed it fome places\(as within'the dominion of Blois), by
Tenants, who have got Dee et or Ret formed
- their yearelie duties on en dayes. ”


dingnefe,


ets m. de: Le  Obliged pe, bownd,bounden ; be,
Obligen en neo Sub éme the rigor of the Court


Guidi bi g 2 payer bien fe doit obliger: Pro. He
PE hse ime good fecuritie. °
Oblique: « mt nique ser: fi Ent bosred,


Be pei See ol
ce Fra er
TE at: a il : =


. a ee ee ea


10 BT


Obfervateur: m.4n obferuer, marker regarder:
au obferuator monitor ,bill- keeper in Schools. à “ft
Obfervé: m,ée: f Obferued, kept, beld ; beeded, efiees
med regarded ; watched marked.


0 OBS


Obliteré: m.ée: €. Obliterated, abolifhed, worne, blot-
ted,or feraped out
Oblivieux: m. ee} Ohio frs ; alfo,cau-


fi ig forget/iuln

Oblivion: f, Obi, forgetfalne(fes unmindfulne[fe.
Obloefion: £. Sore pore ER rest erm

Oblong: m. gue: f. O Free LA ng.

Obmettre. Looke Omettn

Obnubiler. To bunbllates make clowdie, obfture, or


Patient 1m
eur: m. A befieger a beleacuerer,
ee To withfiand, refit ; gainefays impeach, let,


darken,as clowds doe the skie. Obftacle: m.4s obfiacle,impeachment Jet,bind
Obniunciation : £ A forbiddin, ing of a thing upon a fore- ont ediment. set,binderance,

knowledge, ron or likelybood of the ill fucceffe clement: m, A letting, hindering, impeaching;

thereof. re Roppingsor fhutting vp. 3


Obole:m. À balfepennie; a final come worth vij d
Tourn, 4/6, a balfepennie weight ; 12 graines among
Apothecaries, and 54 among Mintmen, and Gold:
Smiths.

Obolede Gueldres. A coyne worth ij s vj d fterl,
Ve de Horne, 75 worth fomewbat aboue xiiij d


fterl
Obole du Rhin. whereof there be diners forts of


Obftacler. To let binder, i PET ; alfa,to flo
window,Crc;) to are «Leu fe. De 0 (edeir,
Obftant, withflanding smpeaching Jetting.
Non obftant: Notwithflanding, for all that, £
Obétaque: m. ée: £Hindered,letted, impeached, with


Obltination: f Obfiinacie,wil , fel fe-mpill
bornneffe ; alfo,conflancie, pr pie oe


: different value, yet all of them betweene 22, and 27 an opinion.
‘ folz Tourn. Obftiné: mc : f.Obflinate ; wilfill, f2lewillie,opini-
Droiéd’obole. Seeke under Droid, onatiue; fii necked .flubborn; firme,cor lant, refolute,
Obémbiation: f. An obumbration,obfeurement fhad- | _ verfifing, determinately bent,
dow,or fhaddowi | Obftinéinent. Obptinately ; wifully 5 Rubbornly ; firme-


ng.
Obombrer. To obumbrate,fhaddow,obfeure,
Obre.Baftard blacke Hellebore,Langwort,Chrifis-wort,
Lyons foot,Lyons claw.
Obreptice: com. ork oer flollen, foifted i in, con-
= ucyed nimmed, filer ¢ come by.
Python: :£ An obreption ; the creeping, or flealing

10 a thing by crafiie meunes ; the getting, or ebtaining

thereof by diffimulation,or prinate coufenage.

Obreptiffement. By lealth,

à Obrise. Orob. Gold perfedly fre tryed, (Kab,

Obrophore, io of | a @Rab.

Obrué: m. ée: f Overwhelmed; couered,or buried all
ouer with eartb,@rc ; drowned, lof oppre fed,confeun:
ded,ouercome.

Obfeur: m.ure: £0b/cure; darke,mirke; duskie,glov:
mie, miflie,dimne ; alfo,fecret,clofe,miftical,di Mfed,
hard to underfland ; alfo, primate , unknowne , baft,
meane,of low parentage,of no + uration.

Obfcurci: m.ie: f. Obfeured si: denotes dscloa-
ted, _— concealed ; obnubilated, craie à in


Oblemeir. To obfcure ; raser ouercaf or caf


aig ree
sObftiner. Stubboraly to perf, or perfiwere ins wil-
filly to harden, fet,or be ha dbs thoughts onto maintaine
epee determine abfolutely, obflinately t9 bold


Obtemperation: f Obtemperation obedience,

Obtemperé: m, ée: f. Obeyed. L

Obtetnperer. To obtemperate, obey ; doe the will, ft
low the direttion,be at the commaund of,

Obrenebrer. To obtenebrate;obfture darken.


of, attaining unto,
Obese To obtaine, attaine unto, atchiene, acquire,


Obtenu: m,ué: £ Obtained; atchiewed |, gotten,attai-

nedvnto,

Obtenuë:f. 4 porche acquiftion thing obtained,
matter gotten.

Obtefter: Toobtef; coniure; bumbly,or heartily to be-
feech; alfo,to iapoke to call to witneffesor call vpon for


mccour. |


O create m. A detrattor, deprauer, backbitér)


a


mien Gane 7st lake, bide conceale ; obrubilate, en.
wrap in O trebtat jon: :f, Detraélion, deprauation, backbiting,
Ob fementsm, PAR de.


Shae To beat, firike,or thumpe ; to blunt,or make
dull; alfo,to inculcate, or repeat often; to wearie, or
cloy with words,

Obturatcur: m. 4 flopper or flutter vp.

fe ager €. An obturation, a flopping, or Soatting


Ohruibe, To Has mea ; interrupt,


ing ouerfhadowing.
eating Siar atin lily dk
y: conertly mmiftically,
Obfcurité: f Obfuritie, darknefe, dimne[e, clowdi-
: neflesduskine(fe,an ouerca g; cloféme(ft, couertneffe,
deep ; a miflicall fence, or bidden mue:


Obécration, E An obfécration, pe cecal! btus: m. ufe blunt, edsclefe; weakened
een orne fimeralorh : ota Spirit. ee ;
Loir ques s foire s 19 t. Obtafeh lly blunt
Obiéqueux: gs Obfequi rs dutiful wention: f, A meeling with; comming againfl; bap-
Pi nee cruait obedient, ee ing or channcing unto,
O nee : À Obferuance,dutie,y sk. Obrention teftamentaire. À Legacie beflowed by
anobferuation ; Buin ji chaunce,or where it was not looked fir.
dg ne tte) | Obvier. To meet with; ore Waren «thar
de bn ae w Obteraming with; te op. Pr eftall.
o fig pont COM Obumbréniée: tL Obibrated,overftedewed, sf.


iy


Go gle


Obferver. To obferue,keepe,bold ; beed,efleeme,regard; |


' br
dont: Sag ee Rhin “


Obtenement: m., 42 obtaining, acquiring, atchieuing 4


48 Obumbrer. To obumbrate,ouerfbadow,caft aniflouer,
oc | darken,obfeurt, :


Ocaigne,& Ocaine: f. Dogs leather ; or,a dogs skin
well drefféd. "1 ay
any £ An occafion ; caufe; oportunitie, fit fea-
on, 2% ge
Occafion trouve qui fon chat bat: Prov. He that
._ would beat his Cat finds a caufé for it.
Occafionnellement. Occafionally,by occafion.
Occafionner. To o¢cafion,or be the eccafion of.
Occiant: m, # Occident, > :
Occiant : m. ante: f Killing, flaying, murthering,
flaughtering. : ke
Occident. The Occident,the wef. © >”
Occidental: m. ale: f. Occidental, weflerlie, wef-
_ terne. Fi
Occipital: m.ale: £ Occipital; belonging to the noddle,
a binder part of the oot se e ;
ccire. To kill, flay,murther, laughter, mafatre.
| Occis: m. ife: £ Killed, PE qe red Laine
Occifion:f. An occifion, killing, flaying, murtbeting,
flauehtering ; alfoja murther,or flaugbter. ’
Occultateur: m. 4 concealor, or bider.
Occultation : £ An occultation,concealing hiding.
Occulte: com. Hidden, clofe, prinie, couert, concea-
led, fecret,obfcure,
Occulté: m. ée: £ Hidden,concealed,ebfured.
Occultement. Hiddenly, priuily, clofely, conertly, fe-
cretly, :
Cae To bide, conceale, couer, keepe (ecret, ob-
cure,
Occupateur: m. The occupier, poffeffor bolder enioyer
of a thing which be bath feixed. —
Cupation: f. An occupation, bufinefe,imployment ;
« alfà,an occupyingyvfing,enioying ; afeixure of ; alfo, a
diffeifin,or ufurpation. perle
Occupé: m.éc:f. Occupied, bufied, imployed in; trou.
bled held or intangled with; alfo,woon, feixed, vfur-
ped, forcibly takensviolently gotten,
Occuper. To eccupy ; to M be nd ue,


* pofselfe enioy; alfo,to win,take,vfisrpe by force;to ftixe
* on,to diffeixe one. ;

? Oëcuper aucun de. To accufé, or appeach of ; to
charge with (an old pbraf.)


Occurrence: f. An occurrence, or accident; a thing
met with matter happened in the way.

Occurrent: m. 47 occurrent; or,as Occurrence.

Occurtent: m. ente: € Occurrent, accidental, bappe-
nihg,or comming inthe way. —

Occurrer. To occurre, meet with, ‘come in place, offer
Selfe,be in the way; to happen, or fallout on a fud-

Gaines "©" 2 217%


Oceane: La mer Océane. The Ocean, or maine Sea.
Oceanique: com, Ofor belonging to, the Ocean ; refi-
=" ding,or lining in'the Maine, "© 1 9B
Oche:£ A nike nocke,or notch; the cut of a Tally, al.


__ fora little ground inclofed with a Quick-fet hedge,and
OP uit TiO '$ ob rs) L


es.

Oché: m. ée : f ed, nocked, notched ; cut as
“Tally; panera ‘ ein Figged,wapled.
Ocher. To nicke,nocke notch ; to cut,as aTally ; alfo; to
mole, fire, fam Wa, > à ;
Ocievx: m.eufe:1 Erefifill at eafe, at le:

fure,that bath Wittlétodoc, re
Ocre:m. (Pa rakitioO


i ors) Sa ai dE .
Ocrifle: f, 4 feould, fhre  uiguiet or impatie wo.
PINS, Nig : ARE “SPR. ch of
Oaëdre. À bodie, or figure of eight faces.


Go gle.


ODO


OGtante. Eightie, fourefcore.
Reguntieline, The eightieth,
ave: £. An Octane; an eighth; a tion, or the
“numberof eight.” cite cad
L'Oétave d'une fefte. The Oftawe,eight dayes,on the
eighth day after a bolyday. ;
Les oftayes en feront bien longues. The blow in-
deed is giuen,but it may be reuenged a long time bêce;
or,men are like enough to be long fencible of it, !


Octenaire. An eight ; tbe number, or a proportion of


Cight.
Otimeltre: com. Of eight moneths.
Oétobre: m. Ofober.
on Bot: eee: eight, f
oltique: f. A Staffe,or Stanzo of eight verfes,
O&ofyllabe: com, Of eight ilables Pot
OGtroy: m. 4 graunt; a grace; a priniledge conferred,
or fist giuen; alfo,free will,or good will;alfo,the craunt
of a Subjidie unto the Prince.
Deniers d'oétroy. Looke Denier.
oyé: m.ce:f. Graunted, accorded, comdefeended
‘unto; beftowed,or conferred upon, à
yer. To graunt,accord ,yeeld, confent, or condef:
cend unto ; to beflow,or cr upon,
Aflez otroye qui mot ne dit: Pro. He that fayes
nothing yeelds enough.
Mar 1 com, Eight times doubled, fixteene, twice
eight,
Oculaire: com, Ocular, per/picuous,euident,apparant,
alfo, belonging to the eye.
Veine oculaire. Part of the forebead veine ; called fo
while it accoafls the eye.
Oculairement. Per/picuoufly enidently,apparantly be-
fore the eyes.
Oculé: m.ée: f. Circumfpelt, foone-/pying, cleere-fee-
ing, fightie quicke of fight.
» Away. Rab.
Ode: f. Dyers woad ; alfo,a Poetical Ode, or Song.
Odelette: £. À fmali,or fhort Ode.
Odette. as Odelette.
Odeur: f. 42 odor, fent, finell, waft; fauor ; allo, the
oO of {melting ; alfo, an inkling, [ufpition,er doubt


ri) . Py
Ifne!’a pas en bonne odeur. He difgufts him. or
diflafis ia much ; be bath no good saa We him.”

* Demauvaife odeur. Telle chofe eft de m.0. Such


a es ds free molt unfanorie ; of ill reputati-


on; 5 thie, : 2
Odieux: m. cule: £ Hate ho be! ntra-
, tte to mans nature ; alfo,baynous, dete borvib

worthie of batred, Mr ee gate) ts
Odorant. as Odoriferant; or, finelling, fenting, **
Odorat: m. The fence,or al2,of fimelling. "
Odoration: f.2s Odorement. , FRE re
Odoré: m. ée : f Smelt, fénted, wafted,vented.
Odorement: mi, 4 /mmelling, fentiag, wafting venting 3


alfo,a finell waft, (ent,vent.
Ode cr. Tofmell, EE à :

oriferant : m. ante: f, Odoriférous, feet, pleafa

Ly finelling, fill of per fume. Cah ang


| Odorifique: ‘com. Odoriferous, 9 " . ?
| O6. Woeb ; the voice wherewith Carters ufe ta flop their
CEE CN .


Oeconomaht : m. The nr did 64 Consrolley i
of a familie ; and particularly, ge ad Fan
~ Ecclefificalt lining,or the Receiuorfbip ofthe reuenue
» thereof,during vacancie. he

écosioine : m, The Gouernor, else


hi ts: st {à


Mois li ae cle.


"7
aie ©.


ee tien Aan secede


=


déni


tes À CU
¥


re oe


.… fichted) eye. à oe unis!
Oeil de perds. A righ oriental paie Reds,


of)
-Oeilveron, A deprauation of the eyes ; when
| Brine binges eo ena pad
in en one of them er they are both of fandrie
colours ; or heir aj no og tA Yo, a


wee Ae:


OE!
of a familie, alfo,areceimer of therents of a Benefice;


erc,during vacancie,
-Jouir d'une chofe en forme d'oeconome. To pof-
Seffe a thing onely as a Gouernour or Steward thereof,
during bis owne life.
Oeconomie: f. Geconomie ; the gouernment of a fa-
milie; the rule,difpofition,or managing of boufebold af-
res. \ à
os ue ‘cate Oéconomicall; of busbandrie,
or houfehold bufineffes.
PAL nn rat ms eufe i Full of, iH ome unto, 4
maticke,and paineleffetumor,or fwelling.
ota $e A ul 2, waterifb, and ficgmaticke
Swelling which prefRed downe with the finger, retaynes
the impreffion thereof. .
Ocdipodique. Iambe Oedipodique. 4 lame, or
gowtie leg. qRab.
Oeil: m. The eye ; an eye; a fight,a looke.
Oeil d'airain. A red, fierie, /parkling eye;(Such a one
as Lyons,and the leaporous baue.)
Oeil bigarré. a Ocil veron. KA é
Oeil blaffard. Am eye whofe Chriflaline humor is
growne white, and almoft dryed up; (an imperfection
that ved old people.) y
Ocil de bœuf, The bearbe Ox-cye;alfo,foolifh Mathes,
unfauorie white Cotula,white vafauorte Camomill; al-
‘{o,an out-rrouting,or great gogle eye ; and,prouerbial-
ly, ignovance,or a weake eye ; alfo (in building) fuch an
ouverture as is made in fome roofès, and clofe walls,by a
ridge-tyle (or in the forme thereof’) to gainelight or
ayre from without, or for the voiding of finoake from
within.
Ocil de bouc. A rolling gogle eye ; alfa, an eye that
lookes a/quint upward ; an eye whofe lid couers balfe
of the ball; alfo, a fhell-fifh, called a Limpin, or Lem-
i


Ocil de carré. Afquinting fide,or leering eye; alfo, a

prowd, furbe, flatelie,or big looke

Oeil de cerf. Looke Cerf.

Oeil de chat. Purple Snapdragon, Calues {nowt (an.

bearbe;) 5 4-Cats eye ; a fight thats better in the
~ might then by day; alfo, an out-flrouting eye ; alfo, a

white fone that glifters like a flarre, and cafts an a-

xure lifter. . ns sante els

Ocil de éhevre, À whall,or ouer-wbite eye; an eye

full of tg fpots, or whofe apple feemes divided by a

eake whe.

Gall d'hypocrite. An often-twinkling eye.

Oeil deIudas. The Nut, or Fryers peece of a Leg of
Be 117) ere ee ete
Ociletene An Fabre nf fetes holds the lids

open; alfo, an eye whofe upper lid b | conuulfion. or 0-

ther bindered ‘from couering the upper part of

1 (A i> ~

Oeil de loup. A duskie,or darke eye. ACTES

Oeil de mauvais garçon. as Oeil de loup. )

‘Oeil de morué. À great,and out-flrowting (but du


WO


a kind of Fig. ai NSP EE A
Pre rat. A finall eye, pinke-eye Jittle fight. HO

rofti. A Carbuncle intheeye.
travers. A (quint,or leering eye.


are
urbe, Le


Toute pris de l ocil: Prov. Mans
doth fet a rate.on euerie thing. ree
Oëillade:£ An amorous looke,affectionate winke,wan-


Ocilladé:m, ée:f. Often, wr efitimma ed ;loe-
Ocillader. To eye often, bebold affeéhionas |
_ daftiuiouff;


O E I.


yeron eft mefchanr,ou tout bon, dit
Blanc oeil. Gens aux blancs yeux. White-linered,
faint-bearted people. {


* Blanc en l'oeil. Il n’a point de blanc en l'oeil. He
és a verie (firit,he bath not a croffe to blefe him with
Bufche en l'oeil, C’eftoit yn bufche en fon oeil.
That was a log, or beame in bis eye; an binderance to
bis fight ; that caft a mift oner bis underflanding.

Gros ocil. A (cornefill,big, furlie,or angrie looke.

Mauvais oeil. Juie Chickweed,Henne-bit,

rs de bel oeil. 4 pearle of an excellent colour, or
er ;


~ A yeux de cire, Looke Cire.
Les yeux plus grands que la panfe. One may fooner,
or bad better, fill bis bellie then his eye.
L'oeil rendu au bois. warily, vigilantly,circum/pelt-
4 5 rr: feares afurprifall ; that lookes veric well a-
wt bis.


Il a yn oeil au bois,(ou aux champs) & l'autre à 1a

ville, He lookes two fundvie wayes, er beeds two [eue

yall things,at once. ji

Il a vn oeil à la poifle, l'autre au chat, The fame; or,

a under Poifle.

Pains les yeux ; & faire les doux yeux. Looke
air


Lever l'oeil. I n'y a homme qui ofe lever l'ocil
devant luy. Ewerie one flands in wonderfull awe of
bim; no man dare quitch, or fers before him.
Il leur en pend autant en l'oeil. They are in the like
danger ; they muf one day taft of the fame fawce as
much euerie way bangs ouer their(carele[fe) beads,
Servi au doigr, & à l'oeil, Serwedatabecke ; dili-
gently attended excellently wayted on.

enir l'oeil à, To looke at fexioufly, view diligently,
obfcrue wifily,giue good heed vnto.
‘A l'oeil malade la lumiere nuit: Pro.An eye diftem-


pered cannot brooke the light; ficke thoughts cannot in-
dure the truth.


$ , > KL
‘A cœur dolent l'oeil pleure : Prov, 4 weeping eye !
_difcouers the fad heart; moift eyes mournefill heart. 4
Deux yeux voyent plus clair qu'un: Pro. Two eyes 1
~ fee better (two wits Eee more) then. one. à


L'ocil du maiftre engraïfle le cheval: Prov. See
Maitre.
Le cœur ne veut douloir ce que l'oeil ne peur voir:
Pro. What the eye cannot fee the heart will not rue.
Nul ne {gait ce qu’ à l'oeil luy pend: Pro, No man
aes what will befall bim, ov bow necrea mifchiefe
ts to him,
Orgueil n'a pas bon oeil: Prov. Pride lookes not
well on any. |
Quand les yeux voyent ce qu'ils ne virent onc-
ques,le cœur penfe ce qu’il ne penfa oncques: Pro:
: New obieéis breed new thoughts, ~
Qui n'a qu’un oeil bien le garde: Pro, Let bim that
bath but one eye keepe it well ; let bim that bath but


one helpe flrine to pre(érue it.
x peer au


« ton afpett, lu fill iert, or paffionate cafl,of she eye ; a


_ hed on wantonly winked at la

c date D, winke at

PT aga a Shee pes pets
€ ns gt


ee


a


: | Ocilladier: m. ere: fBelonging to the eye,or looke; at.
/o.eying oftea,affectionately,or wantonly, —

Ocillage de Vin. The filing up of leakie wine veffels.

Ocillarder. as Oeillader. RE

Ocillé:mée: £ Full of eyes, decked or fet thicke with
eves, like a Peacocks tayle; alfo, filled up, as a leaking
Wine veffell,


Ocillerles Vins. To fill up Wine vefels which haue lea-
hed.


nea,
Ocilleres. Bride à ocilleres. A bridle with eye-flaps for
a fore-borfe.
Ocillet: m. À little eye; alfo, an let-bole; alfo, the
young bud of atree, érc ; alfo, a Gilliflower; alfo, a
‘Pinhe.
eillet Dieu, Rofe-Campion (a flower.)
Ocillet d’Inde, The Ta bne African Marigold,or
_ Gilliflower;alfo, the French Marigold, or Gingioline
flower (which ws the fingle ju of the African.)
Ocillets de Paris, 2s Catherinettes.
Oeillet de Provence. The ordinarie great, red, and
. double Cloue-Gilliflower.
Ocilletderofette. A leffe kind of the red Cloue-Gil-
liflower, *


Ocillet fauvage. A Pinke ; alfo, the fiveet William,
de. ;
Oeillet de Turquie, @s Ocillet d'Inde,


baue their cares and fields their eyesseuerie thing bath
fome inftrument of,or belpe for,diftouerie, 1
illeté: m.éc:£ Full of eyes (like ill-preft cheefé, or
light-wrought bread;) alfô, full of oylet boles.
he eton: m. A Pinke,or [mal Gilliflower;alfo,a little
ued. ;
Ocillier: m. ere: f. Ofor belonging to,an eye.
Veine ocilliere. Seeke Veine,
Ocillieres: f, The eye-teeth,or tufhes.
Ocfipe: m. The filth, and fiveatie greafineffe of wooll
growing on the flanke, and fhoulders of a Sheepe.
Ocfon : m. The weafon,or throat-pipe.
Ocfophage: m. The mouth of the flomack;alfo,the pipe
that reaches from the mouth to the flomacke.
Och: m. The Eaft wind,or coaft.
Oeltre lunonique.4 gad-bee bor{e-flyedun-flye,brim-
fey, brixze. Kab.
| Oeuf: m. Aa egge. |
: Oeufs brouillez, Looke Brouillé. .
Ocufs de Pafques. Pafl, or Pafch-cgges, egges ginen
at Eafter; whence; |
Ils s’y attendoient comme à Jeurs ocufs de Paf:
ques. They expedted it certainely,they looked affuredly,
or grecdily, for it, :
Donner des oeufs de Pafques à toutes reftes. To
fesiameste sbelamme,belabor foundly ; to lay about bim
il)


ly,
Oeuf des Philofophes. The veffell wherein Alchy-
ph put the fluffe which they hope will yeeld the Pbi-
rs flone,
Oe ions, The /pawne of fifhes; wbences
_ Harene au LOGE, fillrawed.or bard-rowed Fr.


ring. Sr tes


Oeufs als riblette.Egges and Collops,


Serre va ? Ta To batch an wks eto
reed an ungracions child; to nowrifh an un ‘er
mifébieuous d 4 :


bee = oe poules, To count bis chickens be-


cannot be drawne to.attend,or meddle init,


Bois ont oreilles,& champs oeillets : Prov. Woods


Il n'y fera rien, nc plus quee og es oeuf.


Quitter yn bœuf pour prendre vn oeuf. Toguit a
bed Sor the gaine of a finall,thing ; to change for the
worfe.


Tondre fur vn oeuf. To quarrell without caufè, or
find a fault where there is none; alfo,to pick a game out
of a moft bare,or barren commoditie.

Vn oeuf n’eft rien ; deux font grand bien; trois ¢’
eft aflez; quatre c'ef tort; cing c'eft la mort: Pro,
One egge is none, two fomewhal, three enow; foure be
too much, fine giue a deadlie blow,

De mauvais corbeau mauvais oeuf; Pro. An ill bird
layes a naughtie eg ge;lewd creatures breed lewd crea-
sures; as the damme or fire, fuch is the race,

Mieux yaut en paix vn oeuf qu'en guerre vn bœuf:
Pro. Better is an eg ge in peace,then an Ox in warre,
Noire geline pond blanc oeuf: Pro. Looke Noir.
Tel cuide avoir des oeufs au feu qui n’a que les ef.
cailles: Pro. Logke Efcaille.

Vne belle chofe eft vn oeuf: Pro. An egg's a beau-
tifll,or goodlie thing.

Ocufmoletre, Seeke Omelette,

Oeuvance. as Ocuve; (at Blois,)

Ocuve:f. The rowe,or fpawne of a fifh,

Ocuvé : m.¢e: f. Layed,or fet on,as an egge; alfa,fpaw-
ned.

Oeuvre: f, A worke; deed; bufinelfe; labour, trawaile,
toyle ; alfo,worke,or workman|bip ; alfo,a place or part
of a Patifh Church, wherein the Church-wardens crc,
Sit together on feaftinall dayes.

Oeuvre blanche ; &, faifeur d'oeuvre blanche.

Looke Blanc.

Oeuvres fainêtes, Fmagerie, or imbofed worke, [et
jon, or appearing but balfe without,a wall.

Oeuvre de loy. An aéluall difpoffeffion,or tran(port

ofaliened Jheritances,Rents,Seruices dc, fuffered,

or paffed before the Landlord ther eofor his flewardsor
\ before other ve of the iurifdition of the place,

Oeuvre de finge. An idle, foolifh, lewd, or impure

att,

- Bois d'oeuvre. Great Timber fquared, cut outer fit.
ted for ufr.

Chef d'oeuvre: A Maifler-peece.
Dedans,ou dehors oeuvre. Within, or without the
walls of a houfe,crc; (a vvorkmanlie tearme.)

iftre des oeuvres, The Surueyor, or Ouerfeer of
the Kings workes.
Maiftre des baffles oeuvres. A Fakes-feyer.
Maiftre deshautes oeuvres. A Hangman,
Mortes oeuvres. The outfide of a Ship from the wales
upward. .


Mettre toutes pierres en oeuvre. Laoke Mettre,
‘A Poeure on cognoift l'ouvrier : Pro, One may dif-
cerne a workman by his worke. ott 3% 2)
‘A bon iour bon oeuvre: Prov, A goodlie af on a
- godlie day; or,as we fay the better day the better work;
(tis alfo eS and ina contrarie fae. he
_ bath bonoured fo good a day with a goodlie aët indeed;
(of one that on a boly day commits a baynous deed,)
Il n'eft oeuvre que d'ouvriers: Pro, There's no work)
but by workmen,rightly done. à 7»
Le cœur fait l'oeuvre non pas les grandsiieurs:Pro.
a ioe dayes, but willing bearts,that foon difpatch
abu :


Tel autheur tel oeuvre Prov. Like Author like


worke ; fisch as the writer fuch his booke, ©
Of(An Interieétion expreffing a Ter tt wary

ment, fence of paine,or of difdaine;) Ob, Abyalas; out,

fisfarrebeit. Say


Of


Let. hr 526 "AT np


=
1


Oo F


Offence: f. as Offenfe.

ence: m. éc : f. as Offenfé,

Offencer. as Offenfer.

Offencible. Looke Oftenfible,

Oftendre.To offend, ronge | | PER
doe {cathe unto,

Offenfe: f. Offence, shurt, (cathe, harme, wrong, iniurie,
dammage,difpleafure; “alfoya crime, fault, o ence,tref.
pa(fe.tran/greffion,
frenfé: m. ée: f. Offended, burt,wronged,iniured.

Oftenfement: m. Az offending, difpleafing, burting,


wronging iniuring.

Offenfer, To offend, burt,wrong, iniure, abufe, barme,
damni pr dre fcathe unto.

Offenfible: com, Offencible, burtfill, indommaging,


dangerous.

Offentif: m. ive: f. Offenfinesburt fill difpleafing,tron-
blefome noifome,or dangerous unto, à

Offerte: f. An Offer,an Offering.

Offertoire: m, 42 | Offertorie (ia the Mafe,érc.)

Offeux: m. eufe : £. Soppie; or full of lumpes, or gob-

bets.

Office: f. An Office;finétion, magifiracie,dignitie,(pub-
licke) charge; ie mans dutie; alfo,an office, kind-
neffe, pleafure, feruice, good turne done one ; alfo, di-
uine Seruice,

Offices extraordinaires. Are thofe that concerne the
Finances, Aides, Tailles,and falt Garner's.

Offices ordinaires. The Offices of ordinaric Fuflice,
and of the Kings Demaine.

Caufes d'office. The canfes which concerne a Lord
Tufticier.

Greffier d'office ; &, Procureur d'office, A Lord
Fullicers Clarke; Atturney, or Prottor,

icial: m. An n Oficial a Commiffariesor Chauncelor
to a Bifba

O oo spa An 0 cer; alfo,a Magifirate; al/o, a Ser-
geant,or Catchpole,

Officiers d'armes, Heralds,of all forts.

Qui ie fois ae cier au moins d'un moulin : Prov.
Let me be an Officer though it be but of a Mill : make
the King an Officer,and be will fone grow rich;(quoth
an old Preacher in Edward the fixts time.)

Officier. To fap Seruice in the chureb alfo,to work,im-
play,or bufie bimfelfe about, = >

jeux: m. eufe: f.: Officions, dutiful, feruiceable,
diligent, courteous, _friendlie, readie at call; willing te
doe pleafuressor good offices.

Officine:f. Aworkboufè,or fhop. 21: ©:

pe: f. An Pr se

Offrant: m, ante: f, Offering, ing.

Au plus offrant. To him that bid ifs

Offrayc : m. The great water fimleclid an Ofprey.

€: m. An


Or. To cheba alfo, to prefent, or exbi-


nage ; a dimming obfcuring,


Our offre Bache dirt dim,


CRE
Ogee in Archite
Ode: Eide Obpefegr ;


OH nm te


-Go gle


Ohié: m.ée: f. (raxie,diflempered, ficklie,ill- dpi,
Ohier.To es Can ficklie or craxie;to weaken,en-


Oho. Crea) Oho ? is it euen fo ? is it fo indeed?
Oignement: m, Az oyle,or ointment ; alfo, an annoin-


Oi non: m. An O


m.éc:f. Offufeated,obfeured, blackened, | “On


Gunne-bullet dll;


O0 IG


ee,or feeblenefe of the bodie,
int, feeble,weake.


ecble,ma


in


nyon.
ignon de bois, The wild flarrie Facinth, or (vow-

toes.

Oignon de chien, Dogs Leeke, the bufh Facinth, or
tuft Facinth ; alfo,as Porreau de chien.

Oignon fendu. 4 Scallion.

Oignon de mer. The Squill,or fea Onyon.

L'oignon du pied, The (bunchie, or out-bearing) root
of the great toe; the flefbie part of the fole of the foot
at the root of that 10e.

Oignon fauvage. The Squill, or fea Onyon ; alfo,the
wild d field Onyon, Bulbine, wild Bulbus, Corne Leeke,
wild flarre of Bethlem; alfo,the Learbe that beares the
purple Jacinth Vaciet.

Oignon fe@il. 4 Scallion.

Oignon teftu. The ordinarie garden Onyon,

Il ya a de l'oignon. There is a padin the flraw,there’s
Simewbat amie among them.

Se mettre en rang d’ojignon,& ne valoir vn’efcha-
‘lotte. To indge too well ofhimfelfe, to take too much
upon him; to ranke bimfélfe with, or compare birfelfe
 to,bis betters.

i? ain,& oignon trompette,ne clairon : Pro.See

Clairon,

Apres Pafques, & Rogation, fy de Preftre, & d’oig~
non: Prov. After the weeke of Eafter, and Rogation,
a Priefl,and Onyons are abhomination.

Si tu te trouves fans chapon, fois content de pain
&d'oignon: Pro.lfthou want a (apon, fall to bread
and an Onyon; or,let not the want of dainties difton-

tent thee.

Oignoncettes: f. Cines, Chines, rufb Onyons,

Oignonnerie. as Oignonniere,

Oignonnet: m. ‘The Onyon Apple,or Peare.

Oignonnette: f. A Scallion; or,a wild Onyon.

Oignonniere :.f. 4 Bed, Plotor Garden of Onyons.

Oillet. Seeke Oeiller,

Oince: f. À Hawkes Pounce; (and thence) a hooke ; and
(as in Rab.) aband, or fifi; alfo, the beaf called an
Ounce,or Linx.

Oin&: m, a Oing,

Se m4 oinéte: f. Annointed, greafed, befmeared,
‘ineered,

Oindre. To annoint, greafe,befineare, fineerc.

Oiguez vilain il vous dra: Pro.{Like our home-
lie one) claw a churle by ee breech,and be will fhite ia


LA


\ Jour fi. /
~ Charité oingt,& : Prov. srt an-
nointeth, finne ue 1 itie quiets the heart,
ie de ule. |
| ses le culoindre:Pro. |
weal tot FEI Sow inch etayle,
:m.(B afè,or feame ; fineare.


€ Selfe-beale, Hooke-beale, Sicklewort,
_ Brunell Prunell,Carpenters bearbe.

| Oingture: f. An annointing,begreafing,befinearing;al
Joan ointment,
En li de chien n'y a point d'oingture: Prov. The
"| kennel of a dog fmells not Bh Cuers.

| Oinze. An Ounceor Linx. @Rab Oi
l=


Oifeau: m, 4 bird,a fowle; and (particularly}a Hawke;
alfo, a Hodd ; the Tray wherein Mafons, Gc, carrie
their Mortar. ‘

Oifeau de bec. A bungrie, or greedie Parafite ; one

in whom there is nothing but words.

Oifeau dunette. 4 Thrufh.

Oifeau de S,Martin, 4 Ring-tayle, or Hen-barme.

 Oifeau de meurte,ou de nerte. A Mirtle Thrufh.

Oifeau de Paradis. Looke Paradis,

Oifeau de proye. A Hawke,or Kite.

Langue d’oifeau. 4fhenkeyes.

Pain d’oifeau. Stone-crop; Stone-bore, Moufe-tayle,

wild Prick-madame, Jacke of the Buttrie.

Parler comme vn oifeau en cage. To babble, tattle,

chatter, talke much to little purpofe.

Oifeau debonnaire de luy mefme fe fait: Pro. The

gentle Hawke(balfé)makes,or mannes,ber felfesa well-

bred perfon is of a vertuous difpofition, needes not

much tutoring, will of bimfelfe be good.

L'oifeau gazouille felon qu'il eft embecqué: Pro.

A manvfially fpeakes as bis bumor moues,gaine leads,

or paffion urges him or (like a good bird)he vtters oné-

ly that which he was bid.or taught,to fay.

“A tous oifeaux leurs nids font beaux : Pro. To eue-

rie bird ber neaft feemes faire; moft men like boufes of

their owne contrining.

D'oifeaux,de chiens,d’armes,& d’amours,pour yn
laifir mille douleurs: Pro.Looke Amour,or Armes,
el oifeau tel nid: Pro. Like ayerie like Hawke; {uch

as the bird fuch is bev neaft.


Vieil oifeau ne fe prend à reths: Pro. The old(inex-


perience) are not fubieët to furprifalls.

Nid tiflu oifeau envolé: Prov. Tis 4 figne that the
birds are floven when Spiders build ouer the neafl. _
Qui veut prendre vn oifeau qu'il nel effarouche :
Pro. Deale geatly with the bird thou mean’ ft to catch;
be not too har{h to thofe thou faine wouldft win, >’
Trop tard crie l'oifeau quand il eft pris: Pro.when
mifchiefes are befallen complaints auaïlenot.

Oifel. as Oifeau.

Oifeler, To fall a birding,or flye ont at birds, like a gid-
die,or ill-made Hawke. :
Oifeler vn faulcon fur la grue. To flefh or fly ber vp-
on ,to make or lureber unto , the (rane.

ey > f. Fowliag, bird he, bird-catching ; a

ping ator preying on,birds.

Oifelet: tn. A bte bir.

Oifeleur: m. 4 Fowler or Bird-catcher.

‘| Oifeleur: m. eure: f. Ofor belonging to,abird. —

Oifelier. as Oifeleur; alfo, a keeper (or one that bath

the charge) of birds, or of fowle.
Oifeliere: f. as Oifelerie ; alfo, a cage for birds,a coope


for fowle.

Oifeux: m. eufe: f Either, floathfull, fluggifh, full of
idlene(Jé , whence;

Fille oifeufe rarement vertuëufe: Prov.

Oifif: m. iue: £. Lither laxie, floathfill, idle, negligent,
retcblee ; languifbing; that hath but little to doe, or if
be bad much,would doe but little.

Fille oifive à mal penfive: Pro:Looke Fille.

Oifillon: m. A young bird,or finalt bird.

Il bat le buiffon fans prendre l oifillon. He beats
a bufband gets not abird; much fruitleRe paines be
takes. . Se a : aC

Oifivement. Litherly,laxily, loathfiully idly.

Oifiveté: £ Re mue o | en) , laxinefe; neg,
ligence,retchlefnefe ; aljo,reftvacancie; a langnifbing,
or burtfull eafe, LE \


Oifon: m. A greene-Goofe, or young Goofe; a Golling.
Oifon bride. 4 La qu ninnie pedis, sis
La mort aux oifons, Heñbane; alfa, Hemlocks.

Pied d’oifon. Goofé-foot, wild Oracbe,
Fourni d'entendement comme yn oifon de crefte,
As wife asWaltams Calfe.
Oifon yerd bon, grifon gueres bon : Prov. See
Grifon.
Loifon n’eft pas digne de monftrer les pafquis à ?
oye: Prov.(.4 checke for young men that prefume to
teach their elders.)
Les oïfons menent paiftre les oyes: Prov. (Said
when Jubieëts gouerne their Princes,cbildren their pa-
rents, meane men the Magifirates, and feruants or
Schollers their maifters ; and is a note as welt of weake-
neffe in the Geefe,as of farecinefe in the Goflings.)
e meine loifon paiftre: Proy. The Goofe leads
e Gofling to the field ; ( contrarie tu the for-
and an argument of a well-proportioned gouern-
ment.

Oittre. as Huiftre.

Oiftriere. Locke Huiftriere.

Olcagineux: m. eufe: £. Oylie, full of oyle ; alfosof an

Pers ver tree.
leaginité: f. Oylineffe,or an oylie fubflance.

Oleardre. The Rofe tree, Rofe Bay, ba Lawrell, Rofé
Bay tree. :

Oleaftre : m. 4 wild Oline tree.

Olecrane: m. The end, or tip of the elbow ; alo, the el.
bow it felfe.

Oléeux: m.eufe: f. Oylie, full of oyle,

Oliban:m. Olibanum; Frankincen{e in drops; (igno-
rant Apothecaries tearme a kind of Rofèn, great Fn-
censor Thus; and the right Incens,Olibanum:where-

* as Olibanum (in Greeke Libanos) and Thus be but
one,and the fame thing.)

Oliette: £, Poppie,Chefbolls,or Cheeft-kowles. qWal-

on.

Oligarchie: f. An Oligarchie; or, the abfolute gouern-
ment of a few principall men.

Oligophore. Vin ol. weake,or fmall Wine ; fitch as can
beare but little water,

Olimpiade. as Olympiade,

Olivaire : com. Of an Oliue ; like an Oline.

Cautere olivaire. See Cautere.

Olivaftre: m. A wild Oline tree.

Olive: £ Aa Oline ; alfo,as Canepetiere.

Okvete:f, 4 ground,or grone of Oline trees. £

D de :f A litile Oline; alfo, a little Oline-bitt for a

or fe. : 7

Olivier: m. An Oline tree. roses 137
Olivier domeftic. The mannred\Oliuerree.
Olivier. Ethyopic. The wild Olive tree of Ethyo-


Il a tous fes oliviers courans,Hebath kus fill fivindge
or libertie,be doth what be lift. k

Olivot: m. 4 great Oliue,

Olle: £ 4 feetbing pot.

Ollonnes. as Aulonnes: .

Olmeau: m. Ayoung,or little Ele, À

Olometre. An Inflrument wherewith all kind of dinie-
ions are,or all a thing may be,meafured. by got

Olonne:£ Canuas for thé (ayle of a flip; (asin Aulon-
nes;) and fometimes alfo the fayle it (élfe,

Olphe. The Matt-rnfh,or Matt-weed, Proven }

Olybrius: m.The name of a fivaggering Worthie menti-
oned in fome of the Romans (or old,and fabulous Poe-
Jies,or Hiflories) of France. - à CPAS PEUT

LI


‘Faire |


-
£
À


ONC


Omioteeis Alike-founding claufes,or clofes,
Omnis: m. ile: £, Omitted, pretermitted, baulked, ouer-
pt uerpafedsneglee, gotten;left ont left undone,
miffion : f.4z omiffion;baulking,ouer lip,ouerpaffing ;
forgetting,or neglect of; a leaumgout,or letting goe.
mitton: m. as Aumuce; a fired Ornament worne
on nr asa
mniforme: com, Ofjor hauing,all kind of {hapes,
Omnigene : com. Of all kinds ; chanel a ab. |
Omnimode: com, Jnfinite in meanes ; of cuerie way. !
Omnipotence: f, Omnipotencie, almightinefe,
Omnipotent, Omipotent,almigbtie,all-able.
Omoplates: £. The fboulder-blades, Rab.
Omphacin. Huileomph. Oyle made of greene, or-un-—
ripe Olines.
Omuffe. as Aumuce,
On. (Such a Particle as our One, or fomewhat more ge-
nevall,and the figne of a Verbe Fmperfonall,or imper- :
Sonally vfed ; whence;)On ditymen fay people talke,its
reported ; & on le voit par experience; men site itor
we {ee it, by experience.
Opsness m.ere: f. Of a wild Affe.
as MAR) A verie fifi pace ; (for fucha one
ba the wild A
Onc. (4a Aduer bah time;) euer at any time;alfonener.
Once: f. An Ounce,in weight; alfo, the fpotted Ounce,or


Fairel'Olybrius.To /wagger or play the terrible Roi-
fer; to pretend great À ag talke as if no bodie were
able to fland before bim.

Olyinpe. Heauen (among Poets.)

Oly 1 Are f. An Olympiade;the {pace of foure Libre

he fiftie moneths (cach meneth containing thirtie

pas

Otnaille: £ Great cattell ; as Oxen,Kine,@rc.

Omale: m. The thicke, and fattie part of a Bullockes
gl Some alfo take it for a fat Tripe, or Chitter-


Ombelle: f. A little fhadow; alfo, a fafhion of little
round fanne ; or as Ombrelle,

Oinbilic. as Vmbilic.

Ombilical.as Vmbilical.

Ombrage: m. Anvmbrage ; a fhade; 4
fosiea af Ge, fisfpition,an incling of; whence
Donner ombrage à, To difcontent ; me
or put buxxes into the bead of. tae

Ombragé: m.ée: f. Shaded, foadowed; ¢ vec
fcured, D auerfhadowed ; alfo, put into a Flers st dif
truf.

Ornbragement: m. 4 fhading,or fhadowing.

Ombrager. To fhade or fhadow ; to caft a re, a 0%, or
giue foadow vnto ; alfo,to coucr, darken,obfcure ouer-
call; alfo,as Donner ombrage à, Ombrage.

Ombrageufement. Obfturely, darkly, conertl ; af,
icaloufly; waywardly, skittifbly.

Oinbrageux: m.cufe: f. Sadie, fhadowie,couert, full
of fhade ; obfcure, darke ; al/o, rt 2 ; iealous,
(ufpitious, alfoggiddie,skittifbsbirdoeye often. farting,
or flarting at euerie feather,

Ombraire: m, 42 Vmbrello,or fhadow.

Ombre: f. A fhadow; alfo, a fhade,or conert; alfo, a
colour, cloake, vale, pretext, or pretence for; "allo, as
Vmbre.

Combatre fon ombte.To fight with bis own faire
to be angrie to no purpofe, or take paines in flriuin
gainft no refiftance ; alfo, to deuife new matters pe
terwards inueigh againf them; alfo,to reuile,or threa-
ten,the abjent. — Sai
~ Courir apres fon ombre. To runne after bis owne
‘ow; to {pend bis time verie

_ ALuiGter cétre les ombres.as Combatre fon pute,
Se mettre à l'ombre des pr . To fhrowd bim-
felfe under the fhade aie Tate te ipinto a Tauern,
Sous ombre d’afne entre chien au moulin: Prov,


Il n'y a fi petit buiffon qui ne porte ombre: Pro
The Hot 19 bathit Mate: The lies;

Vn poil fait capone te Prov. A haire makes a

the fn things bane their fhadowes ; viz. their y


Ombre Labs rf " Vmbred, or fadowed; (atearme of
bubble, or a wallop or two.
Onnbrele: : f. An Vmbrell ; a '(fafbion of) round, and Ome m.¢e:fiwaued ; furging,wauing ; alfo,fireaked,
_ broad fanne,wherwith h the Indians ( (and from them our


Seal games n the beat of afeor- QU pond ine rames,


‘aime
QE Le ai ia


Onde. tamer pre downs masse


sat :£ Alittle wane, « final billow.
Onder. To wane ; 10 mete Plaites,orfreakes like mes


{


… Litre
L'once de l'année, A moneth.
Oncial: m. ale: £ Of, or belonging to, or weighing as
“much as,an Ounce; whence;
_ Lettres onciales. Huge letters great letters.
Oncle: m. An Vncle.
_. Celuy eft bié mon oncle qui le ventre me comble:
Pro. He is my necref! Prend iat fills my bellies or be is
my kindefi-unckle who doth feed me,
Gade. as Ongles,
Oncques.(.An Aduerbe of time) neuer.
Onétion: f, V’aétion,an
Onétion feable, Seeke Feab
Huile d’onétion. The bolie,or re Ople,vfed,by
the Church of Rome in Baptifine, Gr Extreame Vnélion.
Onétuëux: meule : f F td Ointments; alfo,annoin-
ting ; alfo,oylie.fattie,grea
Ondtuofité: £ Pre opine 5 greafinefe, fatti-


ond t Diond. whence; wbereby. €Rab.
a à dire d'ond venez vous. Extreamely,excee-
exceffiuely;unmeafurably. €
onde? £, A waue; billow, furge * the fea alfo, the
_ tumbling tricke of touching the ground with the h hands,
and then comming ouer topfie turuie, diuers times to-
etber.
Caipeloe Jondes. water Chamlet.
Bouillir vne onde.. Te boyle awhile , or but forone


o-


ONG


L’Ondoyante plaine, The Sea,

Ondoyé: m. ée:£ Waued, farged, floated ; fivolne

| Per er one, f hat an ad

_ 1 Ondoyeinent : m. A waning, furging, floating ; a

À fwelieg with billowes ; alfo, a dangling, flickering, or
gentle moning,in the wind. ,

| Ondoyer. To waue; to-furge; to rife in, or fivell with

billowes ; i sto float ; flicker,dangle, or moue gently,

in the wind. A

Ondoyer vn enfant, Tochrifien a weake child pri-

|  uatelypwrinachamber.

| Oneraire: com. Of burthen, for carriage, that ay be

| _ laden; whence, Nefs oneraires.

} Onereux: m. eufe: f. Onerous, burthenfome, beauie,
weightie,chargeable.

- A titre onereux. Acquerir vne maifon &c, à titre
onereux. To buy a houfè, cc, thats lyable unto an
yearelie rent anmuitie, fine, or fubieët unio fundrie du:

| _ ties,or other charges.

Onglade:£.4 fératch,or paw with,or the print,or marke
of, nayles ; a nayle-marke. \

Ongle: f. The nayle (of a veafonable,) the claw ,boofe,or

tallon (of an unreafonable) creature.

Onele cabaline. The hoofe of a borfe; alfo,the bearb
Horfe-boofè,(olts-foot,Fole-foot,Bull foot.

Ongle odorant. Vnguis odoratus. A long,finall,and
Smooth [hell (of a fifh) vfed in perfumes.

Ongle d’une rofe. The nayle,root,or white bottome of
the ied of a Rofe.

Goutte fur l'ongle. Boire la goutte fur l'on. To
drinke all but a drop to couer the nayle with.

Sang aux ongles. Il a du fang aux ongles. He à
refolute, valorous, couragious ; there is good mettall,
pith,or (laffe,in bim. :

Conduire à l'ongle. To finifh,or bring unto perfedti-
on ; toleane no iot vadone of.

Conieéturant le lion par les ongles. Ayming at the
whole by a little part; or,as under Lion. ,
Couper les ongles de prez à, & Rongner les ong-
les a. To clip ones naples fomewbat neere ; to bold him
Short, to weaken,or difarme him,to take away from bim
all meanes of doing barme.

Ilseft rongné les ongles à l’eftude de. He hath
beaten bis braines exceedingly,or weakened his bodie
extreamely,in the fludie of,or care about.

C’eft belle bataille de chiens & des chats, chacun a
des ongles: Prov. Faire és the [lrifé when both-are
arm d alike. ;

Onglé: m, ée:f. Nayled; booféd; clawed, talloned,
farnifhed with nayles,@rc.

Onglée: fAche of the fingers ends im extremitie of cold

weather ; alfo, apainefull flipping of the flefh from; or

Swelling of it ouer,the nayle; alfo,a web in a mansyand

the Hawe in a horfès, eye.

Ongler.To fratch,or marke with a nayle.

Onglet: m. 4 little nayle; booft,claw,or talon,

0 de pourceau. Hogs-feet finged, then fodden


till they be verie bard, and then boyled betweenc two

difbes with veriuice,vineger, pepper and onyons,

Onguent : m. 4a unguent, ointment, or oyle ; any fat
thing fit to annoint with,

Onguent Apoftolorum. 4 certaine deterfive falue

compounded of twelue Jngredients, Oe

Es petites boiftes met on les bons onguens: Prov.


Men put in little boxes precious ointments ; little men
bane many times Hes x3
_| Onguentaire: com, or belonging to,ointments,


Go gle .


untill they be verie tender, then broyled on a gridiron


QO.4P "HH


Gland onguentaire. See Gland,
Onicocrite : m, 4 Iudger of dreames. Rabi
Onicocritique: com. Judging of dreames,
Oniropole: m, 47 expounder of dreames,

Onitide: £ wild Marierome, groue Marierome.

Onoctotal: m. 4 Swan-like bird that brayes like an

Affe; (or as er
Onopire. Loofe-flrifè, willow bearbe,or hearbe willow.
Onoinantie: £ Dinination by names; alfo, the skill of

repeating many names by the art of Memorie,

Onomatopofe: f, The faining of a name; or a word

made by a certaine found,

Onothomantie: f Dinination by a mai name.

Onques. (An Aduerbe of time;) neuer,

Onques.mais. Neuer,at no time,nor tyde.

Onques-puis. Never after,at no time after.

Onse des doigts. The fingers ends under the nayles,

Onyche: m. The Gemme called an Onix.

Onymiantie:£ Dinination by Oyleand wax, ERab.

OnZain: m,A fmall,or bafe coyne,worth x jd Tourn.

Onze. Eleven.

Cercher midi ou il n'y a qu’onze heures. Looke un-

der Midi.

Onziefine, The eleuenth.

Opacité:f Opacitie, fhadineffe, vmbrage, obfiuritie,

. duskineBe, gloomineffe,thick-darkneffe.

Opale: m. The Opall fone.

Opaque: com. Duskie, gloomie, obfcure, thicke and

8 go thicke-fhadowing ,blacke.

Operateur: m. An Operator,a worker; alfo,a Quack:

saluer ,Cheater,Impofler (called fo at Tours)

Operatif: m. iue: f, Operatine,working.

Operation: f. An operation ; worke; a working doing,
labonring, trauelling.

Operer. To operate,worke; labowr,trauell; doe; aét,
hiale: £ A fore which fretting the shin of childrens
eads, maketh their baïre fall off in diuers places ; it

Fri begins bebind,and eats on forward vato the

rhead,

Ophioétene. 4 kind of the many-legd Scolopendra,

and a mortall enemie to Serpents.

Ophiogene: m. The wild Parfénip called Elaphobof-

cum,or Harts fodder.

Ophite: m. A kind of marble {potted like a Serpent,

Ophraye. as Orfraye.

thaliniie: f. A(red,and painefull) inflammation of

7 vance skin of the eye; and confequently of the

whole eye.

Ophthalinifte: com, The vttermoft shin of whofe ef?

is inflamed. x :

iat. as Opion:

iate: m. An Opiat; a cordiall Eleciuarie, *
Opier: m. The Ople,water Elder, Dwarfe plane whitten

tree.

Opilation: f. 2s Oppilation, —

Obiler. Seche Op

Opinant. Opining,deeming,cenfuring, délinering bis 0
7721072,

Conteillers opinans, The Afiftants of a Court,
Opination: £.47 opination opting opinion-deliuering,

alfo,opinion,iudgement, fancic, imagination; fame, re-

putation.

Opiné: m. ée:f. Opined; argued, diftuffed; cenfured,

delinered as an opinion. ’

Opiner. To opine; argue; cenfure; utter bis mind, fay

what be thinks, deliuer bis opinion or aduice,in,

: Onopine. Sentence is in gining,

Opineur: m. 44 Opinor ; one that deliners bis opinion.

L l 1 “* ~ Opi-


1


y


[we oe es,


«
;
e


Thee idea 1 aly’


OP :10


Opiniaftre : com, Opinionate,opiniative,obftinate wil-
full, (elfe-vaillie wedded to bis owne hutmorsyconceited
of bis ovene indgement, frowardly fending wrong,
or ill opiniog.

Opiniaftre comme vne mule, 4s wilfully moodie,
as a Mules

Opiniaftrement. Opiniatinely,obftinately, wilfully or as
one thats wedded unto his ovne peruerted will.

s'Opinialtrer. To be opinionate wilfiull ,obfinate ; lift
to inaïntaine,beadiy to ftand ta,or adbera ote (an ill
opinion.)

Les fievres s’opiniaftrerent fur moy. Very much
ae ale uponme, or bent or fetled.themfelues to af-


O ftreté. f Opiniatiueneffe wilfllne[feobfinacie,
heudindes a head{lrong maintaining of, or perfiflance
in,(an ill opinion.)

Opiniaftrie, & Opiniattrife.as Opiniaftreté, :;

Opinion : f.Opinton ; thought concert imagination; fier
mifeconieclure, fuppofall, gueve,weening ; al/o,an opi-

nion,aduife, or fav ; and, a cenfure, fentence, doome,
indgement ; alfo, the prettie game which we call Pur-
ofes.
(el de teftes autant d'opinions: As many wen
fomany minds ; as many humors as beads,
Opion: oe Opium; the bardencdinyce of garden Pop
ie heads. a
Opiltogesphes: f. Papers wr itten vpoa œ both fides


quor which iffiseth frum the wounded on tree ;
|  Looke Bafme.
Opobafine. a Opobalfame,
Opocalpafe: f, 4 kind of poyfom wherewith Mirebe is
(t00 often) fopbiflicated,

Oportet.( 4 Latin Imperfonalljit oughtsit mulirehences
Quand oportet vient en place il n'eft rien qui ne
fe face : Pro. That which mut be will be; abfolute au-
thoritie,or urgent necefitie, are excellent workmen.

Oppilatif: m. Oppilatine objtruttine, flopping,

Oppilation: : f. dn oppilation,or.objivudlion. : :

Oppilé:m.ée: £ Obfiruéted, Popped, lub ep,

Oppiler. To opsob rut, fout vp.

Opportun: mune:f, Timelie, feafonable, fy right
comenient ; commodious.

unément.Opportunely, timely, feafonably; fitly,
rl de in good time sight in the wikis inftvohen

- it fhould be.

©pportunité: f. Opparurite fafnablenpe ime

; J penance À of place; a good occafion.


withflander; contraditior.
Opposé: m. ée: f. Oppofed,reffed,orvhftod 3 obicéled
vato, protefied again|t.
sOppofer.To oppo/e bimfelfe; rorefilwihflandsgcines
of ; to obiedtexcept,or protefl again. .


ofite : corm 9 pete aduer{e,in sian withye>
4 Le ion: f. eee |


mene TO
; om ur ane,


MMA


= = Fe, mnt.


Te by CO: gle


Oppugnation: f.. An oppugnation; affault, batteries |


Opobalfame : m, Opobalfamum, the pce erg


Oppel m. An Oppofant, or Opponent a refer : Or eft


tine «if | are theres. co . |
Seales then,therefore,.. : 25
ça. Now then,or goe 10 ; Or by tqninvehtinn | asin
| outbe Caden, Maur 6 Le
| Or donques: then. CEA


exactions, or taxations, — —
effion: f,: Oppreffion; BARS secraginast
an vnreafonable furcharge ; a grieuous burtben,taxa- |
tion exa tion; or the impaling afany of them C1
Diprees as Oppreffer.
Opprobre:m.Areproach; a defindsarie pias
checke ; a Aifpractfill twit, upbraiding,reniling s dle-.
ost Ht rayling,
Opprobrier. To reproach ; to taunt, rebuke, checke de-
Spight filly ; difgracefilly to vpbraid, caft in the tite
twit in the teeth,


Oppugnateur: 42 oppugnator ; affaulter, batterer, te
Sieger ; refifler ; wrong-doer.


siege ; open refi) fiflance,
Oppugné: m.€e: LOppugned; affaulted, battered, be- |
seged; fought,or contended with; openly refifled.:
Oppugner. To oppugne ; batter,affiult,befieges refif,or |
mand sey : habe bard,reafon eagerly labor ear-
4gainit. |
Opter, To Qu à ru 3 alto wifh,couet defre.
alnie. 4s Ophthalmi
Option: £. Optiam aleCtion cheiees alfo,a wifh,or defire.
Optique: & An\ Art whereby the reafon oF fight is
knowne.
tique: com. -Ofor belonging to,the eye-fight.
oT optiques. The finewes from which the eyes |
~~ their fight.
pul eminent, Wealtbily richlyabundantly.
ulence: f. Opulencie,wealth,riches ; plentie, flore,or
abundance of meanes,
Opulent: m.ente: f Opulent,wealibie rich, well ly- |
ned,abundant in meanes.
rae a as Opulemment.
Opufcule: m. A litrle Worke ; fmall Booke, fhert Trea-
Life. ;
Or: m, Gold,
Or d'Ailemaigne, A kind of bafé Gold, the ff vd
- = whereof is Silver.
» Orblanc.as Ord Allemaigne,
+ Or de Clitie. The Marigold,
Or en paille, ou de paillele. Dent Geld, or Gold
beaten thinné for Spanglés; Looke Paillole.
Or de pepin. Round, or maffie graines of Gold.
Orras. Smooth Gold, Venice fluffe.
Or Tholofain, 4 difmall, or wnluckie poffefion; ( fir
. enerie one thathad it perifhed.) -:
Or traïét. Goldwyre. 1
‘Theft de bas or, ile craindlatouche. He is a counter ;
fire feares to be tryed.
phd qui or vaut : Pro. Tis Gold thats well Gold,
‘A l'or le feu fort, au fort bras la luiéte: Pro, Loske
Bras.
Nul or fans efcume. No Geld without fame droge.
Dans vne gaine d'orvn coufteau de plomb: Prov: ,
A ro heartunder a rich habit.
5 is NE On or; quide vertu que


On dr ans on,goet0,well new. ©


caft Gold hether..


Or rim Nam the later ee é-
uen now,onely at this time,at varie fans wee
Ort ff then, finceofeingtbate 1


x


Original from


The OIO-STAPE UNIVERSITY = €


OR A


Or fas. Goe 100,07 forward, well then.

Oracle: m, 4a Oracle; a fentence deliuered, an anfwer
ginen, by God. ;

Oraculeux: m.cufe: f. Oracle-like,true as the Gojpell,


infallible.

Orade: f, The Guilt-head ; a fea- fifh.

Orage: m. A florme,tempeftorage ; outrage.

Le vent, la tempefte, l'orage monftrent du nocher
‘lecourage: Pro. Looke Nocher,

Toufiours ne dure guerre,ne orage: Prov, No vio-
lence,nor violent thing, lafis alwayes.

Orager. A tempeft,or forme to rife.

Orageux: meuf: £ Stormie,tempefluous,raging out-
ragious.

Oraifon: f. Orifon, prayer ; alfa fhcech; language, dif-
courfe,communication; oration,

Oxanye: f. 4x Orange; alfo, a kind of pernicious fire-
ball; alfo, a certaine fowle.

Orangé: me: f. Orange-tawnie Orange-colaured,

Oranger: m. Aa Orenge tree,

Oraprimes. as Or primes.

Orateur : m. An Orator; Spoakefinan, Arguer,Pleader,
Aduocate ; Emba[fador.

Oration: f. Ar Oration,or Harang,

Otatoire: m. An Oratorie; a Clofet,or priuate Chappell

| to pray in.
iy : com, Oratorie,belonging to an Orator ; of e-

uence.

Oratoirement. Orator-like,eloquently.

Orayn.wbilere, {Picard.

Orbateur: m. 4 Gold-beater.

Oïbatu: m, Leaf-gold.

Orbe: com. Blind, figbile[fe ; wanting, or deprined of,

À fight; bence alfo,darke,ob{cure, without light.

Coup orbe. 4 dry blow ; a blow that neither makes
ouerture,nor fetches bloud.

SEE po com, Orbicular,circular,globie,compaffe,
round,

Orbiculairement. Orbicularly, circularly, in a round

~ compaffe or forme; globe-like.

Orbiere: f, A blinding-boord, or bead-boord (hung be-
fore the eyes of an vnrulie beaft.)

| Orbitaire: com. Belonging,or like,unto the Orbite.

Oirbité: £. Orphanifine ; lacke of parents; alfo, want of
children ; generally any lacke,or want.

Orbite: £ The boleor feat of the eye ; the bole wherein
| aneyeis placed, :

L'orbite d'une poulie. The mortaife wherein the fhi

ser of a Pullie runnes.

Orcañette. as Orchanette. ,

Orchades: f. Great Ships ; alfo,akind of great fifhes,
mortall enemies toWbales.

Orchal. as Archal. ©

Orch ~ : £.Orkanet, Alkanet,Spanifh Bugloffe wild

Orche.dorche. Ox the left band. qRab.

Orchenie: f..4 rib ag

Orches. asOrchades. @Rab.

Orcheftre: £. The Senators, or Noblemens Place ina
Theatre, betmeene the Stage,and common Seats ; alfo,
the Stage ee 5e pie

:m.orde:f Filthie,naflie, foule, fluttifh ; durtie,

. bevayed,ouglie,or loathfome'to bebold, 3 4 |

. | Ordelot: m. otte: f.Sullied, flubbered, flained,fome-

me why


' À pharma = : ei a : |

it t. Filthi a cs |
' nc ee ose til, a

+ 3 ali, fouled defiled beraye d,


| Ordi: m. ic: f, 4 Ourdi


om:


ORD
es begrymed, foyled, flurried, flubbered.


rdinaire:m. An Ordinarie ; a Bifbop (or bis Chaun-
celor,drc) within bis Diocel]e ; alfo, an Ordinarie Ta-
,dyet, fare.

Ordinaire: f.Les Ordinaires de Sorbonne. (ertaine
difputations beld among Sorbonnifts before they com-
mence Dottors.

Ordinaire: com. Ordinarie ; common, v{uall;alfo,pro-
per, peculiar, in ordinarie of ones owne.

Procez ordinaire. À cinill Aétion,Caufe,or Suit.

Ordinairement. Ordinarily, vfually,commonly, of cuf:
tome.

Ordinateur: m. An Orderer,Ordainer, Appointer.
Ordinateur des Threfors. The Lord bigh Treafurer
of France ; called fo in Philip the faires time.

Ordinatif: m.iue:£ Ordinatine; arder-fhewing, or-
der-declaring ; ordering.

Ordir, as Ourdir ; al/0,t0 foule,defile, (oyle, beray, be-
durt,begryme, flubber flurrie, fitllie; blemifh,diflaine,
inquinate, pollute.

Ordiffeure: £ 2s Ourdiffeure ; al/o,a fouling defiling,
beraying, begryming, flubbeving, fullying ; diftaining,
polluting.

Ordon: m..4 flowen; a filthie fellow; alfo,the ranke,or

-vowe which a Reaper hath undertaken to goe onin,

-Ordonnance: f An Ordinance ; Ediét,Order,Decree,

Statute, Foftitution, Conflitution ; a Frecept,Appoint-

ment, Commaundement; alfo, aright, or due ordering,

aifpefings digefting,arraying, ranking,or mar fhalling of

things.

mig de celle ordonnance. Offuch a bulke,fixe,or

ore.

Gens d’ordonnance,ou,Genfdarmes des ordon- -

nances. Looke Gendarme. :

Ordonnateur : m. 47 ordainer, enatler, decreer ; an
orderer,difpofèr ; enioyner ,appointer of,
rdonné:m.ée: f. Ordained enacted, decreed,inftitn-
ted; ruled,appointed,commaunded; ordered, digefted,
difpofed,marfhalled, raunged ; arrayed ; filly placed;
well firnilbed, in full equipage; armed, equipped, or
fitted at all points. i

Ordonnément. Orderly, fitly, bandfomely, iuft as it

Should be


Ordonner. To Cn rh tr 8 op 1
mine;commaund appoint; ranke,dige/lmar{hall,range
difpofe ; array, ra firnifh, prouide of suce:
armeequip,ot fit at all points. i

Ordonncur: m.4a ordainer author enaéter appoïnter,
commaunder ; alfo,an ordercr, difpofer, marfhaller, fit
ramker of things. |

Ordonques. Seeing then.

Ordoyer. as Ordir, To defile,

Ordré de Vay. The name of a verie fnall apple.

Ordre: m. Order ; method, fafbion name rank,
file, courfè, row, continuation ; due place, or feat; fit

flate, or poflure; alfo, the calling, degree, or eftate of |
men; alfo,an Order ,Societie,or Sect of religious men or
women; alfo,a Companie,F ellowfbip,or Brotherbood of

Knights, (tearmed) of the Order,and inflituted by a So- |


ueraigne Prince.
Les ordres,ou les faints ordres. Prieftbood,the Mi- |
nifterie; or the inflitution of a Prier c; lie Orders,
Ordre de l'Anonciade. An Order of Knighthood in-
flituted inthe yeare 1350 by Amadeus Earle of Sauoy.
Ordre du croiflant. The Order of the balfe Moone re t
flituted by René Duke of Anion Anno 1464. —
Ordre duS. Efprit. The Order of the bolie Ghoft; by
Henry troifiéme,iz the yeare 1579. ea
eke ré


FU
we


PP ya
(PAT? rs 12° 4


#


TANT SES


dé


PT
a tee LUN


KR


OR D, '


US ee


‘ Ordre de S. Eftienne. The Order of S, Stephen; by |’


a Duke of Florence in the yeare 1560.
| = Ordre de l'Eftoille. The Order of the Starre;by John
King of France in the yeare x351.Looke Eftoille.
L'Ordre de France. The Ordet of S. Michael.
4 L'Ordre de la genette. The Order of the Gennet ; in-
ffituted long agoe by Charles Martel (the grandfather
|. of Charlemainc) and now cleane ont of date.
4 L'Ordre de la lartiere. The Order of the Garter ; by
‘ Edward the third-in the yeare 1344. :
Ordre de S. Michel. The Order of S. Michael ; by
Lewis the eleuenth in the yeare 1469.( There were two
forts of it; viz, Le grand, & le peut Ordre; The
Krighis of that fort wore a collar of maffie gold,of this
onely a filke ribbon.) i
| Ordre du porcefpic.The Order of the Hedgehog; in-
es © fétuted by Lewis Duke of Orleans, and the brother of
| Charles the fixt.
Les Ordres du Roy. Both the Orders of S. Michael,
and of the holie Ghoft.
=. Ordre de la roifon d’or. The Order of the golden
Fleece; inflituted by Philip the fecond Duke of Burgun-
die,in the yeare 1430. :
Ordre de la Vierge Marie. The Order of the Virgine
' Marie; was inflituted by Fobn King of France in the
Jeare 1365. :
Il n’y a point d'ordre d'avoir fait cela. There was
no veafon,nor equitie in that att; there was no fence to


rey A


doe ils
£ Ordure : £ Ordure, filth,durt; nafinefe,impuritie,pol-
> lution


tion.
Il y a de l'ordure dans leurs fleuftes. They are fome-
what too blame ; all is not right with them; fomething
is amiffe among them.
Truye ne fonge qu'ordure: Pro. À Sow dreames of
* nought but of durt, 5
Oré: m. ée:f. Prayed unto; befought,implored.
Le Jeudi, & Vendredi orez. Holie Thurfday, good
Friday ; Thur(day and Friday in the Pafion weeke.
Le Sainé de la ville n’eft point oré: Prov, we fel-
dome crauc the belpe of our ovone Patron, 24
Orée:'f. The fide of a Riner (or a Riuers fide ;) the fea
~~ fhoresor firand ; the skirt, coafl,edge,or border of any
- placejerc; alfa fhower of raine, — sind
. 4 Oreille: & Aneare; alfo,attention giuen ; alfo, free, or
. plaufible audience gotten.
a d’afne. Comfrey,Knitbacke,Blackwort; Looke
- Afne > ep ‘
Orcilles du cœur. The Auricles of the bart;two finall
peeces of flefb growing to the bortome of the beart;and
feruing it, as fimnels, 10 receiue bloud from tbe hollow


lungs baue prepared for it. ge. ;
: Oreille de ludas. The Mufhrome, or excrefcence cal.
. led,a lewes eare.
|. Oreille de licvre. Scorpionwort,or Scorpiongraffe;al-
= Rs Haves care; alfo, a mixxen,or fmacke
2. Fr ew are tae
{ Oreille d'ours. Beares-eare; 4 kind of mountaine


-


feille de rat: æ Orcillede fouris.
Îles d'un foulier. The latchets of a fhooes


veiné, and as cares,to let in and out the ayre which the -


x d,

qt e that bat bis

heey yc ae seo ie eh
ete : ee


ORE

laufible to the Princes eare.
er ae fleiche à oreilles, 4 forked, er barbed arrow.

ead.
Haut d'oreilles. Somewhat deafe; thicke of bearing.
Pendant d'oreille. 4 Pendant, Pendant d'oreille
de gibet. The fierniture of a gibbet; a man that bangs
on a gibbet,or would become one paffing well,
Loreille au vent. Attentiue,lifiening ferioufly.
‘A vne oreille. Said of wine, thats excellent good ÿef
Taffata,which is but flight,or fingle.
Avoir l'oreille de. To baue at all times free ms
rs “y's willing attention from; to be a principa

ite of.

Hen a iufques aux oreilles. He is vp to the eaves in, |
or bath bis whole fill of,
Chauver des oreilles. Looke Chauver.
Drefler les oreilles.To lift. fet,or pricke up the eares;
to prepare,or fettle them to attention. ;
Sac plein drefle les oreilles: Pro, 4 fil purfe,or fat
bribe, commaunds attention. :
Endormir fur I’ une,& l’autre oreille. To fot with
eafe,or delights; to bring a bed.
Faire l’orcille fourde. To be deafe of that eare.
Mettre le bouquet fur l'oreille à.Te expofe vate fale;
See Bouquet.
Mordre l'oreille à. See Mordre.
Partir les oreilles. To heare both fides.
Pendre à l'orcille. Autant luy en pend à l'oreille,
He is the more to blame, or bath the more 10 anfwere


rs
Rompre les oreilles à, To trouble with ouermuch, or
ouerlowd prating.
Tirer l'orcille.lls ne fe feronr gueres tirer l'oreille.
They need no long intreatie ; they will be eafily inuited,
foone perfuaded quickly dravene,vnto it. ;
‘A beau parler clofes oreilles: Pro. Oppofe to glofing
words a clofed are.
‘A paroles lourdes fourdes oreilles : Prov.Heedlefe
attention unto hoggifh tearmes.
Bois ont oreilles,& champs oeillets: Pro. (wherein
the 09 15 the woods care.) Loüke
Ociller. ;
Ventre affamé n'a point d'oreilles: Prov. The baa-
gric bellie hath no eares. ‘ £
Oreillé: m.ée:f. Eared; well bung, or bangd ; which
bath great eares.
Oreiller : m. A pillow (for the bead.)
Tenir latefte fur Poreiller.To flug itor loll it,a bed ;
to lye ouerlong in bed;to line flouthfilly drovefily yetch-
lefly,carele(th. GC
Oreiller.To et gai e eare,or attention unto,
Orphée oreilloit les rocs, Orpheus gaue eares, or
hearing,vnto rocks. j
Oreillere: f An Earewig.
Oreillet: m. 4n Earing ; alfo,the eare-peece of an bel-
met crc; the flap,or peece that conerstheeare,
Orcillette: f. A little care; alfosan caring or finall toy
tohangattheeare. —
Oreilleur: m. A barkener,or lifener.
Oreilleute: & An Earing.
Oreillier : m. as Oreillers ga?
Oreillon: m. A little eare; alfo,the handle,or eare of a
porrenger crc; alfo, a box, or cuff on the care; alfo,an
im 07 ing about an cave; whence; ©
Les oreillons. The Mumpes; or mourning of the


Les oreillons d'un fer de javeline. The ferks,barbs
| LR din ie ro. 2 q
‘ €


1


anak


Orendroit. Now,or,about this time. af
Orer. To pray; befeech,implore,defire.
Ores. Now,at this time. woe
D'ores en avant, Hence forward, from this time
b $


forth.
Orfanité: £. Orpbanifme ; the flate of an Orphan,
Orfanté : £ 45 Orfanité ; Afo,barrenne(fe pwant,or de-
priuation of children. , | :
rfaverifé : m. ée : f. as Orfavrifé.
Orfaverifèr. To worke Goldfimithes worke, to play the
Goldfmith, -\
Orfavrerie :f. as Orfevrerie. à
Orfavrifé: m. ée: f. Wrought with Gald/inithes warke,
Orfavrifer. as Orfaverifer,
Orfc: £4 kind of daintie Sea-Ruffesor Sea-Pearch.
Orfebvre. Looke Orfevre. ~
Orfelin :m.ine:f, Orphan, fatherleffe and motherleffe,
without parents,
Orfenin. as Orfelin,
Orfevre: m. 4 Goldfmith.
Orfevre de la terre. 4 Gardener ; fosearmed of the
excellence of bis worke , wherein be Lfarpafes th’ordi-
narie Hasbandman as farve as the Goldfimith a Black»
ith. a
| Orfevré: m. ée : f. wrought with Geldfmithes worke,
Ortevrerie: £. The Gold/mithes trade,or worke.
Orfevrefle : f. 4 Goldfinithes wife, or woman Gold.


|. faith.
Orfevreux : m.eufe :f.Furnifhed with,or trauelling in,
aes worke ; alfo, full of Goldfinitbes.
Orfevrie. 4s Orfevreric, e
Orfrais: m. Broad welts, or gards of gold,or filuer.im-
|. broiderie laid on Copes, and other Church-veftements: |
_ An old time the Jackets, or Coat-armours of the Kings
Gard were tearmed fo,becaufe they were couered with
_Gold{mitbes worke. wes L
| Orfraiz. as Orfrais; alfoyas Orfraye,
| Orfraye : m. The great, and greedie water-fowle cal-
4 led an Ojprey.
Orfres : £ Buds,e>¢ ; as Boutons.
Organe :m. An Organ, or Infirument wherewith any
thing may be made,or done,
Organique : com, Organicall, inflrumentall, ufed as
ameanes, é
Veines Organiques. Looke Veine,
Organifte : m. An Organift; one that ufwally playes on
a paire of Organs.
rganifte : com. as Organi
Orgafine: m. An nt ere ARE of anger,
Orge: m. Barlie. va
rge emondé.Naked Barbe; a kind of Barlie whofe
buske,when it is ripe, falls fromivofitfelfés … - ©)
Orgue mondé. The fame ; alfo,French Barlieyer piled
and cleanfed Barlie; alfo,pottage,or pap made thereo/;
Barlie pottage. . :
Orge de muraille wild Barlie,purre Barbie, way Bar-


Orge paumé.Beere Barlie,big Barlie,Barlie with the
Squareeare,
Orge Pelé. as Orge mondé.
‘A grain d'orge. Ima triangle forme, :
Faire leurs orges. To make their market, or make v
their moutbes. * RE 5
— quand l'orge. One for another (is faire
p'ay. ka i :
 Semervn pein d'orge pour artrapper vn pigeon,
| _ To giue,or loofe a littleinh opp,
| Orgée : f Barlie gruell; Furmentiesor pottage of Rar lie,


BREN ES PE aR er ep Mie OE ie trae


, venger conleningsor ining powder, 3


:Oriflam.:# Oriflambe, |


ORG


Orge-mondé :m, ée:£ Made of French Barlie, or
naked Barlie.
Orgeol: m, 4 long wart refembling a Barlie coraejand
rowing on th'edge or corner of au zye-lid,
Orgie: £ 4 fadome, :
Orgies: m. The Sacrifices of kacchus, i
Orgoole. Licifque orgoole, 4 fait bitch > €Rab.
Orgueil : m. A rowler ora round truacheon laid unde?
a greatflone,orpeece of timber, for the mare cafie remo-
uing thereof ; alfi,as Orgeol ; whence the Prousrbe;
Qui refufe À yne femme enccin&e, vn orgueil uy
one i l'oeil. if .
IBUC1 : m. Pride, fwelling diflaine, flateline[e ban.
time, lofline[e of mind, areas! fur-
guedrie,
Orgueil n’a pas bon ocil: Prov, He fun
that proudly babes, or, as in Ocil, areal
In'eft orgueil que de povre enrichi : Proy, There
#20 pride vato tb'inriched begger,


Orgueilleufement. Proudly, Lurlily, frornefully arro.
gant sa.


Orguilleux : m, as Orgeol,

Orgucilleux :m.eulc : f, Proud, furlie, Swelling; pif
Up witha conceit of bis owneworth; flatelie, bautie
lofiie-minded ; feorne full difdainefil :
Mufcle orgueilleux.4 muskle in th'vpper part of the
cheeke , neere to the hollow feat of th’eye, which jt
drawes towards the temples.

Orgueillcufe femblance montftre folle cuidance:

a An ae looke argues a fond prefumption.
eux Orgueiileux ne peuvent eftre portez

Afne: Proy. Looke Afn < : a

In’eft f grand defpit que de povre oroucilleux:

Sag A prond begger is the de(pightfilleft creature a
e, À

Orgueilli :m.ie: f Growne proud, flatelie, furlie »
ah pride. sl mick ee ene

s'Orgueillir. To wax proud, grow furlie, become flate-
lie,takeé much [late vpon bim. .

Orgues : f. Organs; wind-infiruments 3 ao, Barges fer
carriage, Wejlerne Barges; alfo,a kind of fall Ar-

. tillerie,
Dire d'orgues. vous dites d'oreues. You fap blew;


how fay you to that; wifely brother Timothie 3 lrue Ro- |


£er; did am did am:

…Jouër des orgues. To play the lafciuious wanton. to
lacher taxa jents Wats)

Oribus. Compere d’oribus, 4 fuperficial, or kollow- |
bearted friend,ov companion, °% 2". be
Pouldre d'oribus. Powder of Pproieé?io,or of the Phi.
lofophers (lone ; zearmed thus (in devifionsaud)becaufe
much gold bath beene wafled in the fearching for it 3


Orichal. &s Archa
Orient: m, Th'Orient,Eaf,or Eafl part of the world;the
Sunne-rif, 713 €
Oriental male: f Oriental, Eaflerlie ; orient,bright,
ciecre, r :
Orienté: m. ée:f. Maifon bien oricntée, 4 hone
ie toward th'Eajt; or whofe forefront is made

Ea


Je pierre bien orientée. Verie Orient , or Orien-

ta xs à :

Oriere sfasOrée. : . à pind

Orifice im Th orifice 3 month, brimme, or entrance in- :
to,a thing. ' à 18:


riflambe. The great and bolie Standerd, of France ;
orne |


À
ù
À


ORI


borne at fifi onely in warres made againft Infidells
but wea A in all other warres; and at length
utterly loft in a battell againft the Flemings.

Oriflant: m. An Elephant.

Origan :m, Garden Organie, Spanifh Origan, wild or
baflard Marierome,Englifh wild Marierome,
or de Candice. Baflard or wild Marierome of
Candie. 5
Origan commun. Englifh wild Marierome.
Origan Heracléen. Baflard Marierome.

Origan Onite, White bafiard Marierome,
Origan fauvage. Wild Organie,groue Marierome,

Ones Th Orix; a fierce and cruell wild Goat ; of a
pale white colour and a baire falling backwards to bis
pe: parts, and forward to bis beadwar ds ; he ba-
uing blacke upright , and fharpe-pointed berns,
mr der ie often uate mo pe A bunters, or
beafts that purfie or affault,bim.

Originaire: com, Originarie natural unto,bis from the

_ beginning.

Les originaires de la ville, Such as were bred, and
borne in the towne.

Originairement. Originarily originally. .

Original: m. An original ; the firft authentick,or true
draught of a writing.

Originalement. Onginally, a,

Origine: f An originall ; abi tb, beginning, ofspring
flocke,pedegree,kindred; a ground, canfe, bead, foun-
taine,welfpring.

Originellement. Originally.

Orillier. Secke Oreiller.

Orillons :m. The Mumps , or animpoflumous fwelling
behind the eares.

Orin: m. ine :£ Golden pf gold.

Orine. 4s Origine.

nd à : roma
rion : m,44 ,duft,cuffe,rapsknocke ; alfo,a num-
ber of. mihiefs a multitude ofeuills ; alfo,a certaine
Signe of flarres in the firmament.

Oriot: m. 4 Heighaw,or Witwall. ‘

Oripeau: m. Bafe gold, leafe gold, falfe gold, Nn


‘Orle:f. A bemme, feluidge,or (narrow) border; in Bla-
<onsan Vile, or open border about, and within,a coat


of Armes.
OS :m.ée:f. Hemmed,feluidged; welted, or bor-
ere . : ‘
seo rahe A bemming, feluidgings, welting, bor-
Orker. Tobemme, feluidge; border; welt th’edges , or


Orlet. A little hemme; feluidge; weltsborder,
Odlure :£ A pened ee bemming; feluidge, or feluide-


Ormaire f. A 4 £ | M =
of, 4 Spor tirs 2
per le :f, A groue of Elmes.


me:m, Aa Elme tree. y Rermnt
Ormeblanc. The white Elme, yoake Elme, Horne-
Orne champeftre. TH ordinarieElme,
Orme de mon The mountaine Elme ; or, the
“Bros ie a
$a AlvecartolinsPontues as offre Lower «
_ pratling,or pidling Pestifogger, =


O R P


luge deffous l'orme. The Judge ef a village; an im
fineur Judge ; Looke st à ù

Ormeau: m. A little,or young, Elmetree.

Onneteau. 4s Ormeau.

Orne : £. The firrow made bya plough; the deepe rut,or
tracke made by a cart wheele,in the ground.

© Iconduifoitfourdement cette orne. Hee carried
this bufineffe verie clofely; be bandleditfo as fiw bad
notice,or ge any inkling,of it.

Orné: m. ée : £ Decked,adomed, trimmed , tricked,
garnifbed, imbellifhed, beautified, graced ; gaily ar-
rayed gallantly furnifbed, finely fet Firth,
rnemént :m, An ornament,erace,beautie imbellifh-
ment; rich, or comelie garnifhment, goodlie fiam{h-
oe faire attire; alfo,an adoining,decking trimming,
tricking.

Ornément. Neatly,trimly, finely, gallantly beautifully,
gracefully,

Orneomantie : f. Diuination by the mouing of birds.

Orner.To decke adorne,trimme,tvicke; beautifie,grace,
ae imbellifh ; to fet out finely, attire gallantly,

aifb gaily,

ome :m. ere:'f Full of ruis, worne with many
tradis.

Orniere: f. The rat, or traël of a cart wbeele,ére.

Ornithogalon. Starve ef Bethelem(an bearbe.)

Orobe:m. Orebus; the bitter Vetch,or Fitch.

Oroer : m, 45 Oratoire ; An Oratorie,

Orologeur : m, A Clocke-maker ,Watch-maker, Dyall-


one e

Orofcope : m. The Horofcope,or Afcendant,of a Nati-
uitie ; Leoke Horofcope.

Orpeau. # Oripeau ; or as;

Orpel: m.Silver and by-gold; a kind of leafe-tinne,v ed
in tbe filuering oner of trifles for children.

Orphanité. as Orfanité.

Orphe : £. 4 kind of daintie fea Ruffe,or fea Pearch.

Orphée :f. as Orphie.

Orphclin. Seeke Orfelin.

Orphelinage :m. Orphanage; the flate of an Orphan ;
a being (young,and) without parents, —

Ogghie: f. The Hornebeake, Hornekecke, Piper-fifb,

arre-fifh. |

Orpigment : m. 4s ; :

ae :m, Orpiment, or Arfenicke; a golden-co-

ed poifonyor drug, found verie deepe in the earth,

Orpimenter. To mingle,or colour, with Orpiment.

Orpin: m. Orpine ,Liblong or Liuc-long an hearbe; al.

- fo,Orpine,Orpiment or Arfenicke; a drug,
Orpin rouge. Red Arfenicke; a bright-red colour
2e found in gold,and filuer mines.

Orprimes. Looke Or.

Orque: £. A Hulke, or buge (hips alfo,the Ourke, a fea-
monfier, enemie to the Wball; (fometimes) alfo,, the
graue,or bell.
ceil: m, 40a

Orthodoxe: com. Orthodox, orthodoxall ; of a right


_ faith,true belie, d'opinion.
gps ar Right cornered,


:male:f Orthogonal right cornered.


| ii ns com. One whofe lightapipes are fo


À 07 firaitned,tbat be cannot breath but when
be bolds bis necke upright.

Ortie :£ A Nettle; the common Nettle, fimale Nettle,
great Nettle,
Ortieblanche, The bearbe Archangel! blind Nettle,
dead Nettle, |
Ortie bruflante, The finall Nettle, or fivall burring
Nettle, Oitie


1


OR T


Ortie cendrée, A kind of the fea Nettle. — x
Ortie Grecque. The Greeke Nettle Roman Nettle,
male Nettle; fome alfo call. the fmall red Nettle fo.
Ortie griefche, The final flinging red Nettle; Oras
; ue “i SSN aT tes 2


Ortie de mer. The fea Nettle ; an ouglie (but verie
daintie) fifo , which being touched ,prickes Uke a
Nettle. ra 448
Ortie morte. # Ortieblanche: |: >> :
Ortie puante, The linking blind Nettle,or dead Net-
tle; a kind of Archangel that fmels moft filibily.
Ortie Romaine, The Romane Nettlesltalian Nettle,
male Nettle, Greeke Nettle. 463
Ortie rouge. as Pofterol; 4/0,rhered Nettle.
Petite: orties The final Nettle, or finall burning
Nettle.
Afne d’ Arcadie broute chardons,& Ortie,quoy que
tout chargé d’or: Prov. Appliable to 4rich,and moft
wretched penie-father;. one that all theyeare long be.
flowes not a bit of good meat on bimfeife. | oid
Ortié :m.ée: £Nettled pricked,or ung with Nettles,
Ortier. To nettle,to pricke,or fliag with Nettles,
Ortieur:m. A neveler, totum
| Ortigue :f as Ortie de mer, a0!
AOrtographié: m.ée:f. Ortograpbifed, written rightly,
_ Ortographier. To Ortograpbife; to write, or Uf, true
Ortographie, . 5
Octrait. as Retrai&t ; À Priuie,or Fakes:
Ocval: m, 47 inconuenience ; alfo,as Orvale. se
Orvale:£ The bearbe Clarie,or Cleere eye, CBs
Orvale fauvage. wild Clarie, double Clavie, Ocle
Chrifli. Les Hh Reeth wy
Serene as Houtvaris; Alfo,the vie of Funtfmen va-
to their dogs,being'at a defanlty ess)


-


Orver,& Orvier:m,.A Snake. an
Os:m. A bone ape ‘ftone ofa Date; Oline, Peach,
_ Plumme,ee ; alfo, the Garguill, or Dew-elaw of a
Stag,Bucke,Roe,e>c, EOD Tat
Os barré. The fecond part of Os Ilium, not fo broad
as the firft,and bauing on each fide a largehole,
Os bafilaire. The Nape,or Nuke-bone;the bone wher-
by all the parts of the bead are Supported; fomme'call it
the Cuneall bone,becaufe it is,wedce-like,thruft in be.
*Pwcene the bones of the head and th’upper Fam! *
~ OsBertrand. ‘the fhare-bone; the coniun, on of the
“tivo great bones whereto the thigh-bones are Sifte-
ned, sb
Os Bregmatis,
of the skull,
Os de coeur de cerf. The bone of à Stags heart; is
found in the left fide thereof (onely betweene'the mid-
dle of Auguft,and 12 of September) and is good againft
th’Emrods,and the trembli of the beart, - ‘
~ Os conjugal: Th’ontward part, or end of the cheeke-
bone towards the eave. re
OS corbin. A certaine hollow bonein the ‘ruinipe, oP
crupperofaDeere,» vial Ve HO
Os coronal, The forbead bone. —
Os duc . d et bone of the cubit. ?
one


Two trianguler bones in th’upper part


Os couloir du nez. The he > oF inner bone of
the nofe, Res SAS vg A ee 53

Os ctibleux. 4 Os Etmoide, Renan

Os cunciforme, The Cuneall,or findamentall bone of
the head, VA ORR aR cebeiisel é gu


Os Cyboide. comme asta


Os Eshonté, 4 Os fronta
| Osde I efperon, The leffe typo fhanke bones,
oles | and feated


<O . S ,
betrweene the forbéad bone and the top of the nf:

+ Os de la fella, The bipsbea orH te bone 5 6
Os frontal, The forbead bone. ie A4
220s furculaites. The points of the fhoulderbonet fore-

Part,mecting a little belw the mecke, 5}
ve +3 de la greue. The fhirire-bôné, or bigger bone of the


legs.
Os dela hanche. The third art of Os lium; ir fel;

‘“confiting alfo of three parts. ES se

* Os hyotde. 4 bone in the root of the tongue fafbioned
like a Greeke Ypjilon,

“Os de la jambe. is Os dela greue.

'Osdes Hesitsioyned to the tranfuerfe proce(fes ofthe
Sacred bone. and dinided by Anatomifis into three !
parts; the firfl whereof (being the bigheft, and broa. |
deft) retaines this name , th’otber two are called otber- :
wife,

Os jougal, as Os conjugal.
Os maxillaires. Th'upper Faw bones ; thofe wherein.
to the teeth are fer; in men there are bat two of them
difétrned in beafis foure. ve
Os naviculaire. The fecond bone of th infu, tear-
med thus becaufe tis fafbioned Somewhat like a boat,
Os occipital: The noddle bone 3 of an Ouall forme, and
feated in the hinder part of the bead,

“Os de l'orbite. ‘The whole cheeke-bone confining on
the bottome, and outfide ofthe eye; or tbe bone whith
inclofes the eye,

Os parietal. A certaine bone in th'opper, and fore-
partof theftull, neereto the Coronall fulure,
Os du penillier ; ou du pénil. # Os barré,

© Os petreux,où pierreux. The bone of the temples.’
Os delapommette. ‘The cheeke-bone. aa
Os dela pouppe de Ia tefte The forhead be) 4

Os du Rayon, Th'vpper, and bigger of the tro bones

“of the eubit. ©. : nae

Os facré,
refteth, ;
Os fans nom, A certaine great bone wbichcontaines
three others ; viz, Os des Iles, Barré, & del han-
che; alfa, the three bones whereby the three great toes
* ave fuflai vase


The great bone whereupon the ridge-bone


ained, : ET
tn fcaphoïde, The skiffe-bone ; or as Os Havicu- |
aire, a


Os de feiche: A sorting marrowie, and pig
\itians,


\
"Done in the backe of the cutile fh, vfed by P
LS Goldfimithes , for deanna ts purpon
es. CRE Te PÉ E
Os du fens commun. The frbead bone, FO EE?


cttaine, -


Rabe


Os fpongieux. The Ju ie bone; fealed in'thel bite
TA the forbead tire Bete aboue the 90/2: and


full of boles like a fpung ; Lot
1. The bone of the-tem: }


Os dela temple,ou rempora
ples; around bone ix the fide of the bead. PR ats
Os zigoma. The end, or outward part of the cheeke-
bone towards the eare; called this at Paris, 11)
“Avn autre chien avec cet os, Allure foie otber |
with i bait; intice another with that pleajir trea :
fure,offer. à ie tin 8: RER
© Perdre la chair pour les 65. ‘To loofé the Hel fr the }
2


Original trom
THE-OQHIO.SFATE-UNIVERSTEY


~~


tle fi ite enith

ea fe df
‘unc d their” |
ae which


4
i


CTT A 4 tt ase NN tee
2


’


os S&S OS! *


Oftel, as Hoftel,

Oftement : m. À remouing,or.taking away.
Offenfeur : m. TH index,or band of an Afirolabe.
Oftenfion:£ Afbewing. _ x on
Oftentateur :m. An oflentator,boafter, bragger,vaun-


bones; to leaue effentiall, for moft idle things.

‘A bon chien re os: Prov. Looke Chien, À
SA vn bon chien n’efcheut onques yn bon os : Pro.
The honefler a man is the leffe 1 bis preferment ; tbe
worfe bis lucke.

Deux chiens nes’ accordent point vn os : Prov.
Two dogs;and a bone,agree not in one. :

Qui a mangé le lard ronge los :Prov.Let bim that
hath eaten the beft feed on the worfl ; or, be that hath


4 pres beft flefh, will be faine, at length, to


Souvent à mauvais chien tombe vn bon os en
fee :Prov. The veriefi knaue hath oftentimes beft


ke.
Ofche,& Ofcher. Looke Oche,& Ocher. | à
OfGines : com. Singing birds; thofe efpecially which
prefage ought by their fringing : qRab.
owe £.4 gaping, yawaing,floath,idlene [Jes neg-
- figence,retchle(neffe.
Osé: m. ée: F. Dareds prefumed ; aduentured.
Ofer. To dare,prefume, ture; baue the beart, or
be fo.bold as to doe a thing.
Oferaye :f. A groue, or ground of Oxiers.
Ofereux: m.eufe : f. Full of; made with Ozers.
Ofeur : m. A bater ; loather,detefier.
Offer :m. The Oxier red Witbie,water Willow tree; al.
. foicker ; alfo,a basket of Wicker ; alfo,a rodortwig
of Oxier, or of any other fuch pliant wood,
Franc Ofer, The fall withre, twig, Withie, Oxier
Withie, Spert.
Ofiereux :meufe :f. as Ofereux.
Ofmonde:m.0/mund,0finund the water man,Ofmund
“Royall, water Fearne,S, Chriflapbers bearbe..
Ofmonde royal. The fame.
Offailler. Te fet,or worke,with bone.
Oflaillerie : fBone-worke, bone-fluffe; alfo,a werking
with bone, ;
Offas : m. A great thicke bone.
Of :m. ée:f. Boniemade of bone.
Offec. as Lofec. ,
Offelet: m. A little bone, rea ;
Offelets. The game tearmed Cockall, ov Huckle-
bones. ‘ ;
Batre le tambour à coups d'offelets. To play at
dice, or buckle-bones on a drummes bead.
Offernens : m, Bones ; alfe,the ftones of Apricocks,Pea-
_ches, Dates, :
Offet. as Offcler.
Offu: m.ué: £ Berit hier füll of bones.
Oft:m. An Hoaflor Armie.
~~ Oft banni. as Ban & Arriereban.
Aide de loft. Th'affifiance a vaffall is bound to yeeld
unto bis Lord, either by prouiding bim of men , or fitr-
© wifhing him with money, when be goes to the warres.
Seruice de loft, "1s epecialy) the vafjalts perfonall


ter,

Oftentation : £, Oftentation, bragging, boafling, vaun-
timg,cracking.

Oftentatrice sf, An oftentatrix, braggardefje, boafling


woman.

Offer. To remone withdraw ; pull take,or carrie away ;
to put off ;.bereaueor deprine of; to lay,or get afides 10
difcbarge,or deliner ; drine,or expell, from.

Oftez vous delà. Beware of that, no more of that
if mie loue me ; alfo, get you bence , lets fee your
acke.

Ofte-vent: m. 4 Porch or Portall contrined, a peece
of cloth bung,or fet up, before a doore, to keepe off the
wind,erc ; alfo,a penthoufe,

Oftiere :f. 4 Spittleor Hofpitall; whence ;

e gueux dePoftiere, A rogue vagabond, er Spitile
egger.

Oftize. Arent benne, rc, paid, or delineved,in liewof
a dwelling boufe.

Oftracifme : m, (Ten years banifhment, wherewith the
Athenian State allayed tb'immoderate power of their

veat men. ‘

Oftruce:f. An Offridge.

Otarde:£ .4 Bufard,

Otardeau: m.A young Baflard.

Otruche: £ Maïfierwort, falle Pellitorie of Spaine,

Ottelles. Ottells,or Oates(in Blaxon.)

Ottroy. Looke O&troy.

Où(accented,an Aduerb)where,whither,in what place;

_…alfo,wbereas.

“D'où. whence; of or from what place; alfo, whereof
as in this Proucrbe,


whence thou commeft,but whereof thou lineft.

Ou. (without accent,a Difiuntliue)Or,or elfeseither.

Ou. in fome old Authors is vfedin flead of Au.

Oiiaille : f, A fheepe. es +

Oüaine : f 4 : Pic. LES

Oùüaire :m-A great leather bottle,or budget like a bot-

te, for ayle,or drinke,to be kept,o7 carried in; (tis com-
monty made of a Goats skin, and the bairie fide fome-
times turned inward.)

Oval: male :f Oval, fhaped like an egge.

Ovale : f. An Oval; an egge-like [hape,or forme; 2 peece

… of veorke fafhioned like an egge.

Oùan : m. 4 glone :qPic.

Oiian. The lafi yeare ; (an old word.)

Oüarir. a Guarir : ¢Pic.

Ovation: £.4 finall triumph granted to a Commanader,
that bad gotten a bloudleffe victorie.

Oüazon. as Glazon : Pic.

Oubier :m.The fap white or foftefl part of wood. fubiedl


dar 28 at
Oublayerie :£ king of Waftrs.
u ayeut : m, A Wa -maker,
i: m, Obliuion, forget fulnelfe.
à pers annual rents due wntofome parti-
anons of Noftre Dame de Gracay en Berri.
Oubliance : f. Obliuion, forget É
Oubliant. Oblinious, forget fill ; ao, forgetting.
Oublie : £.4 wafer cake; fucb a one efpecially as is fwee-
ti with honie ; alfo, the thinne paft that ferues
forthe bottomes of Tartes,and Marc pe
roi


attendance on bis Lord vato the warres,
= Les Vivres fuivent l’oft : Prov. Looke Vivres,
Oftade : £ The fuffe worfie ofied..
|. ‘Ademy c Cut in panes, cre,like a Spanifh lea-
; (a Gafcon pbrafe, :
AR =i a aries et ate BE
? An bofiagesor pledge; a Juretie, or gages


=


10. On thats delivered imboftage. |
À nd To take in pledge, or for a pledge; to e-


yann


PORT 7. » on ( =
6 ¥


Non d’où tues, mais d’où tu pais. Refpect uot À.


déc ©


CEE ST SR


Te. Se ee nt
pA # t Sr nt 0 ry


Ow LD


Droiét d’ oublie, 1s, in fome places, arent Capen ba-
uing a Douzain,or Sol,in bis mouth,
Oublié : m.ée:£ Forgotten, out of mind, out of me-


morie, : é
Oublier. To forget,put out of mind, blot ont of memorie;
to fayle in memorie,or in the remembrance of.
Oublier Dieu parmy tous les Sainés. Looke
inét.


Sain
Ileft bien fol qui s oublie: Prov. He that forgets
bimfelfe’s a verre goofe.
Qui bien aime a Prov. Hee that loues
eartily forgets not eafily; true lowe is longa forgetting,
Oubliette :f, À dungeon, or clofe re. #8 ground
for hainous matefattors, :
O eur m.4 Wafer-man,Wafer-baker or wafér-ma-


er.

Oublieux: m. as Oublieur.

Oublicux : m.cufe :£. Oblinious, forgetful ummindfull
of 3 alfo,of,or for,Wafers ; whences
Corbeille oublieuse. 4 basket to pityor carrie Wa-
fers in; a Wicker basket.

Oublition : £ Forgetfilneffe.

Ouche. The nage of a fertill vine ; alfo, as Oche; af,
a Spot of ground veferued, neere to. house, for the fow-
ing of Beanes, Peafé,or Hempein.

Oudre: 4 Borrachoc; « great leatberne bottle, or buds

"get like a bottle made commonly of a Goats skinne,and
fed for the conueying of wine, oyle, rc, through pla-
e which cannot be paffed by carts ; alfo, as Oul-


e,
Qué. as Oye; 4 Goofe.
La petite oné de viandes, The pawach, and'intralis
of edible creatures. chi
Oüeille. as Oüaille; A fheepe; whence; - |
Chafque oiieille cerche fa Pareille : Prov, Ewerie
Sheepe will bane bis fellow; fooles bold there isno com .


t but in companie.
Quelle: £ The river Smelt, called fo at Roan,
Ovent: m, A penthoufe of cloth,or wood ouer a window
or docre.
Over. To lay an egge, -»
Oitere. as Oüaire.
Qui: m. ouïe: f. Heard,bearkened liftened unto,
Ouï-dire. Report,or herefay.
Oui-dire va par ville: Prov. Tell-tale is the towne
~ Crier; bearefay goeth fpeedily from doore to doore,
Quiltre. 4s Oudre,
Quir : m. Hearing ; the fence of bearing.
Quir. To en to te, + liften vnto.
Dieu gard de malquivoit bien, & n’oit goutte. 1
mould God bad me fi conceine it,or care a int for it-
On n'orroit pas Dieu tonner. The noif? is infinite;
wonderfull the burrie ; Gods thunder it felfe could not
be heard among them. + ore
“ Se faifant fi bien ouïr en Ja bouche de. Shew-
ing fo well in, er comming fo gracefully from, the
| Oy,voy,8ede tais, fi tu veux vivre en paix: Prov.
Be thy peace, if thou defire to line in
Ces Samy PRAM Ti
- In’eft point de pire fourd que celuy qui ne veut
ouir: Prov, No man’s se then e that will
not beare, Fe DER CET thins ! aA”
Qui demande ce qu'il ne devroit il oit ce qu'il ne
voudroit: Prov, He that askes more then be foould,
heares more then be would, =. Oui
: Tout ouir cout voir, &rien dire, merite en tout
temps qu’on l'admire: Prov.Wobeare all; fee al, and


[oO


Por bg ly,beyond all meafüre,


Ov VOL


| fy nought merits eternal admiration,

Ouldre, as Oudre; 4/6, the Orke ; a Sea-monfler, and
the Whalls natural enemie.
ule :f, 4 Jürgeor great wane of the fea; alfoya great
earthen pot, ‘

Oulme, #5 Orme ; An Elie,

Oulot: m, kind of braffe,or copper, fit to make Orda

e


nance of.

Oulque: £ À Hulke.

Oultrage: m. Outrage, exceffe, vnreafonableneffe ; in
durie,wro bufe,infültation mucb violencesextreame
breach of duetie in what kind focuer.

Elle eft ns detre maisiln’y a rien d’oul-
€. Her beautie though great could ill be foaréd.
fare fe is indeed, but vo faer then fhe frou be,”
Ie ne vous demanderien d’ oultrage. My demands
are neitber vninfinor unreasonable,

Oultragé : m.ée sf. Outraged, wronged,abufed; band.
led vilely,reuiled filtbily. ®"

tragement : m, Anoutraging, wronging, abufing. ‘

Oultrager, To ontrage,wrong,iniuresabufé; lay violent
bands on,deale extreamèl with mifise Unreafonably,
reuile moft (pightfully,. "1 q

trageur: m, Am outrager, extreame wronger, Vit
reafonable abufer of.

Oultrageufement. Outragioufly, exceffinely, moftun-
reafonably,


Oultrageux: m. Outragious, exceffine, vateafonable,
molt Ril,sorengfiluinisrions,
Oultrance: f, Extremitie,excelfe,or exce fiuenelfes ex.
ceedingne|fe,
Combatre À oultrance. To fight at fharpe,te fight it
pid tothe vitermof}; not to {pare one anotber in
ting.
ultré : m.ée:f Pierced opened,bored, firuck through;
~ tunne through and through; alfo, ficklie, vnfound, or
confumed in bodie,
Oultré d'amour. Farre gone, ouer bead and eares,
in lone.
ae oultré, Runnethrough; dead, laid along
le


aa,
leur oultrée. A filly-withered flower. ’
Loy oultrée. Quand quelque different eft detér.
. miné par enquefte,ou par brief: h Ree; \
Us'eftoultré, He bath murthered , or laied violent
bands on,bim/elfe. |
Oultre. (Adverb.)Ouer, beyond, without ; more,befides,
further moreouer ; on, forwards,’ van


Pafler oultre; To die, Le Ae
Percé d' oultre en oultre. Rumne through and
through. : SEX
Ouirebord Exceedingl}.paling, beyond the bankes or
bounds o a J eA À
Oultrecoulcr. Tofurround,or owerflow, . Es
Oulttecaidamenent.ur-seeningh,prefhmptaany,
arrogantly, wee}
Oultrecubdiatice : F. An ouer-weenine, presumption,


pride arrogancie; too great a conceit of bis own fus
encie,
Oultrecuidé : m.€¢:£ Ower-rveenine, prefumptnohs,
vaineglorions, arrogant, felfe-conceited, or too well
conceited of bimfelfs.
s'Oultrecuider. To oner-weene ; 10 prefume too fatre
on bis one [ufficiencie, to thinketoo well of | D
Oultréement. Through and through ; alfo,extreamely,


+ To cleane afunder, 10 pitrée cleane


through.
ia Oul-


Bea st eI SE 7 ESR Es CORNE RTE NTI -
ee fe ©


O VS


_ Ail d'ours. Beares Garlicke,Ramfons Ramfies, Buck.
rammes. |

_ Oreille d'ours: Looke Oreille. O
Patted’ours. Bramkurfin, Beares-breech; calledalfo
by fome ,Beaves-foot,or Beares-claw.

Oursal :m.ale : f. Of, or belonging to,a Beare.

Ourfe :£ A fhe Beare ; alfo,the heat, or cable whereby
the maine [aile is faftened to the Lar bord(or left fide)of
. h


[OV VOR


Oultrefendu: m.ué: f. Clouen afunder, pierced cleane
through. sO


sO ultremarcher. Toouerreachin am À
Ouitre-naturel : m.elle : £ Supernatural, beyendna-


ture, f 4
Oultrepaffe : m. An excefes or tranfgreffion; an emin
ne dl eminent thing 5 a firpafing, or paffing be-


yond. +
L’ oultrepafle des Advocates. ‘The befor moft emi-
nent Lawyer; the Paragon of Pleaders.

Oultrepassé : miée:f. Surpaffed,onerpaffed,exceeded,
outgone ; tranfgreffed ; aduanced,proceeded, marched
on; runne ouers Carried,or conucied ouer . :

Oultrepaffement: m. 4 furpaffing, exceeding, excel.
ling; an eminencie, owerpaffing,outgoing ; alfo, an ad-
uancement,proceeding,or marching forward.

Oultrepafler. To furpafie,exceed excell ,onerpaffe, goe

… beyond, outgoe; tranfèreffé; runne ouer; alfo, to ad.
mance,proceed,or palfe,ons alfè,tocarrie,conuey, or
. pale ouer. y

Oultrepercé :m.ée:£ Pierced, thruft, or firucke tho-
ro.

Oultrepercer. To pierce, thruft,or firike through.

Oultreplus : m, A furplufage;an ouerplus.

Le SE (Adverb.) Furthermore mmoreouer ,befides

that.


Oultrepreux. Extreamely valiant , bardier then the
: bardief


Oultrer. To pierce,open,bare,thruft or firike through; to
_syunne through and through... f: ;
Oultrer vne iournée,To fight from morning to night;
> orto fight a battaile out, t K
Ourague: f. The channel or conduit whereby the vrine
of an vnborne infant hath paffage.
Ourche. The game at Tables called Lurch,
Ourdi: m. ie :f Warped; wrought ,wouen ; alfo,begun,
inuented,in the web ; contriued,deuifed,
A wile ourdieDieumande Je fl: Prov. God belps


r à ourfe. To goe neere a wind.
Naviger à pogge,& à ourfe. To bold an vncertaine
courfe at fea. Looke Pogge.
| Ourfe. as Dehoufé: RE. |
ss :m, À little, or young,Beare ; a Beareawhelpe,

er cub. el
Ourfelet: m. Alittle Beare. ©
Ourtfet. as Ourfeler.
Ourlette :£ Ayoung,or little, fhe Beare,
Ourfillon ; m..A verie little Beare.
Ourfin: m, The fea Beare; or, akind of the fifh'Tun-


=
4


nie,

oo :m.ine: f. Beare-like;of Beares, belonging unto

cares.

Ourfon : m, A Beare-whelpe,the cub of a Beare; alfoja
little Beare. \

Ourfonne: f.as Ourfette.

Oufclage : m. That which a contratied man gines to bis
affianced,or future wife. :

Outtarde. a: Outarde.

Oufteron :m. 4 Reaper, or Mower ; a Hind, or bire-
ling ,onely for Haruef tine,or worke.

Outarde: f 4 Buflard,

Outeron, as Oufteron,

Outil: m. 4 toole, an infirument,
Mefchant ouyrier ne trouvera ia bons outils:
Prov, A bungler cannot find (or fit bimfelfe with)good
tooles,

Outillemens: m. Stuffe, mouables, bonfhold fianiture,


"them forward that baue well begun; or begin to belpe |. or implements. |
_ thy felf,and God will belpe thee; fomeexpoundit o- | Qutin, as Autin. |
© therwifé of belpe fent (when the vfe of itis pafl) wben | OQutrage,&c.as Oultrage,&c. …
a bafineffe is difpatched, "| | Outre: m. The Orke ; 4 kind of huge fifh of the fea.
Ourdir. To warpe a web of cloth;to lay the warpe ther- |. Outre :£ A Borrachoe; as Oudre. ;
of,or put it into the loome; to begin aweb, to ane Outre :com. em Free Oner-ripeymorethen
Ls ÿ Hosto innent, contriue, begin; caufe, | — ripe,neere- ntpall the bef.
; en? joie ie seat ” Gunes a ‘ered be cero tho-
urdiflant. Warping beginning to weaue or worke;itt> | row and thorow; Looke Oultré. '
: pH hn procuring... - : Outre. (Adverb,) Eooke Oultre.


afle.s m. Anexceffe,or eminencie ; afiurpaffing;
atranfereffion’; Looke Oultrepafie.
Ouvé: mée:f Full rewed,as a fifh.
Ouvert:m.erte: f Ouert ope; patent euident apparent,
difcouered unconered,plaine without colour ; alfo,ga-
ping,wide, broad, large, = À
Fief ouvert, A Fiéf without féruices performed, or
- wafall top Fief.


m ; Looke Ficf |
Heaulme deré,& ouvert. 4 gilt, and open belmet on


Ourdiffeur: m, 4 warper ; «putter ofa meb of cloth

into the loome; bence alfo,a beginner ,contriuer inuen-
ter,deuifèr.

Ourdiffeure : £ ‘The warpe of cloth ; the threads that
“yunne along in,or make the length ofa web of cloth; al-
fo,the warping th jor the laying of the warpe ; the
‘putting it into the loome ; tbe beginning of a web, and

{ibence) of any work; a contriuing,inuenting,denifings

pi VA, ' + ;


imide +f. Hemmed, z … atoat of Armes; the marke of a Vicount, Baron, or

Our ct To homme LE ates = - £ awe it gine as pepe whom
O rm. Abemme;LookeOrle, , . "4110 wearing of gilt armour belongs; a: D 4 Cap.
acne an Ortega Sea jbe oral eral ey th fs lift up; the better 20, view their :


‘A huis ouvert. Plainly, cleerely, fully, wholly; pub-
lickly,in open Court. x


Les prifons leur feront ouvertes. They fall be de-


J s Ourler. To J ee
m. A Beare; alo, the Northerlie flarves called
PER T


weldie, and tbicke- liuered.or difcbarged. ‘ ;
fla pala opal cou Ltée LE.
La Es: ere nen __ Abwayes open like an Aduocates parfi. ne. :


cleerely,plainely ; publickly.. À pe
Ouverture: f. An overture, or opening ; an entrance,
bole, beginning made,path begun or beaten unto; amo-
tion made ; alfo,an opening manifeflation, difcoueric,
vmcouering. | oe
L'ouverture des Eftats. Th'affemblie of Parliament
men ; the beginning of their conference; the firft- Se/-


LÀ
: Prvciade defick The change of Lord, or of Te-
nant. |
Ouverture de rachapr. À fine due(in certaine cafes)
to the Lord art do anew polfelfor(Lord,or tenant)
of an inferiour fief,
Ouverture de Regale.. The vacancie of a benefice
thats [ubieët vato Droict de Regale. - ie A
Ouvertures de vendanges. 4 beginning of Grape-
baruef}, appointed or permitted by the Judge of the
place. K à
Ouvrage :m. A worke; al{o, workez alfo, workman-
LD. . 4
Ouvrage de Marqueterie.Checker-worke,or Inlaid
worke , of fundrie colours.
Ouvrage Morefque, Moreske worke ; Loake Moref-
que. »
Ouvrage de commun ouvrage de nul : Prov! E-
uerie bodies worke isno bodies worke ; that which eue-
rie one can doe is not worth doing ; or, as good doe no-
thing as worke for a multitude, .
Tel ouvrier tel ouvrage : Prov, Such as the worke-
y_ man fuch bis worke. :
Ouvragé: m.ée :f. Wrought with a needle, fowed.
_ | Ouvraver. To worke needle-worke,to for. :
_ | Ouvrant: mante:f. Opening ; alfo working,
Ouvré :m.ée: € wrought labour ed,tranelled:
| Ouvrée : f. The eighth part of a Bourgonian Journau ;
* Looke Journau, .
~ À Ouvrer. To worke; 10 labour, trauell, doe, att ;indenor.
* Louvre fagement en cet affaire.He carries bimfelfe
difcreetly inthis bufineffe.
Le temps ouvre : Prov. Time workes (er weares)out
\ euerie thing.
.Ouvreur: m. Anopener. |
Ouvrier : m. 4 workemans tin Artificer,or bandicrafis-
_man ; bis crafis-maifler ; & generally, any werker,ac-
ce frame, inneñter, contrinér, denifér ; alfo, anun-
‘f 4


Chaud ouvrier.(as we fy) A bot chapman.
De main d’ouvrier, Done workman!y, framed excel-
lently,in all perfection. :
* Ouavriergaillard cele fon Art: Proy.Th'induflrious
morkéiiee DES bis skill to fem.
Ouvrier mediocre à cheval; ouvrier gentil a
hofpital : Prov. The meane workman labours bard,&
by much light gaine comes to a beauie purfe; the skil-
_ fall one is(commonty) proud wuntbriflie,or floathfiulls and
dies a wretched,or diféafed begger. ;
Me rier ne trouvera ja bons outils : Pro,
Nere wi the bungler fit im with good tooles, t
Tel ouvrier tel ouvrage : Prov. À workman like bis
worke ; r,like workeman like wor ; ;
‘A l'oeuvre on cognoift l'ouvrier : Prov. The worke
“A Thole bons ours en digo le
IE: f it és ers,en a it ee
| afniers Peo. Bunglers grow rich, pee mu Ta
| wretched; the cogging fot gets honour while the cun
ot ee JAP:
Jet plus d'ouvriers que de maiftres : Prov. There


+


he og le


4 Ouvertement. Ouertly, openly; euidently,apparently, |


“Oxycedre. Cedar Funiper , the crimfon or pricklie Ce-


ree
- Oyard : m. 4 Gander,


«Cold oye: The Port, or Vpfet of fome Bits, made


be move workemen thea worke-maifters.

, Un'eft oeuvre que d'ouvriers : Prov. No sworke is

: rightly done but what a workeman does.

Ouvrier : m,cre: fvorking,labouring trauellings alfo,
prompt, expert, of cood dexteritie in a things whence ;
Le gerfaut eft ouvrier de prendre les oifeaux de
riviere. The Gerfaulcon is apt, able, or accuftomed, to
prepontiuer fowle.

_ Tour ouvrier.d workie-day,a wecke-day(which à no

> boly-day.) 4
De main ouvricre: a De main d'ouvrier.

Ouvriere:f. 4 workewoman.

Ouvrir. To open; to [ét vpen ; to difélofé, diftouer, be-
wray,
s'Ouvrir, To gape,cbap,cleaue,rine ; to part bur
20e afunder,of Rif. ‘i ÉTÉ a «2
Ouvrirles Eftats, To call affembleor begin a Parlin
ament.

Ouvroir ?m, A worke-bou/e,or fhop to worke in,

Ouy: m. ouïe:f. Heard,bearkened liflened vate.

Ouy. Yes, yea,

Ouye:£. Lare,attention,bearing ; alfo,aneare ; alfo,the
bearbe called great Sengreene,or great Houfleeke.

Les ouyes de poiflons. The gills of ordinarie fifhes:
but of buge ones (as Whalls, rc.) the boles wheront
they Jpout water.

Les ouyes d’vne Violle. The found-holes of a
TVioll.

Ien’en ay rien que l'ouye. 1 haue it no otherwife
then by report , 1 came to it onely by bearefey.

Ouyftres: f Oyflers.

Oxicrat, Looke Oxycrat. ES

de ag : com, Sharpening , or cleering the
Went, ; ss

Oxigone. A fharpe-pointedangl, ==.

Oximel: m. Syrop of vineger (made of bonie,water and
vineger.) vet :
Oximel fquillitique, Hath the inyce of the Sea-oni-
on added vnioit. : Det

Oxirrhodin: m, 4 liquid medecine of vineger and
Rofe-water ; applied to the heads of the franticke.

Oxifacre. Syrop made of vineger and figars ;

Oxugoine : com, Sharpe-angled, fharpe-cornered,


dar. ail
bg a : m, 4 potion,or drinke, made of vine ger min-
gled with water. > ~ La
mel. as Oximel. - 1): E
Oya. ( An Intericétion of wondering ) is it pofible !


Oye: FA Goofe. Cea
Oye de mer. A Porpofe,(becanfe nofed like a Goof.)
Oye nonnette..4 Brigander.
Becd'oye. Wild Tanfie, Siluer weed ; alfo, the Por-
pofe,or Sea-hog. i


round,and bowing like the necke of a Goofe.

Merde oye, Goo/e- turd grétne, ; ‘
Patted’ oye. Looke Patte, REX

La de oye. The giblets of a Goofe ; alfo,the bellie,
and inwards oï intralls,of other edible creatures.

Pied d'oye.Guo/t-foot,wild Oracbe ; an bearb which
is alfe called Swines-bane, becaufe it kills ibe [wine
that eat of it. A


Verd d'oye. Ayelowifh,or Gooft-turd greene. |
Ferrer les oyes, To (pend both time,and labour verie |
. vainely. 2


Mon  L'oye |.


:
=
4
TS
à
% à
F
4
à.
om
ns


4
|
2


OI Z E


L'oye mene l'oifon paiftre: Prov. Cavefull parents
teach their children bow 16 line of themfelues.

L'oifon n’eft pas digne de monftrer les pafquis a !’
oye: Prov. Seche Oifon,

Lés cifons menent paiftreles oyes: Prov. The cart
leads the borfe ; the young inflruét ibe old.

On plume l’oye fans la faire crier: Prov, The fim-
ple gooft complaines not of ber plucking; a fillie gull
complaines not though you coujin him, -

Peu à peu Ic loup mange ge : Prov. By litileand
little tbe Wolfe denowres the Goofe; by diligence , or
degrees a man obtaines bis purpofe.

Qui ne fait comme fait oye , n’adefa vie lon~
gucioye: Prov. (In commendation of the drinking of
water )

Qui mange l'oye du Roy, il en chie la plume cent
ans apres: Prov. He that eats the Kings Goofe doth
void the feathers an bundred yeares after: viz. He
that purloynes the Princes treafure payes in th'arreras
ges (by bimfelfe, or bis beives) one time or another,

Oye. grand d’oye. Great flore, huge plentie, much a-

bundance : Rab.

Oyon : m. A greene Goofe,or young Goofe,

Oyre:f. An oyle-budget ; a great leatberne bag,or bot-
Le 10 keepesor carrie oyle,erc,in; made, commonly, of
a Goats skinne, and the hairie fide, oftentimes, turned
inward.

Oyfeille. as Ozeille.

Ojféler. Seche Oifeler.

Oylon. as Oifen.

Oyzeau. Looke Oïfcau. TA

Oyzelerie :f Fowling,bir d-catching;birding.

Oz. Looke Os, oy 4

Ozane :f. The name of an apple,

Ozeille:f, Sorrell,garden Sorrell. |
Ozeille de brebis. Small Sorrell, fheëpes Sorrell,
Ozeille petite. 2s Ozeille de brebis; or, fmall Sor-
rell,barren Sorrell, y
Ozeille Romaine. Roman Sorrell, round Sorrell,
Tours Sorrell, ; 3
Ozeille fauvage, Wild Sorrell , fowre Sorrell, the
Sovre Dagke. wee
Ozeille de Tours. as Ozeille Romaine.

Ozene: £, 4 linking fore, or vicer in thenofé; alfo, a
kiad of ranke-melling Purcouatrell fifh, that feeds on
Oyftersand is fed on by Lampreyes,

É es += : Hb
zeraye: f. A grove evs, ts fr ;

Ozercux: m.cule: £ Of Oxier, of wicker ; allo, full of
Oxiers.

Onc: m, The Oxier, water Willow, red Withie tree;
alfa,wicker ; alfo, a basket, or skip eee alfo,a
rod or twig of Oxitr,or of any otber pliant wood,

Franc Oziet. The Oxier Withie, Witbie, twig


| Ozicre:f. Awithietwi, |
Games A kid of finke, or pipe, feruing to conuey a-
| way


; m,Oximel ; frrop of vineger; made of bonie,
erand vineger. Phi -!
tea ML, [=
as Rose 4 es | P es Ve
=: 42 : { g ra s
zm, Paflures paflure grounds, or feeding
pean tt eo es


Paie a. “The landing-place of a balfèspaceflaire ;
~ enerie broad (which is commonly eugrie fift , or fixt) |


Pr A C


ment; a concnant,or condition agreed on. |

Pacification :£ A pacification,guseting,oppeafiment.

pages: m.¢e:f, Pacific, calmed, quieted, filled, ap-
peafed,

Pacificment : m. 4 pacifying,an appeafing.

Pacifier. To pacifie,appeofe.quict,calme, frill,

Pacifieur :m..4 pacifier appeafer, peace-maker.
acifique : com, Pacificews, peaceable; gentle, quict,
calme, fil,

Pacifiquement. Peaceably,quietly,calmely ; gently.

cue im. A packet; a (fmall) bundle, or fardle; a
truffe. ,

IL porte fon pacquet. He carries bis lead abeut with
him; (faid of one that is bulch-backt,)

Pacquette : f. Honiewort ; (an bearbe)

$0 im. 4 Pace ;
actieux : m.eufe: f Conenanting ; contraGijng, |

Pattion : £ as Pache, vf ie

Paétionné: m.ée: f.Conenanted,conditioned,indented,
promifed;bargained,contraéled capitulated agreed,

Paétionner. To couewant, condition ; promife, indent ;
bargaine,cope,contraël,capitulate agree with,

Paétifer. as Paétionner.

Padane :f, 4 kind of open bit which gives much libertie
40 the tongue of a horfe.

Padoen :m, pr ET

ce. À common e. ~

Padouen, as eae. :

Padouyr les vns furles autres. Neighbours to lead
their beafts each into others paftures,or 1e commen one
upon the other,

hr sai m. Common of paflure inone, or diners
Parifbes, |

Paelle :£ 4 fhouell ; a fire-fhouell ; alfo,a Peele wher-
with bread,érc, is fet into an quen; alfo, a féoileffe
Pojnet or Skellet shaming brimmes like a Bafon ; a (ut |
tle)Panne. |
Paelle à bourbe, A Scauingers fhouell; a broad and
bollow fhonell of wood ; fuch a one as durt is vfually
‘ vemoued,or taken vp,with, :

Paclle à frire. 4 fiping-panne,


aelle marine. The Sea-ball; confifis of the flender |


laulks of the bearbe Alge, or of peeces of fpunges com-
Dr by the foame of the fea, & by the working iber-
of caft afhore.
Iineluy chaut d'avoir paelle puis qu'il n'ya plus
uc frire, He takes no care for that which be bath no
ther caufe to vf.
Tenir la queuë de la paclle. To bane th'ab/olute go-
uernment of,or chiefe dealing ina matter.
Qui tient la p ar la queuë illa tourne 13 ou
ilveut: Prov, He that holds a fiying-panne by the
taile pare it which way be lif.


La paelle fe mocque du: : Prov. Said when
one friend or ,derides another.
… ‘Atelle ) : Prov, One [louer matcht


flenge: “sone fil Peele fill of.
crée: f, « eHl-full, or Peele- full of.
à eller cif. A little fhouell , fire-Poonell > Peele, or


ecfe,er flep thereof.
pÉllarnet: À m. Afinall panne, or (footleffe ) Skellet.
Paellonnette:f as Pacllonnet. i
Paganifmne:.m. Pagani/me, Heathenifme, Gentilifine;
the religionor flate,cf the Gentiles. |
Page :m. A page ; a waiting, or frsing hep lis ance,
e


ee


PAI


where he hath often good breeding, be ought to be a

Gentleman borne’) thence alfoja Taylers boy; and,

Page de navire. A hip-boy, -° asthe

Hors de page ; & forti de page. Adultus pal breech-

ing, out of bis waiting prentifhip, growne atall maz,

or,a full- grovone man; (Hunifinen applie this phrafe to
a big Leaneret.) Mr

Page:f. Apage ; a fide,of'a leaf

Pageat,& Pageau. as Pagel. ©

Pagel: m, A little ruddie Sea-Breame,whichrefembles
the Pagre fo neere, as it is often miflaken for a little

- one; See Pagre,

Pageot. as Pagel, ; |

Pagerot: m. A(paultiie) little page,

Pagnon. The pinnion of a clocke, &e ; the nu in bof
notches the tecth of the wheeles doe runne.
Lanterne à pagnons.A paire of trundles,or trundle
beads ; part ofa mill; as under Lanterne. à

Pagnotc : m, 4 Bifimian, [coundrell,cowwardlie or feur-
wie fouldier ; one that hath neither wit,nor courage.

Pagre:f A round-headed, bawke-(nowted, réd-mou-

thed, and ftrong-tootbed Sea-Breame, that feeds much

on fhelt-fifh; in Summer fhe is ruddie of colour in Win-
ter skie-coloured; therin differing from the fifo Pagel,
which is alwayes ruddie,

Pagrure. as Pagul,

Pagul. The /mooth-fhelled Cray-fifh, tearmed a Grama
pell,Grit,or Pungar. 4

Pagure. as Pagul.

Paianifme : m. Paganifine,

Païer, Looke Payer. :

Paignon: m. A little loaft of bréad : qPic.

Fe + rie vies ; Hs J mate of
aillace :f. Afiraw-bed a 0, a wide veffell made
Such fluffe as biues be of, and fomewbat refembling,
though not fo deepe as,a Babel.

Paillard :m. A/echer, wencher, whoreminger whore-


bunter ; alfoya knaue,yafcall,varler, {coundrell, filtbie |.
eo y


”.

Paillard: m.arde:f Lecherous, whorifh, wenching,
lafcinious.

Couleur paillarde. A pale, bleake,or wan colours the
veene ficknefe. :
aillardcomme yn Moine; &, Paillard comme
vn Verrat, As lecherous as a Goat([ay we.) ï

Paillarde:£. 4 whore, punke, drab, firumpet, harlot,
queane,conrtezan,callet, ;

Paillarder. To leeber ; bitch-bunt it ; bannt bawdie

_. boufes ; alfo,to tumble in the firaw, : À

Paillardife :£ Lecherie, whoredome , venerie, obfeeni-
tie,uncleanneffe; alfo stoguerie,fnauerie svilanie,wic-
kedneffe ; any filthieor beafilie bumor.

Paillasse. as Paillace, ~ ‘

Paillé: m, as Pailler ; alfo, firaw-colour; alfo,a Bifbops
Pah; whence; .

Droi& du paillé. Loohe under Droid. |

Paille: Straw ; alfo,chaffe; the buske,or bull wherein
corne eth; alfo, the firjt bud of a flower ; al, a
a im a blade, cre alfo, a Spangle; See Pail-

es,

Paille folle debled, chaffe; the buske wherein corne
‘Wyeth; or, ’ ‘+ Fol. tn 8 eS
Paille cas Sagnie, MES

eyalde paille. 4 borft thats fed with fra in
| lead of bay; whence the Prowerbe; Cheval de paille,
cheval de batai + ARE ©: Det
> Couleur de jaune paille, Strawcolour, ”

… Loupen be 2078


le. See Loup, Vn … :


Paille-maille, see Palemaille. 4
Pailler : m. Areekesor lacke of firaw; alfo, bed-ftraw;


Pailles:£. spangles; alfo,the flakes,or Parkles that flie
&


Paillet: m.ette: £Pale.red,pal -claret, flefh-coloured,
Pailléte. as Paillette,

Pailleté: m. ée :f, Spangled beSpangled.

Palleser. vat Lpangle, 10 befpanele, to trimme, or decke,


Pailleteur: m. 4 Spangle.-maber.
Paillette:£ 4 Gale ps ET
Pailleux : m.eufe : f.Strawie; chaffie; alfa


Paillier :m. A chaffe-heapes orja place at Laat


Paillisson. 4 fall frying-panne.  *
ailliz: m. pe rar of eh xs
Paillole: £ 4 pangle ; whence ; Or de paillole, Span-


Pailloté. terre paillotée. Earth mingled with chaffe,


Paillotes :f. Spangles; alfo,plates of Armonr.
Pain; m. Bréad ; alfo,a loa} ofbrtad.


P A I:


Or enpaille, Spangle gold or cold beaten thinne for
angles,


Rats en paille. 4 rumbling rufiling, burliburlie, con.
Uion,flurre,coyle ; or,as in Rat,

Plus ioyeux que rats en paille. See Rat.

Avoir d'autre paille au bec.Il a bien d'autre paille

au bec, He hath other [uffe in bim then yon are aware


of
Iya plüsde paille que de grain, There is mere
chaffe then corne in bim,
Eftre en la paille iufques au ventre, To enioy all
things in great abundance à 10 lue at verie great
eafè.
Faire à Dieu gerbe de paille, To deceiue, or de.
Prine God of bis right, e(pecially in matters of tenthes;
Looke Gerbe,
Mettre la paille au devant de. To interrupt; tohin-
“der, flop,or flay the fpeech of.
Seremplir de foin,ou de paille, To flop, or fil bis
guts with any thing, as a bor/e that wanting bay falls
10 bis flraw,
Rompre la paille avec. To fall out with a Fiend, or
acquaintant,
Avecle temps, & la Paille l’on meure les mefles:
Prov, In time,and flraw are Medlers mellowed,
€ mauvais payeurs foin,ou paille : Proy, Take a-
ny thing thats offered you by an euill debtor,


Nul grain fans Paille: Pro. No corne without fome
chaffe.


alfo,the part of an inner Court wbereon flraw ws fcatte-
red for fowle to feed on, alo, a dung-bill befère a
barne,or flable doore ; whence ;

Vne poule de pailler. A dunghill bennc,a benne thats
Sed at the barne doore,


from bammered,and red-hot Jron,&rc.

Il penfe que nues font pailles d’ airain, (Much
= to our) He thinkes the Moone is made of greene
chee,


with [pan


iskept; alfo,as Pailler,


gle gold; or gold thinne-beaten for fpangles.


or with flraw.


Pain d'amande. Almond bread,or bisket made of Al-
monds ; alfo, Marchpane,

Pain d'Argus. Spangie, or light, bread ; bread full of
enes, °°
Pain d’aveine, Oaten bread ; Fannocks,

Pain de balle. Are. bread ; or, a courfe bread
wherein there is much chaffe.

Pain benitt. Helie-bread , vfed in Popifh Chur-
ches. . 0 TER


Mmm ij


oe ee Ne ee + Ne TE fuk eee cen ok di, él qu Ad ci Ode DOM


Pain de Goncffe. A delicate white bread, made ina
… village called Gonefe ; whofe water is reported to be


… Pain de panniere.A great white leafe yeelded by the


P, A IL.


Pain benift de la conftairie. Thumps,thwacks,blows
Pain benift de la S.Cy. wine ; or,any good drinke.
Pain benift d’Efcofle. 4/odden fheepes liner.

Pain bis.Browne bread,houfhold bread,courfé bread.
Pain bis-blanc. wheaten bread,or boulted bread.
Pain de bouche, 45 Pain mollet.

Pain bourgeois, Crible bread betweene white and
browne ; a bread (that fomewbat refembles our wbea-
ten,or cheat)a loaf whereof u to weigh, when tis ba-
hed,32 ounces.

Pain de braffe, A great boufhold loafe of courfe
bread, like our chefloape

Pain de brode.Browne bread,cour fe honfhold bread;
a loafe whereof is to weigh 96 ounces,or fix pound.
Pain de Chailli, À verie white bread (named fo of
Chaillia vidlage)the loafe whereof is to weigh 12 oun-
ces and to be fold for 12d, Parif. when a Septier of
wheat is worth 20s. Tourn.

Pain chalan, A4 kind of countrey-Bakers bread,that
of Gonefle excepted, :

Paina chanter. as Pain miflal.

Pain de Chapitre. A fine, white, bard-kneaded, and
flat manchet, weighing about 16 ounces,

Pain à cecu. The finalleft, and daintieft kind of red
Mujbrome ; alfo,as;

Pain de cocu. Cuckobread, Stubwort, wood Sorrell,
woud Sowre, fowre Trefoile,bearbe Alleluya, :

Pain coquillé. 4 kind of bard-crufled bread, whofe
loaues doe fomewhat refemble the Dutch bunnes of our
Rheinifh-vwine boufes. ;
Pain de Cour. as Pain mollet.

Pain farain, A verie yellow boufhold bread, of the
better fort,and made in great loaues.

Pain defeneftre. Browne bread.

Pain fraifé. A Panadoe,of the crummes of fale bread,

aked a while in 2 or 3 changes of water, then boyled

in apipkin with butter or any other fweet,cr fat moif-
ture; or in Capons broath , and often flirred.


the chrefe caufe of that delicacie.
Pains @ hoftelage. Looke Hoftelage. . .. :
Pain de mefnage. Ordinarie boufhold bread; (for the

mofl part finer then browne, and | owner then whea-


ten.) ey WAR ;
Pain miffal, 4 Wafer made onely of flower and a lita


tle falt. ° “7 ¢
Pain mollet. 4 verie light, verie cruflie, and fauorie
white bread, fill of epes,tes nd falt, ;
Pain de mouftarde. 4 leafé,or ball, of drie, or dried
Pain mouton. LeokeMouton
Pain d'oifeau.Stonecrop, Stonebore, Moufetaile wild
_Prickmadam,Pricker, Jacke of the butterie,


the tenants of S. Gondon fur Loire unto, their Lord,
arely,and befides their Cens,
Pain broath


Brown bread,courfe pla bread.
de pourceau, iat?


A delicat bread made in a village


le è otenfac al ag yin Pera 7%


or haile-fellow well met,with,


: C’eft crop mangé d’ vn pain en vn lieu,#e bauetoo


cs


PAI


Pain rouffer. Cheat or boulted bread; boufhold bread
made of Wheat and Rie mingled. PRINT
Pain de terre, The bearbe Sow-bread.
“je pain. re Her: yee af
etit pain. 4 ead; alfo, fhare diet,
pooré fare, thinne cheere; whence the HE Apres
and banquet petit pain. &,faire le petit pain.Te
neerely, (paringly nigaraly, with a little.
Aupain, & au coufteau avec. Verie familiar, verie
much conuerfant,at bed and at boord, as a companion,


De mefme pain foupe ; &, faire de vel pain foupes.
Looke Soupe.
Eftre en pain; cu hors de pain. Children tobevn-
der,or out of, the gouernment of their parents; hence
alfo,Mife hors de pain. An emancipation.
Faire pain fepare. To part houfholds ; people of one
houfe,or focietie, to diet feuerally,or line by themfelues.
ied ia pee blancle pos To fare wellat
rfi and ill at laft; or, to the beft at firft in bope
the worft will mend. Pe of fh ‘
Manger fon painen fon fac. To play the faudge, or
churle; tecat bis viltualis priuately, retiredly, or in
corners, 7


much ufed,attended,or vrged,one thing at once.
Il {gait plus que fon pain manger. He knowes more
then th'eating of his bread comes to; he 1 no child, be
is paft a babe ; bis skill is more then ordinarie.
ectre le pain en vn four froid, To put bread intoa

cold ouen ; to imploy things idly, or on that which will
not auaile them; or.thinke to make vfé of things which
are of no manner of vft.
Mettre vn pain au four à. To doe a man a good{(or e-
will) turne ; to put a tricke onbim , with a good (or an
enill)intention. .
Prendre yn pain fur la fournée. To get a {natch at
bis wench thats readie to be maried,
Quiers tu meilleur pain que de fourment ? #ouldft
thou bane better bread then’s made of wheat ?
Il veut beaux chiens à de pain. He lookes to
be well ferned, and yet will gine but little intertain-
ment, ;

Pain tantqu'il dure, vin à mefure : Prov, Eat at
pleafure, drinke by meafure. :

‘A pain, & oignon trompette ne clairon : Pro.Look


Oignon. .

Nulpain fans peine: Prov. Toyle bath a part in each

par: we enio}; or, without fome toyle no bread, no be-

nefit.

Ou pain faut rout eft à vendre : Prov.where bread

is wanting all is to be fold,

‘A Yenfourner on fait les pains cornus (ou cocus:
Pic.) Prov. In the beginning of a caufè are faults the

hin made,and (once made) wort amended ; or, the

beginning fhewes ywbat to prefime of the ref.


SA la faimil n'y a | de mauvais pain: Prov.
ee,
:/Chafque demain apporte fon pain. All dapes pro-
duce their owne prouifion.
. Ia ne 2 a qui n’apporte fon pain:
© Prov. Let the next day produce it owne prouifion ;
or, let bim not come next day that may comes TH-
prouided. L 25
.Crouftes de paftez valent bien pain :Prov. Peeces
of pie-cruft are as good as bread; or;he doth no wrong
, that giuetb cake for bread. i+
De rours'avife qui pain four Pro.Nefiieinuen-
i . te


To


= PAT | PAT!


soda pod dr es; ant more then any thing makes | iefs,or vafalhs in tenure,or in efate.
pas es | Pairrie : f as Pairie.
Eau & pain c’eft la viande du chien : Prov. Bread | Pais: m,4 Countrey,or Region, Land, Prouince (natine)


and water is but a dogs dinner, (à Loyle; al, (any)ground,or fève.
Le chat a faim quandil ronge du pain: Pro The Païs couftumier. See Couftumier,
cat's a bungred when fhe gnawes acruft. : Pais de droiétefcrit. 4 contr ey gouerned by thé ci-


Selon le pain il faut le coufteau: Provave mufipro- wile Laws
portion our experce by our meanes. Pais defuerie. The Pveating countrey ; Cornelins bis
Tel a du pain lors qu'il n’a plus de dents: Pro. Some tub.


baue abundance when they cannot vfe it, ‘A travers pais. Rouing, at randome at large,
Telgrain tel pain: Prov. Suchas the corne fuch is Aveué de pais. Grofely,baflily,at Pr fight,without
the bread, certaintie ; without any exaétor neere ¢xamination,
Vn mefme coufteau me coupe le pain ,& le doigt : Eftre bien de fon pais, To be clownifh, rude, fimple,
Prov. From one thing I receiue both good and burt. ignorant,
Painéture. Looke Pein@ure. aigner pais. To fleale on,rid eround,rid way,
Paindre. as Peindre. Teéter leurs hommes À Pais.To fer their men on land,
aincux: m.eufe : £. Breadie, full of bread. or afbore,
aintre. Looke Peintre, Tirer pais. To flie direllly forward; and, in trauel:
Pair: m. 4 peere; a paragon; alfo,a match, felow,com- Ling to goeon,or,to rid way.
anion; alfo,a paive at Cards. Qui maura perdu ne m’aille cercher en ce ais 12,
airs. Vaffalls, or tenants bolding of a Mannor Let not bine that (hall bappen to locfe melooke to find


one kind of tenure ; fellow vaffalls, fellow ubieGls; à me there, :

So, the common Counfellors of incorporate townes baue Païfage :m, Païfäge, Landskip, Countrey-worke ; a re.
beene tearmed Pairs. prefentatio of fields,or of the countrey,in painting ec,
Pairs de la Cour;ou Pairs de ficEaffalls,ortéants, | Paifant:m, 4 peafant poore, clowne, fivaine, bind 3A
who fit as Afiftants,or Triers ia their Lords Courts,(em bob,or lob of the countrey.

pecially when any caufe that concerns bis inberitance | Pai ible: com, Peaccable; quiet, calme, fill, gentle,
4s iudged;) thefe Pairs are finable to the King for all Paint.

Sentences ill ginen in thofe Courts, Paifiblement. Peaceabiy; quietly calmely, gently, mild»


airs de France. The Peeres of France; in old time, Ly,patiently,
and at their firftinflitution (by Loysle Ieune) were | Paisibleté:£ Peaceableneffe, tranquilitic, quictneffe, \
but 12 ; fix Spirhtuall; vizsthe Archbifhop of Rheims, _Calmenelfe,mildnefe gentleneffe, À
the Bifhops st Langees(who afowere fliled | Paiflage de beftes. The graine , palluring, or fee- ‘
Dukes) the Bifhops (and Earles) of Beauvois;Chaa- ding of cattell, .
lons,aad Noyon; and fix Temporall ones; viz the | Paisse foliraire. A certaine black-browne mountaine ‘is
‘Dukes of Burgundie, Normandie, and Guienne ; bird which refembles a Throfile, or Owfèl, and being a
* the Earles of Flanders, Champagne, and Tholofe : incaged fings verie fweetly; or,as inPafle, py
At this day all the former fix continue; and in lieu of | Païfleau :m.4 |fake,pole pearchprop,or flay,wberwith ‘#
the later (whofe eftates baue beene, at feuerall times, 4 vine,oc,is beld up; alfo, the vine Jo vnderpropped, me
either united vato;or aliened from, the Crowne) there Saulter de treille en Paifleaux. (1 diféourfe) torun ÿ


be more then fix, either Princes of the Bloud, or the Siddilysor uncertainly, from one matter to another,
Princes fauourites ; created at feurral times, and e- Paiffeler. To under{et,or vnderprop with poles,or fakes.
quall among themfelues(and vato the firft Peers)in all | Paiffernent. as Paiflage.
manner of primledges, Paifficre:f. 4 banke,or canfiy, beld por in,by flakes.
Pair,& fequence. 4 card- play fomewhat like toour | Paiffon:f. Th giftment, or Herbage of woods, av ‘fore
Poft and paire. *  vefis; feeding for cattell therein, ae
La Cour des Pairs. 4 Court Baron, or Lords Court; | Paissonner. Cattell to Seed; or broufe, in woods crc,
and the Parliament of Paris, wbercin the Peeres of | Païflu: m.ué: £ Fed on graxed,eaten,by cattell,
France may fit as Affiftants,’ Paiftre: Tu feed, graze,eat,paflureon, Hees toe
Veine fans pait..4 branch of the bollow veine,wber: | Paiftre de paroles, To give words in fread of money;
by ~ [paces berweene eight of the lower ribs be nou- 10 delay,put off,or toll on, with faire words.


rifbed, La mauvaife garde paift fouvent le loup : Prov. 14
I’ entends le pair, & Ja couche. &,Prins au pair,& watching oficn feeds the ie wolfe, es
à Ja couche. as in Couche: Les oïfons menentpaiftre oye; & l’oye mene les


Pair. Like,alike equal matcbing,euen meet. oifons pailtre. Tswo contrarie Prouerbes of Confaf.
| Pairounon, The game called Euen and odde, oneal Galea ; Looke Oifon, iif
‘A pait de. Like unto,enen with, : : Paiftri,& Paiftrir. See Peftri,& Peftrir,
Aller SEX avec. To goe ranke in vanke,or cheeke by | Paix:f, Peace, quiet, ref; a peace, accord, agreement,
iowle,with, a compofition,attonement,
Mettre depair avec,Ta compare,or fet in equal! bal. Homme de paix. 4 vaffall; Seche Honime,
lance wi a Maifon de la paix. A Court of Fuftice ; a Law-Court.
| Paire: £4 paire,or couple of;alfo,a bet or flakeswhence; Sergents dela paix. Ordinarie Sergeants, or Catch-
lem’en vay de paire, will not bold the match; will poles, belonging to fome Court, .
béunlaïd againe. . Villes de paix.Peaceable,or priviledged townes;thofe
| Faite3 paires de Po Tomake 3 mariages ; and wherein fubiells are bound to keepe the peace, and to -
hence,n commen (peech,they fay ; vnc paire de Heu- end their differences(if they will contend) by Law.
_ res,ou de Pfeaumes; A Sergice booke, or P{alter. Tout en paix. Quietly, filly, gently, faire aiid
Pairic:£ 4 Peeredome of France; alfo, equalitie of fub- Softly. Fin k
Li] Mmm iÿ SES


ee
Fa


PAL 3 ae 2 oe


EEE ET ee eh OAR ARE eT IT X ï
Lapaix eft la fefte de tous Sain@s: Prov, Peace is Palemaille : £. Agame, wherein a round box bowle is
all boly mens holy-day. re with a mallet firucke through a bigh arch of yron(fian-.
Achette paix,& maifon faiéte : Prov, Peace, anda ding at either end of an alley one)which be that can do
houfé thats built,are to be bought. ; at the fevéft blowes,or at the nicbey agreed on,winnes.
Bafton porte paix quant et fey: Prov. 4 cudgel! | Palenc:m.The Pennant; a rope which belpes to hoife up.
breeds the peace of bun that beares it. the boat,and all beanie marchandifeaboord a fbip.
Mieux vaut en paix yn oeuf qu'en guerre vn Paletée :f. 4 pale fill of. |
boeuf: &, Mieux vaut fervitude en paix que Seig- | Palerons des efpaules. The fhoulder blades,
neurie en guerre : Pro. Better aneedic flaue in peace | Palet:m. An yron peftell ; alfo, a fall beetle to play at
then a wealthie Lord in warre. : ball with; alfo,a quoit. We
Oy,voy,& te tais, tu veux vivre en paix: Prov. | Paleter du chanure; To pound,or bruifebempe with à |


Looke Ouir, : peflle,or beetle.
Peu,& paix don de Dieu: Prov. .4 little with peace Palette :f.4 Lingell,Tenon,Slice,or flat toole wberwith
a a great bleffing. Chirurgians lay falue on plaiflers ; alfo, the faucer, or


Qui de tout fe raift de tout apaix: Prov. Hold thy


porringer wberinto they receiue bloud out of an ope-
peace and enioy peace;unféafonable talke is tbe motber


ned veine; alfo, a battle-doore.


8 a La palette du genouil, The knee bone, or : the
“ Paix. (An Intericétion inioyning filence) peace bufbt ot sobrlebone of the knee, ki > panne; be .
; a word, Pigeon de palette. A rough-footed Doue.


Pal : m, A pale,lake,or pole ; alfo, a putting to death by


al-fer : m. Anyron-btaded fhonell, fpade, or
4 flake thrufi(longrwayes)througb the bodie; much vfed ME LT at
e. sa,


p ia by Gardeners.
i: m. A pale,or thicke lath; a le,or pile. ”

Paliarif: miue:£ Palliatine; prea ouer ¢0-
uering,biding ; (badowing ,colauring.
Cures paliatives. Cures which baue not fearcht to
the root,or caufe of a difeafe, but baue brought onely a i
Shew of amendment; as wben a wound ts clofed, and ie
yet féfiers at the bottome. ;
Medecines paliatives. Medecines which cafe for

_ awhile, bus beale not altogether; or as in Cures pa-


among the Turkes ; alfo,as Milandr
Palabre: £ a Parole, : :
Palabreur: m. A pratler,babler, tatler ;amidle or com-
” mon talker.

Paladin : m, 4 Knight of the roundtable,
4 Il faitbien defon Paladin. He fivaggers, brags, or
“ frouts it mightily, ——
SJ Palais: m.A Palace; a Princes Court, houfe, or place ;
=. alfo,the boufe,or Hall,wberin Courts be keptin town


a of Parliament; a Guild-ball,Sbire-ball, Sefjions-boufes liatives,
alfo, the roofeor palate of the mouth; alfo,the taft. Paliation. Seeke Palliation.
Palais au Lievre,ou du Lievre. The finooth Sow-tbif- Palicer: as Paliffer.’ »
tle,or [oft Milke-thiflle,called Hares Lettuce. Palier. To palliate; to cloake,to coner,bide, or bill over;
Do€@rine du Palais. ciuilitie,courtefie,good manners, to foadow,to colour, .
courtlie bebauiour ov carriage. Palifié:m.ée:f. Impaled, compaffed with a pale, de-
Efcus du palais. À kind of couaters. fended by a Patifadee,


Gens du palais, Lawyers(of all forts.)
lours de palais. Cowrt-dayes , (itting-dayes, Hal-
dayes.
Fe Pourfuyvans au palais. Suitors Clients,
Souris de Te An Aduocate, a Pleader ; or (moft
voperly)a Pettifogeer. | L'ART ate
; Paice epalait To plead,or argue at the barre.
Palalalan, The found of the French march. ]
Palamide : £ À young Tunnie ; alfo,the Bonito (fifh.) _
Palamie: & The bloudie rifis; a difeafe,or impofiumati-
on in the veofe of aborfés mouth, + ab ae
_ Palatin : m. 4 generall,@ common appelationor title,
for fucb as baue any fpecial Office, or fimétion in a So-
" ueraigne Princes palace.
Comte Palatin.A Court Palatines (is not the title of
|‘ a particular Officer but an bereditarie addition of dig.
… nitic,and bonor, gotten by feruice done in a domeflicall


Paligenefie :£. Regeneration, or, diserfitie of genera


tion. |
Palinodie:f, Apalinodie, recantation, contrarie fong,
unfaying of what bath beene faid.
Palinotode : £ Dinerfitie of birth.
Paie re vewele ub ib
ifer. To reueale,publifh,bewray. ;
Palifflade :f, 4 palifadoe; a defence, or wall, of pales;
alfo, abedge-row of fundrie fruit trees [et clofé toge-


ther,
Palifle : f. as Paliffade,
Paliflé :m, éc:f. Palifadoed,flaked,or paled about. —
Der oh impale; to inclofe with pales, to defend with
palifadoes.
Palisson : m. À flat yron,or fhouell to bake cakes on.
Paliure: m. she ed pee of: + Chrifis
thorne (becaufe it is faid be was crowned withall.)
Pall-allant: m. .4 ftaulhing,or fronting braggadochio;


or asP n.
Pallamente:f. Pavt of the Orelopjor upper decke of a


= charge; and be whom the Prince appointed to be cbiefe
ae gen awhole Prouince bath alfo beene intitled,
jomte Palatin.)


'alatin: mine:£.0for belonging to,the whence; | Gallep > |

Da races prets Such pr “este: Pallares. 4 kind of Indian pulfe. ee

| the belpe of the palate; as G,T,Rere. | Palle. as Pale 3,aif0,4s Palletoc; af ,the beaxill,collet,
: at: m, APalinatie; the title, ar dignitie of a | orbeadefaring. . À ; 4
PE ya pt Comets Balatee: : > |, Palle: com, #Pafle; Pale. |
Pale :f. The fowle called a Shoueler ; afo,s fireJbouel; | Pallé: m. ée : f. Partie par-pale; a tearme of Blazon, 4
alfa saffa,tb'Indian fig tree, 5204 | Pallemail. See Palemaille,

JB 5 js 4 | Pallement. Palely,bleakly,wanly, ae
| Es “ Paller. as Parler. (an eld word.) re


Pallerons des efpaules. The Omeplates ;'or fi
blade 2 0 Te Sm


: Pal


PAL
Palleter. To feuffle, or fight with ; (an old word.)
Palletie: £. f ER imi, Ss ;
Palletoc; m. Along,and thicke bar Cie gar-
ment like a fhort cloake with fleewes ; a fuc
the molt of our moderne Pages are attired in,


Palletoque.That weareth a Palletoc. ‘
Pallette: f. 4 little fhouell; à finall peele; ao, a fout
pir bade saa eo et

eur: f. Paleneffe,wa à
Palliatif. Looke Paliatif


Palliation: f. 4 cloakiae,couering,biding, colouring.
allier: m. as Palluyet; alfo, the landing place of a
» balfe-pace fiayre.
allir. See Paflir, ne
Pallis. zs Pali, PA poses Ling
Palliflade: £ 4 Palifado, or defence of pales’, alfo, a
Parke;or place impaled. ‘ Sa
Palliflement : m. Palenefe; or,a waxing pale.
Pallonneau. Looke Palonneau.. |
Pallourde:f A little, narrow,and feldome-gaping Coc-
hle which we alfo calla Palour. 8
Palluyer: m.4a Officer which with a fhouell vualadesor
Lades the fale which is for the Kings flore,
Palinaire: com. Belonging to, or being in, the paulme of
the band, :
Palmant. He that bids mof} rent for a Leale, or money
for an Inberitance,which is to be let,or fold.
Palme: m. 4 band-breadth, foure fingers, or three yn-
~ ches inmeafire ; alfo,abaftment, |:
Le Band palme, Is twelue fingers, or nineynches; a
fill


anne,
‘Paline: €. The paulme of the band ; alfo, the Palme, or
Date tree; Paulme. ge
Palinée: £ 4 bidding of mop, or out-bidding of all, for
an Fuberitance,or Leafe.
Palmer. To firoake, finooth,lay,or firike downe with the
palme of the band ; whence;
Palmer les cheveux des orgueilleux. To quell,or a-
À = bate,the buffe of the prowd.
| Palmier: m. The Palme,or Date tree.
Palmier petit. The little wild Date tree.
Palinier: m.ere:f. Ofor belonging to,the Palme tree;
alfo,bearing a branch of Palme.
‘Heritage palmier . 42 Jaheritance expofed vato
fale. . n.
* | Palmite s f, The low,or little wild Date tree,
Palnule: £ 4 Date,
| Palon: m. The broad end of a (woodden) fhonel; or as


Mafferotte. ;
Palonneau: m.A peece of a firong rope doubled er ba-
ning a knot with an eye in the middle of it, whereby it


fernes 10 fafien draught borfes unto the tbill of a Catt,

\ OY carriage. - x

Palot: m. whence; Tenir palot à. To hold tacke, or

; p e GP prier ie à

Pa le: £. A kind of Spanifh ff.

[pa ue Éd nderly, firoake /afth
alper. ‘To handle gently, feele te , Rroake foftly,
touch gi ; alfa, to , foothe, cog, or collogue

; à Lt cug atk #

Palpication : 6 pantingor often beatings ofathrob

Et


_ bigg,or affrighted


Palpiter. To pantor throb; to beat, moue, or flirre verie


uit, which : .
rt


Panary:


Pançart: m. 4 Gorbellie, great guts, fet guleb. }
Pantar@ere A paper containing the particular rates of |


Pance: £ The paunch, maw, belle; af (the fashion


Paltret: m. 4 Cleaner. @Blefien,
alu: m. 4 fenneymar{h; wet ground,or moore,
aludameit : ni. 4 coat-aymour, or borfemans coat 34
iscker reaching tothe knees. r

Palu léux : m. eufe: f as Paluftre ; or full of marfhes,

s400res, Wks

Perce tg under which the fouldi-
ors that make approaches, or are upon entri
breach, be Le 14 AS + ingefa

Pelumbe if A Ringdone, Stockdoue, Queef, woods
Chiher,

Paluftre : com. Fernie marfhymar(bie moorifh.
Paluyer. See Palluyer. j:
am, as Pan; afpanne.

Pampe. Looke Pampre.

p rhage. Eatalial-ranening al-deuonrin.

Pamphre On. AHornet,or Ox-flye,

Pampier: m, ere: fi Of,or belonging to, a Vine-leaft;
alfo, bearing onely leaues.

Pampillettes: £ Spangles.

Pampre: f 4 ine leafe,or Vine leaues; alfo, & young
Vine-branch full of leaues. ;
Armé de pampre. Whitled mellow,cup-fhotten, that |
bath put on armour of pot-proofe. Loris CT

Pampré: m, ce:f, Fullof, alfa, furnifbed; or couered
with,Vine leaues.

Pamprer. To fl, furnishor coner, with Vine leaves.

Pan: m. 4 pane, péece,or pannell of à wall, of Wainfcot,

of a glafe-window, rc, as Paneau ; alfo, a pawne,or
$8; alfo,a (panne ; alfo,a toyle,or bay wherewith wild
beafts are caught ; alfa; the skirt of a gowne ; the pane
of ahofe,of a cloake rc. .
ans, Looke after Panoucre. ;

Panacée: f. Wound-wort,All-heales an hearbe.

Panacée, à pan. Acallvato meat; like our, A man:
ger.

Panache. LookePennache.

Panade: f. 4 Panado; crummes of bread (and currans)

moiflened,or brewed with water.
Panage: m. as Appanage ; alfa, Pawnage; Maflage

ine; or the money due to the owner of a ead for

the fame. :
Panaillon, Sée Penaillon. .

anaiz: m, A certaine foot thats leRe,and ranker,then |

the ordinarie Par(enip; otherwife. refembling it, and

oft miiftaken for it. i


Panaiz de Macedoine, The Macedonian Parfenip, if
whofe iuice is much efleemed of byheardjmen, À
Panaiz fauvage. Hercules Wound.svort,or Al-beales,
al/o,the wild Carrot ; Some alfo tearme fo, ComParfe- |
Speed Pr pa. A rota
uspanaiz. The white Makow,marsh Mallow, |
moorish Mallow, “BO pepe ‘joyous CT El
>A.Felon or Whitlow. at ofa I
Panax.aéPanaiz. ee ee


naiz.


gulch,


Tolls, or Cuftomes due vnto the King, Ore ; thus tears | -
med, becaufe,commonly, bung up in fame publicke place À
either fingle,or within a frame. !


or the great bellie of 4


avoit les yeux plus grands que fa pance. His |
eyes were Fr mm ee PA A ré |
*A pañce chaude pied endormi: Pto. when the bel.
lieis fill the bones would be at ret, rpmotee
Delapance vient la danfe : Pro, From the pasmch |
___ €0mes.


of) a-great bellied dowblet ;
ART de j


"


yam” Baa EPCOT a: =e AS à. PPT: "+


PAN
comes your daunce ; the bellie glutted fets the legs a-


ati en la hanche fille en la pance: Pro. Locke
Fille.
Quiala ance eine il luy femble que les autres
font fao Pro He that bath gorged bimfelfe thinkes
< mens esi be ie | CB
ouge vifage,& grofie pance ne font lignes de pe-
ni: Pro, A re : bellie,and a drunkards fice
are no (true) fignes of penitentiall grace.
Panceron : m..A great belie gulch,or paunch;and par-
ticularly the fall-fluffed bellie of a doublet.
Pancerotte: fA httle paunch.
Pancette. as Pancerotte.
Panchaique. Odeur Panchaique. The fmell of Ara-
bian Frankincenfe.
Panchant. Bowing, /eaning,inclining forwards; flooping,
Pan gun downewards.
:m.ée: f. Bent, inclined, or bowed forwards;
hoe. declined, banged downewards ; ; any way fleo-


ping,

Arbre panché. The ends of whoft boughes bang down-
wards ; as fome bold all of a tree,whereon a malefaëtor
hath beene hanged,will doe.


Panchement; m. 4 bending, leanin nite 00 forwitrds;
an inclining, or banging downewards ; a flooping,a de-


clining.
panchement, Ofhis one inclinati-


De fon propre

on, from bis owne difpofition.

Pancher. To bend, leane, or bow forwards ; to gine, in-
cline,or bang dowmewards to floope,to decline.
Pancu: m. ue: f, Gorbellied, great-paunched,

Pand. Looke Pan.
panded: com, Containing or belonging to,all man-

ner of bookes ; or bookes that intreat of all matters,
Pandeétes : f. Pandeéts ; Bookes which containe all
matters, or comprehend ‘all the parts of the fubieët
whereof they intreat.

Pane. £ooke Panne.
Pané: m. ée: £. Breadie,of bread; whence ;
Eau pane A Panado,a Mife. :
Paveati: m. A pannel, of Wainfcot; of a faddle, es
alfo (in Mafonrie) a patterne, mould, or feantling,
(made of a thinne boord crc) whereby a flone is cut,
and made fit for the place it is to fland in; alfo, the
flone it felfe fo ent; whence, Paneau de doile;a Cant
eces
P sree. QU vagy; owls, tatters; > a, the batches, or
fiuttles of a fhip.

Panegyric: m. A Difcourfe, or Oration made in praife
ofa e,or Potentate,

Panerée: f. A Pannierfull,

Paneron: m. A little Pannier,a Small Defer.

Panerot: m, as Paneron.

Panes. Red ne Me As set onthe pea ress

: Paneté:m. ée: f. Made into br

-Paneterie: ae

Panetier: m. 4 Paniler.
iP "ee Rah ese i
or the po agailane bisvittualls,
nme) a


2 at


ie és ‘nantes dé ee a Oe ee a
.


‘| Pannetier. as Panctier.


P AN


Leuant fea-Holme, Champion fèa-Hollie.
Panicault marin.Sea-Holme,fea-Hollie,(ea-Huluer,
Erin
S'en aller frotter le cul au panicault, To Spend time
id lib fool, or vain.
a f. A fuddaineand madding feare, which comes
without any apparant,or knowne,cau/e.
Panicle: f, A litle loafe, jé
Panier: m. 4 Pannier or Dofer ; alfd,a Pedlers packe;
alfa, a fafhion of Trunke made of Wicker couered with
the hairie fel of a calfe ; much in ufe among the iour-
neying, and warfaring Lords of France,and carried by
ires,on either fide of a horfe one.
Pan ier à veffes: C’eft le Cul.
Anfe de panier. An Hemycicle,or halfe-circle,
Les plus meures du panier. Looke Meur.
Le pis du panier. The worflof the matter.
Ses paniers font pleins, She is fped, fhe is poopt,ber
panniers be fii
Chier dans ~ panier pour le mettre fur la tefte. To
diferace, or difpraife a thing, the fooner to obtaine it ;
ers Fu to entertaine what be bath formerly contem-


Adieu ponies om, be es font faittes. ua
10 any 4 ing wher eof we baue no finther vft
‘A chafque mercier fon panier: gd] one is to
figpertor looke unto,bis owne charge.
Chafque iercier prife fes aiguilles,& fon panier:
Prov. Enerie Pedlar thinks well of bis packe.
Petit mercier petit Wat p Pro. See Mercier,
Qui fait corbeille il fait panier: Pro. He that can
doe,or bath done ose thingie ibe apter,or likelier,to de
another.
Qui fe mefle.d’ autruy meftier il trait fa vache en
vn panier : Pro. He that medales with another mans
Trade,milkes bis Cow in a Pannier ; viz. loofés his pro-
fit,and undoes bimfelfe.
anicre. Pain de paniere. See Pain.
: e: m. Bread-making ; the Trade of a Paker el,
read,
_Panifier. To make,or bake,into bread,
Panil. as Panic.
Panilliere : £. The Gryn
Panique : com, Dif agit with Copel feare.qRab,
Paniz. Looke Pani
Pannader. 4 bone to praunce, curuetor bound; Looke
Se Pennader.
Pannades: f The curuettings, prauncings,or boundings
of luftie borfes.
ahs f. A skinne, fell,or bide ; alfi,a naturall [pot on
the
Panne de bois. (7s particularly) the peece of timber
a fuflaines a gutter between the roofes of two fes
ules.
Panne de grefle. A leafé of fat.
rig de ira Sef (made of. ‘filke;) and particu-
8 vc url eluet.
prt ae wind to take a Ship upon the
Srayes; or,aé Bouter vent en penne. Sce Penne,
Panneau. as Paneau; al/o, a young Peacocke ; alfa, a
large Net,or Toyle. —


Pannetiere: f, as Panctiere; al, the dewlap, or bris-
ket of an Ox,Cow,e>c.
Pannicule: m. A little clowt; sal, the skinne wherein
a child les wrapped in the wom
Pannicule charneux. The membrane which conduéls
the veffels throughout the a of ibe whole bodie,
all-


| Panfard: m. 4 guts, gorbellie, gulch; alfo, a hind. of


Le a


‘| _ fetching windwi


PAN


Panniere. Pain de pan. See Pain,


Pannilliere. 4s Panilliere.

Pannonceau: m, A Fane,or Weather flag; alfo,a Pen-
non; alittle flag of Taffata, bauing the Kings, or a
Lords, Armes figured in it. :

Pannoyer vn bafton ; (C’eft, le manier en la main)
to witld,or toffe it.

Panoinphée.Of all Nations and Speeches. (Rab.

Panoplique : com. Completely armed,in complete ar-


! Mmour.
| Panoffe.Vicillepanoffe. An old toothlefe bag,a naflie


or beggarlie beldame,


| Panouere: £. A little Dofer Basket,or Pannier.
| Panoye: f. Le leu dela pan. 4 game,or kind of wraft-
bn ;


| Rane m. A kind of large impoftumes ; alfo, the Plural


vnto Pan.


Turbot called,a Dab.
anfe: f. A paunch ; Looke Pance.
Raifins de panfe. Raifins of the Sunne.
Panter. To drefe, attend,or looke vnto ; Seeke Penfer.
Panfotte: f. 4 mall paunch.
Panfferon. as Panceron.
Panfu: m. ué: £ Paunchie,great-bellied, full of guts.
Pantagone: com. Fiue.cornered. ;
Pantagruelifte. 4 Pantagruellift ; amerrie Greeke,
faithful drunkard, good fellow,
Pantagruellion, Hempe.@Rab.
Pantais: m. The Pantaffe,or Pantais;difficultie of brea-
thing, (in Hawhes,erc.) À
Pantarbe. A certaine blacke flone which re(ifteth fire.
Pantarque. See Pancarte,
Pante. See Pente.
Panteine: £ A great Net,or Toyle,vfèd for the catching
of wild beafts. .
Pantelant: m.ante: f. Panting,throbbing ; beating or
breathing thicke and fhort,
Panteler. To pant,or throb; to beat (al/o,to breath){hort
and thicke,or often together.


Panteller. 4 Panteler,
Pantharbe. The name of an artificial Heauen, denifed
by one Ioachas an Fndian Magician,


Panthelement: m.A panting or throbbing ; alfo,a puf-


fing, or faft-breatbing ; and bence (alfo) difficulire of


breathing.

Pantheologie : f. The whole famme of Diuinitie,

Panthere : £ 4 Panther. '
antherien: m. enne:f. Of a Panther ; potted as the
Panther ; (any way)like a Panther.

Panthiere: f. 4 great fiwoope-net,or drawing net.

Panthois. as Pantois.

Pantiere. as Panthiere (and the better Ortographie.)

Pantime: f, 4 bundle of raw filke.
antifer. To breath verie faft; 10 draw the breath often;
to blow thicke and {hort ; or as Pantoifer.

a All, or whole diuels. ares nes

antoiment: m. A panting, or often blowing, €
fhortnelfe of breath.

Pantoiment tourmenter. To vex extreamely; by ex-
treame vexation to fhorten the breath, or put out of
breath,or make aman farce able to draw bis breath

Pantois: m. Short wind, purfinefe ; a frequent brea-
thing,or a difficult fetching of wind by the eof

_ breath; in Hawkes we call it,the Pantais. 2°


Pantois: m. ife: f. oft-breatbing,out of
breath; purfie, ing with difficultic,


GP! AGP


Pantoifer,To breath often,or be ‘foort-winded or be out

of breath; alfo, to breath with difficultie , fetch wind
: with much adoe, ne :

Pantomime: m, 4 Aëor of many parts in one Play;
one that can reprefènt the gefture, and counterfeit the
fpeech,of any man.

ie: £ À pantofle,or flipper. A 5
Porter les fouliers en pantoufle. To tread, or weare

_ bis fhooes downe at the heeles.

hee m. cule: f. Full of pantofles, fit for pan-

ofles.

Pantoyer. # Pantoifer. L

Panurge: m. A fe,craftie, deceit fil companionsan old
beaten fix; one that hath experience or bath been tam.

“ pering;in mof things ; alfo, one that will meddle with,
or baue a flirt at,any thing.

ee as Par. By, Dr Le

aon: m. A Peacocke ; al/o,a kind of fpeckled (i;
Paon celefte. 4 oe Peacocke, ms
Paon d'Inde. 4 Turkie Cocke.

Paon reveftu, Looke Reveftu,
aon terreftre. A tame Peacocke,

Se Paonnader. as Se Paonner.

Paonneau:m, 4 young Peacocke.

Se Paonner. To brag,or ftrout it like a Peacocke:proud.
4) to open,or difplay bis feathers ; vainglorioully to boaft
Of bis outward parts,or faire outfide ; alfo (more tolle-
rably) to take a prettie pride in bimfelfe,

Paonnefle: f. 4 Pea-benne,

Paonnien:m#. enne: f. Of or belonging to, a Pea-
cocke ; Peacock-like 5 prowd, or wainglorious 5454
Peacocke.

Paour. Looke Peur.

Paovre. See Povre. :

Paovret. 4 poore fnake,or fueakesby,

Paoureufement. Fearefülly,in great feare:


Papacité: f. The Papacie,or Popedome ; alfo,Papiftrie, N


operie.
Papafigue : f A Gnat-fnapper, or Fig-eater ; a daintie
ittle bird that refembles a Nightingale,


Papal: m. ale: £ Papall; of, belonging to, or like unto, |


the Pope,
Reverence papale. See Reverence.
Paparot: m. ‘Pap; or,a poultice,


Pape: m. 4 Pope, the Pope; (a word which, howfoener .


it be ufed, fienifies a father) alfo,as Pappe,
€,& puis mufnier: Prov. Fallen from the bighef?
to the loweft eflate; or from pompe to pouertie.
Vn bon pape eft vn mefchant homme: Pro.A good
g ares a wicked man. MES LAIT
apechieu: m. À Lapwing,Teewit,blacke Plower,
Papefif: m. The maine courfe ; that part of the maine.
sayle whereto the bonnets jor dabler be faftened, 17
Pa as Papafigue, * :
Papegau. as Papegay. : x
Papegay: m. A Parrot, or Popingay ; alfo, a woodden
Parrot (fet up on the top of a fleeple,bigh tree,or pole)
whereat there 15, in many parts of France, a genera
Shooting once euerie yeare ; and an exemption, for all
that yeare, from La Taille obtained by him that firikes
downe the right wing thereof ee is therefore tear.
med, Le Chevalier.) and by him that ftrikes downe


the left wing (who is tearmed,Le Baron;) and by him |


that firikes done the whole Popingay (who forthat
dexteritie or good hap bath alfo the title of Roy,du Pa-
pegay,al the yeare following.) : ETS
Papelard. An bipocrite,a di


bler ; a flatterer, © |
Papelarder. To play the bipacrite ; to NE |
nt A |


P A P


terfeit abolinefe ; bence, falfely to sollogue with ; or
ufe fre words and harbour foule thoughts.
Papelardic: £ Hipocrifie, or outward flew of religion;
a dog =. of xeale in religion; alfo, flatterie,
finootb villanie, fale colloguing. 0
Papelardife, as Papelardie,
Papeligofle. The countrey of Butterfiyes. -
assé: m. éc : À Rifleds or often toffedouer, as the
papersofafludent. . À
Paperasses : f. Old, dufiie, rotten, or often-rifled pa-
pers.
Paperat: m, A Paper-booke,or Note-booke.
Papet, as Papin. :
Papetafie: mée: f. as Papetaflé ; or much fianbled,or
often turned oucr,as.abundle of written papers.
Papetaffé: m. ée: f. Patched, or poorely made vp with


paper.
Papetaffer To patch, poorely to clofe, weakely to flop or
make vp,as with paper.
Papeterie: £ À paper-Mill; alfoya paper fhop.
Papetier: m. A maker,or feller,of paper.
Papier: m. Paper ; alfo, the paper-plant, or paper-reed
(whereof in old time paper was made.) 2
Papier baptiftere. The Church-booke wherein Chrif
tenings be recorded.
Papiers brouillars.#aff paperor loofe papers,wbere-
in things be written carelefh, diforderly, or at ran-
dome. Et
Papier iournal. À Journal Diarie,or Day-booke; a
Regifier kept,or Commentarie written,of daplie actions,
or accidents, g
Papier marchand. Browne paper (wherein Tradef-
men fould up their wares.)
Papiers de marchands. Bills of Accompt, bookes of
Reckoning; all forts of writings which paffe through
Tradefimens bands.
Papier raifin. Grape paper.
Papier de raifon. .4 Bill of Accompt, a booke of Rec-
konin Q
Papict terrier. A Terrier; aCourt-roll, or Catalogue
of all the feuerall names, parcells, rents, and feruices
elonging to,or yeelded by, the Tenants of a Mannor.
Lherbe du papier. The pest Egiptian Rufh,whereof,
maid time , paper ; leaues to write on, were


Vin papier, white wines (called fo by fome Swix-
RET.)
: ier endure tout: Pro.Paper indureth all;Seeke
sndurer. | a y
Papicter, Not to eat beartily, to dally with bis meat.
Papifigue: com. A (earner of the Pope.
Papille: £, The nipplesor teat of a womans breaft, ~
Papillon: m, À Butterfly; al/oa fea-Bat. ‘
; de grand apillon. À bigh Bourlet,or Hood, bauing
on either fe a large wing, and ufually worne bereto-


Alaigre comme vn papillon.ds buxome as a Butter-


~ fore by the dames of Lyons.


pee


sye de papillon : Pro. Short,or momentarie gleesioy
ots end ttle Bates ella plague fore.
sm. A little Butler ; 490,4 ts
rage: mi. À fpatling, or j i


€;


xt
“¢


alfobe[patlngyor potting,
ke, or Shake, like (pangs


Pie gle


Spattle,or (pot with durt. are Œ
Papillotes :£. Spangles. … PAS]
Papillotte: £ Thifle-downe, or the (oft downe blowne


Papillottes de bout. Mirie (pots, fpatlings, bedafh-
angs. ,

I croit queles eftoilles font papillottes, (Said of an
ignorant,and fillie Ce ge sor ia we fay) thinkes the
Moone is made of greene cheefe.)

Papillotté: m.ée: f. Befpangled; wrought, fet, beau-
tified, or made garifh, with fpangles; alfo, befpatiled,
bedafhed, (potted, with durt, ec.

Papillottement: m. A beppangling ; alfo,a befpattling,

Papillotter. as Papilloter, ;


ing,or fet thicke,with (pangles.

Papimanes: com. Papifts; doters on the Pope.

je ig :f, Papiftrie; Popifhdotage,or, a doting on
the Pope. ;

Papin : m. Pap for children.

Papoage: m. Juberitance by kindred , auncient de/-
cent, |

Papon: m. Pap for children: QGafc.

she pre papoaux.#bich come from an aunceftor,

or by


Papoter. Not to eat heartily, to dallie with bis meat.
Pappe: m.Thifile-downe; as Papillotte ; alfo,the fhort,


deaues, and flaulkes of fome bearbes.
Paquet: m, A packet, fardle,bundle,truffe ; Looke Pac-


Paqueter. To packe,trujse,bundle vp.


Paquette. See Pafquette,
Par. (4 Prepofition, as the Latine Per ; fignifies ;) by,


| frommies as in, Diner luy de par moy: whence allo,
JEUNE HT SETCe
essing, o (haking bike [Pangle ; gli


in the Proc


PAR


om the tops of flowers by the wind; al[o,e fpangle.


illotteux : m. eufe: £. All-to-be-Spangled ; gliflen-


diftent.
a. Dad; (an infants language.)


oft, and bairie cotton, or downe which growes on the


quet.


through; of,by reafon of; for ; on.

Par ainfi. Even (0,by this meanes, in that manner sal.
fo, wher efore,or therefore, for this canfe.

Par cy: Parla, This way; that way.

Par delà. Seeke Dela.

Par derriere : Par deflus. Backward ; upward,
Par devant. Before; or,in the prefence of,

Par fois. Now and then, fometimes.

Par jour & par nuit. Both day and night,at all times
and tides,

Par luy. qui eft à tout par luy. That lookes onely to
bimfelfe; or, thats wholly fivayed by bis owne ba-
mors.

Par mer,& par terre : &,par monts,& par vaux. Ja
towne and countrey,enerie wherejin all places whatfi-


ener. *

Par cant. On thus condition ; alfo,therefore.

Par tel fi. So tbat, on condition that,

Pat temps, Seafonably, in verie good time, in a -good
OWLE.. +

Par temps de guerre ; paix, &c. During the warre,

peace crc; or. ‘while we warre,peace,erc.

Aupat aller.


bse keg
DeparDieu fit. A Gods name be it ; God profper |
ityor fend it good fucceffe.


moy. By my meanes, or at my intreatie; alfo,


voila des lettres de par voftre femme; /emt from your


wife.
Le parle Roy. By the Kings appointment, commande-
mentor authoritie; from the King; (an ordinarie aye
tions made, and letters written, in bis
name; ) alfo,with the King; 4s, 11 arane domme: &
“faveur


Origi nal trom
PHE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


es


Moi.


mm
| ek.


faveur de par le Roy. The King fauours bim fo iach,


Re


be is [à gracious in bis eyes.
Parabande
of Ballifters in a Tervace,ec, :
Parable: com, Laff to be got, or come by; foone ebtai-
ned, quickly recouered,readie at band, .
Parabole: £ 4 Parable, fimilitude, comparifon; alfo,a
certaine crooked line made by the cutting of a Cone,or
Cylinder,
Parabrin: m. 4 gratulation,or welcome. ,
Parachevé: m. ée: f. (Fully)atchieued,difpatchedper-
formed ; accomplifhed, finifhed concluded.


arachevement: m. A (fill) atchienement, perfor-


~ mance,riddance,difpatch;a confiummation,accompli{h-
ment ab{olute conclufion or end.

Parachever. (Fully) to atchieue execute, performe,dif:
qe finifh,confiemmateaccomplifhymake an abfolute
end of.


oy.
Paraclitique: com. Defamed,ill-reported of, that bath


an ill name.


Parade: f. 4 (boafting) apparance, or fhew ; a brauado,


or vaunting offer; alfo,a flop on bor(ebacke.


Paradis : m. Paradice, Heanen ; a garden, or place, of


perfect delight; a beauen on earth.
Graine deparadis. The Spice called,Graines,
+ Oifeaude paradis. A certaine Egyptian bird whofe
_ featbers dazle,by their gliftening luftre, the eyes of fuch
as bebold ber; alfo (another) white-bellied, and red-
legd bird, thats bigger then a Heron, and beaked like a
Parrot ; many alfo call the Fadian Mammuque Oùifc..
au de Paradis.
Pomme de paradis. An excellent (weet apple that
comes of a Pearmayn graffed on the flock of a Qrince;


Some alfo call fo our Honnymeale, or S. Fobns ap--


ple.
Patadoxe: f, 4 Paradox; a frange, and odd conceit,
or affertion, which differs from the common-receined


[1 le
Paradoxique: com. Paradoxicall, frange,odd,againft
common opinion,
Parafé, & Parafer. as Paraphé & Parapher,
Parafernal. Seeke Paraphernal. |
Parage: m. Kindred, parentage,linage ; alfo, equalitie


of birth,or in bloud ; alfo, coparcenerie,or partition of


lind among (noble) brothers, or filters ; (vfèd onely
where homage is due, and ceafes after the fourth de.
ee. N
| Looke Haut-parage.

Tenir enparage. To bold part of a fief,as 2 cobeire,
or coparcener; or,younger brotbers to bold of their elder
by homage, and fealtie; which is therefore due unto
»  bim, after partition, becaufe bë does homage vato the

Lord Paramount both for their parts, and bis owne.
Parageau: m. A younger brother, who by partition en-

ioyes part of the land defcended from his aunceflor.
Parager: m, A coparceneror,asParageau,
Para Seur: m. The eldeft brother ; who F cuftome hath
~ beene forced to gine equal {hares of bis aunceftors land

» unto his younger brethren. he perf
{ Paragon: m, 4 paragon,or peereleffe one ; the per fecti-
à me flower of; the 7 tdoplete mop Abe, molt
“excellent peece, in any. phatfieuer; hence alfo,a


Fee or Touchllone whereby the goodnefe of things


is tryed. ay
|Paragonner. To paragon; equall, match, or compare


_ with; alfo,ro examine, or try the goodnefe of a thing, -
~ by comparing it with o F ¢


>: di: ac pp tags. :
Paragraphe: m, À Paragraffe, or Pill ; a fall fen-


: € The rayle that runnes along on a ranke


P AR
tence,bead, or title of the (cinill) Law; as much as is
“comprehended in one fentence,or {eétion, :
arain: m. À Godfather ; a Suretie in Baptifine.
Oograinme. 4 Paralelogramme,or long Square.
Parallel: m. 4 paralell; an equal! difance(an}in Fes
«or circles, di
Paralleles. The circles,and lines in the Sphere,drawn
(with equall diftance ia eucrie part) from the Eaff to
the ef},and bauing one of the poles for their center.
Parallele: com, Paralell,equally difiant afundcr,
Paralogizer. To reafon captioufly, argue deceitfully,
conclude falfely; toreafon again{t reafon.
Paralyfie: f. The Palfie.
Heïbe de paralyfie. The Cowflip,or Oxflip,caked at.
SoPalfiewort,and pettie Mullein.
Pas com. Sicke of, or troubled with,the Pal-
Ge ;


Parangon. as Paragon; whence ;

Pierre de paranyvon. A Touchftone.
Parangonneux: m.eufe: £ Full of comparifons.
Parannifer. To perpetuate. See Perennifer.

he: m. Az Orator, who a little before the

commencement of Dottors,erc makes a publicke fpeech

in commendation of their boneftie and {i fficiencie;al/o,

an ouerfeer or an affiftant in the ouer fight ,or ordering,
of Eridall bufineffes.

Parapet: m. A Parapet,or wall breafi-bigh; or defence,

in forme of a Penthoufe, on the vpper part of a Ram-


pier. :

Paraphe: f, The flourifh, or peculiar knot, or marke fet
vnto,or after,or in ftead of, a name in the figning of a
Deed, or Letter; and generally, any (uch gracefill fet-

* ting out of a mans band,or name in writing; alfo,a fub-
JSignature,or fiening under.

Paraphé: m. ée: f. Flourifhed ; eraced,or figned with a
prettie marke,ov knot ; allo, fubjigned ; written, or fie-
nedvnder.

Parapher. To flourifh in writing ; to grace, or beautifie
the hand,or name, with prettie knots ; to fet a peculiar
hen knot unto, or after, or in fiead of, a name in
the figning of a Deed, or Letter > alfo, to fubjiene’s to
write,or hs ne under. ;

Paraphernal. Biens paraphernaux. The goods which
a wife brings ber busbandouer and befides ber dowrie,
or mariage money; as ber bedding, linnen, garments,

jewels ere, à,

Paraphernes. as Biens Paraphernaux.

Paraphrafe: ££ A Paraphrafés am expofition that holds
2 fence, but changes the words, of the thing expoun-


ed, i
Paraphrafte : m. A Paraphrafl, or Paraphrafor; one |
. Yea expounds à Text by other words then it is written

in. NA à Beate see
Parappel. as Parapet.  *. ca |
Parasangue: f. Thirtie firrlongs; or (about) three,and |


three quarters, of our miles ; a Perfian meafure, °°.


Parafceve: f, A preparation or preparing. mT
Jour parafceve. Good Friday among Chriflians 3 aa
mong the Fewes any Friday ; when they commonly pro-
uide all things nece(Jarie for the day following, their

~ Sabaoth,whereon they ave forbidden all worke =: .

Parafeline: £4 fal/é Moone,or apparance of a Moone,

Parafite: m. 4 Parafite; a trencher-friend, or bellie-
friend; a finell-feaftand buffoone at feafts;a clawback, |
flatterer, foother, fmoother for good cheare fake, +

Parafol: m. 2 Ombrelle. TRE te

Paraftates:£ The conduits, or pafages whereby the |

- feed goes from the kidneyes in the att of genevationjor, |.
: . tre


cs: gle


ree ae Stn ee cee DEN ee re


A ete.


FAN
tsk


PAR .


receiue the feed brought unto them. by Vala deferen-
tia; alfa, flones fet to,or about,a pillar.
Paraître: m, A flep-father,a futher in law. €
Paravant. Before,beretofore,in former times.
Parc: m. A Parke ; a Clofe, Ground, or Place impaled;
par fold; alfa, a Stue,or Fifh-pond inclofed.
nparc d'arbres. A (opfèor Coppice ; an impaled, or
inclofed groue of trees.
Chaîtrer le parc. Looke Chaftrer.


| Parcage: m. A Parke,or Faclofuresalfo,an inclofing; al-


fe, a foulding (as of Sheepe;) alfoya Pound ;or as Par-
€.

Parce que. Becaufe that, for as much as,

Parcelé: m. éc : £ Peecemealed; cut,or made,into par-


cels.
Parcelle : € A parcell ; particle, peece,little part.
L' parcelles. By degrees,by little and little,
Par parcelles. Particularly, by parcels, peecemeale,
one peece afier another.
Parchage: m. Jmpoundage, or an impounding ; alfo, as
Parcage.
Parchemin: m. Parchement.
Parchemin innocent.Looke Innocent.
Parcheinin vierge. Parchement made of an abortine
skinne.
Parcheminerie: f Parchment-making; alfo, the fireet,
or place,wherein Parchement is fold,
Parcheminier: m. 4 Parchement-maker.
Parciere. Terres baillées à par. Let owt unto parts,or
for part of their crop.
Parcion. 4 coparceners portion.
Parcité: f. Parcitie, [paring,[cantnefe,neerenefe; fru-
 galitie, thrift, fauing ; niggardlinefe.
Parçon. a Parcion.
re m. À cobeire,or coparcener,
~Parcoulé: m. ée: f. Strayned through.
Parcouler. To frayne through.
Parcourir. Terunne througb. :
Parcours: m. (uflome, vfage, auncient proceeding in
points of commerce betweenc the Townes, or Countries
of feuerall Lords. iain saint
Bourgeois de parcours, Freemen of the Lurifdittion
Sens in the marches of Champaigne, who by a
e challenge may aduow themfelues to be alfo the
~ Rings freemen.
Parcreu. a Parcru.
Parcroiffant: m. ante: f. Waxing ripe, approaching to
_ perfection; alfo, growing among. a
Parcroifire. To ripen, or make an end of growing ; to
wax perfect, or come to it full pitch; alld, to grow a-


Parce: m,ué: f. Full-growne, througbly ripe; mellow,


flufhs come to perfection, or to a fall pitch; alfo,grovne,
: ort upamong. :
Pardé. as Par Dieu, qPoievin.
Pardigoince: £. (The mame of) a great,and delicate


A Pi 3 3

saree ddr Po creyeslawe fa Bar
| Pa : vemiffion ; (Se do
En alr


En à eg PE vo
‘ 1 F


AE 2e my mem nt! me
Pp grand it) pare
don : Prot gs i are à y


| Gas gle


two kernels which grow at the end of the bladder, and |


PA Ro 7


little faults are foone forgiuen.
ardonnable: com. Par donable, for gineable.

Pardonné: m. ée:f.Pardoned, forginen,remitted.

Pardonnement: m. 4 pardoning,remittine forgiuing.

Pardonner. Topardon, forgjue, remit a fault, releafea

debt, bold excufed of. YS
Pardonne à tous mais a toy point: Pro.Pardon all
men but thy [elfe ; or, pardon other mens offences, but
punifh thine owne. |

Pardonnigere : m.A Pardon-bearer ; one that carries; |

and makes fale of the Popes Pardons, vp and downe a
countrey. ‘4

Pardonnir. To fleepe foundly, to take a long, or full
fas: to take bis penniworthes of the pillow ; orto fi-
nifh,or fleepe out,bis fleepe.

Sa i le: ce rd Perittbies 4
aré: m.ée: f. Graccfülly dreffed, dight, arrayed ; or--
dered,or fürnifhed ; decked, pra garnified ; alfa,
banged with Tapifirie ; alfo,warded,or defended fiom
a blow,érc ; and flrowded,or fheltred under; alfo,pa-
ved,as tbe boofé of a bore.
pe patée. Ripened in flraw,erc ; made mellow

art.
Vin paré. Wine that is fined, Wine thats readie to be
dravene,or drunke. ;
Quand la Mefle fut chantée f fut la dame parée:
fe By that time Maffe was done, ber Ladiship was
reffed.

Pareade:f. A certaine fierie-coloured, quick-fighted,
and wide-mouthed Serpent not verie venomous,

Pareage.as Parage;(anoldword,) —.

Pareatis. (The Conclusion of a peremptorie Warrant, or
Iniunttion; like unto our) Hereof faile ye not,érc.

Pare-coup: m. A ward-blow; or,any thing that ferues
to keepe offer put bya blow,

Parée. Droi& de parée. Looke Droit.

Parefrenier.as Palfrenier.

Pareil: m. À match, or fellow, in Glones, Cuffes, Shooes,
dc.

Qui n’a point fon pareil. 4 paragon; that bath not
bis match, that hath no.peere.

Pareil: m. eille: £ Like,equallenen,or matching with;
mutuall, femblable.

La pareille. Like for like, as much for as much, one for
another. :
Chafque oiicille cerche fa pareille: Prov. Ewerie
Sheepe ber mate doth fecke ; fooles take no comfort but
in companie, ;

Pareilleinent.Likewi(e,in like manner, femblably after
the fame fa{bion,iufi fo,euen fo,alfo.

Parelic:f. 4 falfè Sunne,or apparance of a Sunne.

Parelle: f The hearbe Dockes , or the fharpe-pointed
* Docke ; alfo, Patience, Monkes Rhubarbe ; (a kind
ale À
Parelle grande. The great fharpe-pointed Docke.
Parelle de marais, The great water-Docke,or Sorrells,
called alfowater Sorrell, and bor{e Sorrell.
Parelle petite. Ditch Docke,the fmall water Docke.
Parelle pointué. The (ordinarie) fharpe-pointed


Docke.
Parement: m.A decking,tricking carnifhing,adorning;
acomielie dreffing, a graceful Eee fit
. nifbing,orderlie arraying ; alfo, spies ola or any
cofllie Hangings; alfo,a warding,or defending,in fight; |
_alfo,a fhrowding,or fheltering under ; alfo,a paring(of
a aly a Vne forte de chair rouge qui
“vient cere Ja venaifon des deux coftez du
_/SOEPS :@) TR - t 4 À
, ? 7 ran Cham-


APAAIR


: Chambre de parement, The c ber of Prefènce.


.. Hauing two conrfes of, or conered on.both fides with,
free flone,

| Parence: f. as Parure (in the lat fence.)

| Parennité. Looke Perenniré, \

Parenfus. Vn par. A farplufage, ouerplus, remainder ;
Le parenfus, The before-named.

Parent: m. A kinfinan,coufingallie.

} .. Parent de Moyfe. A Cuckold. Looke Moyfe. |

Parens fans amis,Amis fans pouvoir,Pouvoir fans

vouloir, Vouloirfans efteétjEtfe& fans profit,Profic

. fans vertu,ne vaut vn feftu: Pro:

« Aflez parens aflez rourmens: Prov. Many kinfinen

… auch affliétion,


that is famifbed hath but ill friends.
Parentage: m, Parentage kindred affinitie,alliance,
Parentage d’ hanetons. Kjadred intertained for
À … fome lecherous re{pedt. Seeke Haneton: ~
Parenté: f. A parentage ; linage,bloud, focke, familie,
08 3 al(o, affinitie, confanguinitie, neerenefse of
laud, 4
Bonne amitié feconde parenté: Pro. found friend
«4 a{econd kinfinan. : 5
Parentelle: £. Kindred, affinitie, confanguinitie, alli-
ance, à ma!
Parenthefe: f. A Parenthefis. 0
| Parer. To decke, tricke, trimme, garnifh, adorne, dre
comely,dight gracefülly ; furnifh handfomely, order de-
cently ; (alfo, to prepare, or prouide fufficiently;) alfo,
to hang richly, as a roome with Arras; alfo,to ward,or.
defen bea a: ee l'efcu aux coups de;
to oppofe his fhield againft the blowes of alfo, to pare
- the boot of aborfe. : 4 EVE à
; ¢ parer de, To couer, fhrowd, er fhelter him/elfe un-
er,


Parer le drap. To-drefe, or finooth cloth with cards
made of Tales. :
Parer l'enhifleure à faire toile. Te flarch the yarne
whereof Lianen cloth is to be made.
| qe du fruict fur paille. To ripen,or mellow fruit in
am,
: Il para fa mafle, He charged,or lift up,his club.
Parez vn heriflon ilfemblera baron: Prov. Tricke
up an Vrebin be will feeme a Baron; good apparrell(as
Loue) couers many a fault.
Parergue: m. Anaddition,appendix, accelfè; a thing
put unto, though no part of, the matter ; any thing that
ts ne the principal queftion; point, or purpofe in


han

arefol. 2s Ombrelle.

arefle:£. Sloath, lazinefe, sey nS ee
i ifhing negls


parcs RE EE
areffèr. To laze it, flug it,loyter, line idly.
mn Pareffeufeme nt, 5 2 Proper: idly.
Pareffeux: m.eufe: f, Sloathfull, lug gifh, lazie, lither,
| Laytering,moft negligent; (and bence) alfo, dull, flow;
| Le ai 1 :
fledeard loues alifé things done to bis roe
» Jamais dormeur ne fit bon guet, ny pareffeux ne
|» fit beau faict: Prov. The fleepie head, and floathfull
» à


- | band, watch, and worke,
‘Paret: m. 4 wall, qLangu


Lid de parement. ” 3 alfo,a bed of
State , or, a great Sparuer bed, wes onely for
es. 5 pha a@roome. M ce ha

Muraille à deux paremens de pierre de taille.


Qui a mal aux dents a mauvais parents: Prov. He


PAR


Paretoine: m. A certaine fattie Painters white:
Pareute.asParure,  -
Parfaiét: m.éte: £ Perfééled performed accomplifhed,
-\co#fummated, finifhed, fully made or done vp;alfo,per-
4 complete,excellent,abfdlute, fingular, Ù
P tai ment. Perfectly completely, excellently yabjo-
Paire. régie performe, confummate, accomplifh,
nt Uy; goe through-ftitch with make or doe vp
, throughly.
~ Mal fait qui ne parfait ; &, Rien ne fait qui ne
2 ipeefait pren He does but ill,or as ill as nothing,who
anes a worke before be ends it,
Rien n’efk bien faict que ce que Dieu parfait:
Pro, Nothing's well done which God bath not a band


Whe om tsi Hy

Parfaifeur: m. A. perfeiter, accomplifber, finifber
througb-doer ; a fue card ; a pot of ae be
undertakes. mire

Parfiler. To /pinne all,or fpinnethrougbh.

Parfin. dla parfin. At length,at laft,in the end when
all is done, voben all comes to all.

Parfois. Sometimes,now and then.

Parfondeur: f Profanditie,

Se Parforcer. To labour, firine,indeanour throughly ; to
attempt ferioufly,to doe bis beft or vtmoft.
Parfournir.To per forme,confiummate,accomplifh, fulfill;

_ alfosto fupply, fisrnifh, fill,or make vp.
arfum:m, Perfume,fiveet odour. -

Parfunatoite : com. Perfumaterie, perfumingsufedin,

-. or for perfumes ; whence, Canon pa . See Ca-
non.

Parfumer. To perfume ; to fiveeten, to gine a delicate
fent or fmell unto. ‘ :


Pargoys Coufteau pargoys. 4 parie tle childs SR


Parguarir. To cure foundly,beale thtough
Pariage: m. Equalitie,corre[pondenciémat
and iufl exchange, equall tearmes, like for li
another. ’ i
Droict de pariage. Looke Droict.


Parier. To bett, lay, flake downe,at game; alfo,to breed,


-_ ingender,beget,or bring forth, young.

Parietaire: f. Pellitorie of the wall. .

Parietaux: m.(The name of ) two bones, which bein the
upper,and fure-part of the skull.

Parifien: m.enne: € Parifiém;of Paris; whence; :
Matines Parifiennes. The Mafacre of Paris: 81
Parifis. Of Paris ; after the Parifien fafbion,er compnta-

5 me Seeke Livre,& Sol,» + het
arité: f, Paritie,equalitieeuenneffe;likeneffe.
Paritoire: f. Pellterie of the wall. J
Parjure: com, (Subft.)A periurersor periured perfin,a
Sore-Sworne wretch, pats wing
Parjure : com. (Adject.) Periured,oath-falfifyingyab/o-
lutely forfworne, ke C
Dre + m.Perinrie,forfivearing;oath-falfifiing,
th-breaking. ‘3
Se Parjurer. To forfweare bim/elfe ; to violate faith gi
men LS falfifie bis oath. * “
Parlant: m.ante: f.Speaking,talking uttering bis mind.
Parlé:. m.é¢: f. Spoken,uttered,talked,difcourfed off
Parlement: m. A/peaking,talking difcourfing ; reafa-
ning arguing ; 4 parleying communing,conferring,con=
ner fing with; alfo, a fupreame, or foueraigne Court,or
Seffion,of Fuflice, eflablifhed in eight capitall Cities of
: France ; viz. Paris, Grenoble, Tholofe, Dijon,Ro-


uén,Aix,Renes, & Bordeaux. (17 old ga 156
€ q


Nnn


AE


| rie finall purpofe.
-Pañler à caftons. To gueffe, or barpe at, to fpeake at
ferences in
“Rather taiGs,LookeTraiets qu
‘comme tc
‘ p ee vs meted


therewas butone of thefe Courts, it foRowed the King
whither foeuer be went, untill Philippes de Valois,
(or,asfome ,Loys Hutin) /étled it, and made it
ordinarie,in Patis ; after which, other Princes, at fe-
uerall times,eflablifhed the ref. Before and about that
time, Tenir fe parlement was & much as Tenir les
_ Eftats (or to bold a Parliament in England) is at this


Lis de parlement. Beds that be fluffed with Chefi-
nut leaues ; called fo of the confüfèd noife yeelded by
them when they be flivred.or flird on. ;
Parlementer. Toparley,confèrre, commune, talke, dif
courfe with.


Parlementeric: f. 4 patley,or parleying,a conférence,


a communication.
Parler: m. Speech,talke language utterance, words,
Beau parler n'efcorche langue: Prov. Looke Efcor-


cher. °
A beau parler clofes oreilles: Pro, For glofing words
well-closed eares.

» On cognoift les balles aux marques des marchads,
& les ames au parler: Pro. As packs by marks, {0 wits
by words,are knovoe.

Parler, To fpeake,talke,declare, fay, tell utter the mind;
to commune, parley, réafon, conferre, difcourfe, con-
uerfe. :

Parler à fa barretre.To talke roughly vnto,expoftulate
roundly with,tell plainly of errors committed, or inin-
ries done, :

 Parler bien à. 10 beat,vex,chafe, mad with words.

» Parler de quelqu'un en bonne, ou mauvaife bou-
che. Tocommend,or difcommend,
Parler brutif, Tefaulter, maffie, famble ; to fpeake as
one that hath plummes in bis mouth,
Parler deffous la ceinêture. (A fafbion of fpeechpe-
culiar vato cheating prifoners.) :
Parler à cheval. #5 under Cheval.

+ Parler entre les dents, To wsutter, murmure mumble

\ wp bis words; Ghats like a Mout in a Cheefe.
Parler doulcement a. To footh, flatter, finooth ; cog,
or collogue with; make faire > Or gine good


words,unto. ;
Parler par efcot. To /peake by turnes, to heave one a-
nother fpeake. - iia Fe Rss a
2 ‘os, TO , threaten, v
bugs AA ; alfo,to roves to thunder.
: Parler Latin, See Latin. ce
Parler ns oe les craw Cofdeliers. (we
fry the fame) to fpeake Latine before Clarks. ©
Parler livre. To/peake profoundly, or beyond the un-
derflanding of ordinarie men; (Ironically.)
Parler par livre. me Prix by booke;@ Preacher, or
»-Ovator to read the moft of bis Sevmon,or Oration,
arler en maiftre.T0 commaund appoint bid jnioyne,


: owle,
Parler comme vn oifeau en cage. To babble,prattle,


; to talke idly; to vfe many words to ve-


“A peu parler bien befongner: Pro. Lets bawe fewer


words and Ss 5 or, deeds are (common)
difpatched a : ”
Hardiment parle tefte faine: Pro, The fpeech of the
innocent is confident, . de
Ine parle pas au Roy qui veut: Prov. Ewerie one
bath not the Kings eare at commaund, _ LA
Mieux vaut fe taire que mal parler : Prov, Better 4
filent,thena en |
Quand d'autru pérerte voudras regarde toy, &
te tairas: Prov. Let bim that meanes to tax another,
examine bimfelfe,and then be will be filent.
Qui ne parle n’erre: Prov, He that fpeakes noterres
not.
Qui tient boutique doit parler à chafcun: Pro, He
that keepes hop muft (peake to ewerie one.
Qui veut bien parler bien doit pourpenfer :
oat Let bim premeditate, that meanes to Jpeake,
we
Trop grater cui,
ane ebb. bree À ment, in [peaking migh-
tie fCatbe,
Parlereffe. Langue par. A long tongue, or pratling
tongue ; a tongue that neuer lyeth.) * ‘
Parlerie: f. A prattling,tattling,babling talking.
Parleur: m. A fpeaker,talker ,diftourfer,
arlier: m. A Pleader,Imparler; Atturney.
ue: m. ere: f. Speaking; in, of, or belonging unto,


Peech.

Parlire. To read ouerto read through.

Parloer. as Parloir.

Parloir: m. A Parlour; alfo, the Roome out of which
Nunnes doe (peake (through an Iron grate)vnto the lay
people that come vnto them.


| Parloire. A prastling,or idle diftourfe,


Parlouér: m. A Parliament, or Affemblie of Eftates; a
ublicke conference. :
arlouër aux bourgeois. 4n Afemblie, Meeting,
a Counfell of Cisixens ( tearmed fo in old
Parmentier: m. ATaylor. Pic.
P :m. An pate Parma(in Italic;)4/0,
the Cheefé Parmefin (made at Parma.)
Parmi, or Parmy. Among, through, in the thickeft


of. on ,
Parnage. as Pafnage ; Pawnage.


Parnombrer: ‘To xumber throughly, count all through,


‘veckowall ouer, tell all out.


Paroccir. To kill outright,make a full end of, rid out of


paine,di{patch out of the way.
Parodelle: £. 4 kiad of cheefe-cake.
Paroi. as Paroy.
Paroice. 4 Parifh; Looke Paroifle.  :
Paroir: m. A Farriers paring-knifé,or paring Iron, +
Paroir. To appeare, or be feene; to peepe out, as the day
in a morning, or the Sunne ouer a mountaine ; to flew,
prefent,or manifef bimfelfe.
Paroifle:f. A Parifb. :
Manches de deux patoiffes. Sleeues of tro parifhes;
. Viz. whofe vppér partis of one kind of fluffe, and the
“nether of another,


Paroiffien: m. A Parifhiener.


Parole: f. A word ya tearme ; alfo, a fpeech, or fay- |


Afolrla parole foeebonne, (Pire fnifetat a


© mucheloquencesas gracefillneffe, of [peech;) to fpeake À
FRS eee |


“Donner


ler nui@: Prov. Ex. |


APALAIR


Donner parole, Il avoir fecrettement donné pa-
role au Roy. He bad under hand offered the King bis
| Seruice;or bad alfred bim that be would be for him.
Humerla parole. Seeke Humer, vdi
4 Des paroles ils vindrent au poil . From threats
they came.te effects; from the (pending of breath tothe
Ter ” 4 À

: Lesparoles font le jeu: Pro, Words make the game;
Oxen by ropes but men by words,are bound.

Les paroles ne puent point: Pro. (Bare)words bane
no ilk famor.

Les paroles du foir ne refemblent: pas celles du
matin: Pro, The euening chats not like the mernings
tattle, ! I
‘A paroles lourdes fourdes oreilles: Prov. Let th’
eares be deafè when words grow rude; barfh tearmes
are.moft unworthie of attention, Bie

_ Bonne parole bon lieu tient: Prov, 4 good word
hath great acceptation; good language brings it wel-
come along with it.

Douce parole n’ efcorche langue +
Doux. n vs AIN

| Douce parolerompt grand ire: Pro. Fell fpleene is
quayled by faire [peech. ;
Longues paroles font lesiourscourts: Prov, Long
diféourfes make fhort dayes,

… Mefchante parole ieétée va par tout à la volée:
Pro. A bad word quickly flyes abroad; a bad report fet
once on foot, fpreads farre. .

Mefchantes paroles ont mefchant lieu: Prov. Bad
“words find Fea acceptance, or are badly intertained,
‘A bon iour bon oeuvre, & bonnes paroles: Prov. :
Good workes,and words are fittef} for good dayes. :
Parolette: £ 4 little word, orfbeech 3: but a word or
| two, BN
Parolle. as Parole, har. |

Paron, 4 damme; an old one that bath young ones. |

Parons, as Parens; Kinsfolkes, , ;

Paronnel. The name of a Peare whereof good Perrie is


Prov. Seeke


made,
Paronychie: £ whitlo-graffe,Nayle-wort (a weed.)
aroximique: com, Of,or in, the fit of an agues «
Paroxifine: m. The-retrneor fit,of anagues >,
Paroy:f Awall. 1.1 = ng
Parpaie : £, A full payment,or the reftof a payment: :; (1
Parpaigne: £ A pillar, buttreffe,.o7 fupporter of flone-
work,seruing to beare up a.beame or fummer in a wall.
Sher on. = Parpillon, AS
aing.. 4 Parpaigneiui » 41: os .
ala 4 To pay throughly, foundlyall.
Parpeine. as Parpaigne.... “nom ax) YO
Sbrimp.…. >


papillon: m7 hs fi caleass
i : £, Spanglessor Oes. gan
Pap + Lape of foe, vfquared or new


ect


aipin:m, À great
cut out of the Quarrey.
Sebi cy oy a phil 5 .2070.1
Parqué: m.ce: f. Parked, foulded ; impaled, incloféd,
hedged, or bemmed in; alfo, planted, fet dorwne,, fixed,
i ré rene heal 1
impale; inclafé, hedge or
Mae


q


well. PER 1e : + A
 Parq ucts, 4 Parke i rs isthe
: ve,or Inclofure of a Court à ce; fometionesalfo H


>


|. part of a Gardemgwbich conpits of beds and borders of


— ey ii i is
Fe : î Lo: 1


PAR


où the Court it felfe; and fometimes, the Houfé, or Hall,
wherein.tis kept. |
Parquet de jardin: .4 Bed,or Border in a Garden.
Parquetages: m, Foulds of Hurdles ‘for Sheepe ; alfo,
Parkes, or impaled grounds; and particularly, fmall
\ peecesvof falt-marfhes, whereinto the fea walcr is by
Salt-makers let ; of purpofe to be kept untill the beat
of the Sunne bauecongealed it, :
Parquoy. why Pwherefire ? alfo, therefère, for this, or
‘for which, canfe. be
Te ne vay fait,ne dit le parquoy tu me doives faire
:véeque tuime fais, F bane given you finall caufe to
‘efemethus. sue?
Partain: m, 4 Godfather,
Partafine:f Stoze-Rofiz,
Pairicide: com, 4 Parricide ; a murtherer of his owne
father ; alfo,any hainous murtherer.
Parricider: To murther bis owne father ; alfa, to commit
. any bainous,orunnaturall mur ther.
Partin: m. 4 Godfather.
rrodelie:.f.as Parodelle.
arroquet. as Perroquet. ;
arferyir. To ferue throughly, to fèrue long and well;
whence ;
» Malfertquine
Parfimonie : f,
bandrie
Parfonnier: m, 4 Partener,or Coparcener.
Parfoy. à parfoy. Apart, alone, by bimfelfe; alfo, from
him, by bis intreatie or meanes.
Parti m. Abirthyor binging forth, as of children ; the
_ frnit of a womans wombe ; any brood,or litter.
Part: f. A part, flare, portion, peeces a ioint, limme,
oiguarter; alfo,a partie, or fide; alfo, a place, coafl,or
countrey. :
‘Apart. Apart,afide,ont of the way,out
\ edlaie,in private, fecretly by himfelfe.
Seretirer à pärt:T0 retire, or withdraw
gies of all companie.
De fa part elicett pucelle, For all bim,or for any thing
- be bath done, fhe is amaid, à
Enboñnepärt. Hale cœur affis.en bonne part.
There is great mettall,good fluffe much vertue, ishim. |
-“ Quelque part, Somewbere, fomewhether; Quelque
ay amas bats. D ind that:
aire la part au plus efloigné; ou,au plus ieunes To
: \make one büt arverie fleigbt fave, to gine bin what be.
Lit bim{elfe,or notbing.(o much as his due,» 09 \
- sLshomme quia de l'arc poflede fapart: Prov. The
\» Shilfiall Gets afhareinvenerie things > >:
© Quin’y eftn’y afapart: Pro.He thats not there gets
~ nothing theres on >, SEATS oth baste
Partage: mA parerge, partitionsor parting; a fharing,
diutding,or diuifion, HATTIE
. En matiere criminelle n’y a partage. Id cft,paribus
numero fententjs ea fuperat que pro reo facityor, Y
: Aëquo féntentiarimnumeré reus.ablolvicury |


arfert: Pro.
Parfimonie, fparing;thrift, good bus.


of high wayes ; :
bimfelfe ; to


artageable: com, Partible dinidable. uy Oke ss

meray PE LE TS fhareont. : ne n 4

artaut. (Partic.) Parting,départing, going from. :
Darna a rage cr 92114


Parterre: m, flore y alfoya plaine cloft, or any euen
plot,or peece of ground; cod hence; a’ San ere the


hearbes, p out any tree amergthem | +
Parti: m.4 match bargaine condition;or offer. coniditio- ,
| mall; and bence,a marriage,a busband or wife; and, a Ge
+ meanes, fortune,eltate; alfo,a partiesor fide. ut |,
Nan ÿ Pren- ;
rs 73
53


sae "Vp ee ee ©


Parti: m. ie: f. Parteddimided, fenered, dijlinguifhed ;


Pit A’. Ri


PAR


Prendre parti. To bethinke himfelfe,to pamfe vpon; to
be aduifed,or take deliberation yn a matter.

Tenons nous en parti avec le ciel.Let vs hold quar-
ter,or continue our league, with heauen;let us hold with
religion,cherifh deuotion, keepe Gad on our fide.


alfo,gone,departed.
Procez parti. The Court dinided in opinion, ‘

Partiaire: com. fn parts, for parts, of parts.
Campagne partiaire..4 Commons,or common Field,
eae euerte commoner is Slinted.)

ompagnie partiaire. Companie ingaged together;
or whereof Le one bath a {hare in the particular
fait,or bufine[fe managed by them.
Meftayer partiaire. À Farmer which is to yeeld bis
Landlord 4 certaine part of the fruits gotten in bis
~ Farme.

Partial: m. ale: f. Solitarie, primate yetired,unfociable,
all for bimfelfe ; alo, partiall,unequall; factions, more
affected to one then another.

Partialifer, To partialize it ; to fide, bandie, be partial,
or factious; to take parts.

Partialité: f Peine, unindifferencie, fiding, fatti-
oufnelfe ; alfo,a faction.

Participant: m. A pariner, partaker,or fharer with; a

complice, companion, afociate, confederate, accefforie,
adherent.

Participant: m, ante:f Participant; partaking, à
fharing with; adherent or adbering unto.

Participe : m. À Participle (in Grammar.)

Participer.T participate fhare communicate with;al/ol
to partake,or take part with, or take the partof,to ad-
here,or cleaue unto.

Participial: m, ale: f.Participiall; of;or belongings,
a Participle.

Participialenent. 45 a Participle.

Particularifé: m. ée: F. Particulariged, partial
mentioned; feuered, fhared,diflinguifhed. y

Particularifer. To particularize; 10 make pecu
- privates to diflinguifh, or feuer from others ; ta
(pecially.to mention par ticielar ly. \ 60 #; ad

Païticularité:f.. A parent ii nette,
«peculiar or odd,thing,

Particulier: m.ere: f. Particnlars)
broper-ptes cuves 2 nd fatal pat

« fingular, Rgds y ot Pe eee gl ic


fingularly ; diftinétly, fewerally. wi Pend
Partie: £ A part,fhare, portions aint; them
ber ; alfo,a partie, fide, Ps fetyat
«game; alfo,a bargaine, or partie, 2ii-
ent,or fuitor, in Law ; alfo,an , ate, or Counfellor
at Law; alfa, an ‘Accompt; orabead, or fumer, im el

Accompt.

oo 3 Parts, conditions, qualities alfo; shoes

GNT OT SUP THIER Fie! oo. COLLE


| Money made of the fale of
| |


ans dang t


- Il plaidoyebeau qui plaidoye fans | partie: Pro. ; He
fare pleads that finds no Aduer{aric,
-Vne partie n’ef point le tout: Prov. 4 ane " not
the whole; a peecing no perfeélion,

Particre.aé Partizire. -


Partinent: m. 4 parting, dixiding, fonderiog, feue- |


ring ; alfo,a parting,or departing.
Partir. To part, is nf alfo,to partepart,

Ycmoue,or goe from. }

Partir le gaftcau. SeeGafteau, ©

Partir de la main. To part from the band,to Ses or put

on, freely; (a Riders phrafe.):

Partir les oreilles, To heave both fides, iti

Partir du poing. 4 Hawke 10 couet freely; or gee

from tbe band as foone as fe [pies ber game.

Le chanteau part le vilain. See Vilain.

Ce n’eft pas tout de courir, il faut partir d'temps:


Prov. 4 caufe muft be as well begun nc og +6 fol- |


lowed ferioufly.

Partifah: m.4 partner, partaker; affociate,confederate; ;
acceforie adherent.

Partissement: m. as Partiment.

Partisseur: m, A parters dhéder; fharer, difiribwor,
feuerer, [underer.

Partizant. + Participant: ©

Part-prenant:m. 4 partaker fharer ; añibañr : in
a charge to be payed,or feruice to be yeclded; a Puréba-
for that fo contributes; and hence ;
Tenir comme part-prenant. A purchafor to bold
part of a fief by contribution with others in the charge,

. or duties, whereto the whole is lyable.

Partroublé: m.ée:f. Extreamely troubled, molefled,
vexed,annoyed, perplexed.


Partroublement: m, -A# extreame trouble, or a


troubling.

Partuer. To + outright,

P| ra Looke Parti; alfo,a eue, ees. 3a
parting,or going away.


| Parvanc à iy Petvenbel 5 à D ai


Parvenir. To atchieuesattainearvine,or come unto; al-
foste er ame Py or come fra in ibe

Satie mi The Porch ofa Church ao (or more pr
perly) the vtter court of a Pallace,or great 12
arvité? £ Smallne(e,littlenefe,

Pasieere ‘Adecking, tricking, trimming ; alfo, arvay,

— apparrell} attire; alfo, a Ree; or Suit of uppar-

re L


Pas:m. A pace, a (ep, a pride: a mes fare of two foot
and a halfe; or (as in fome places) of three aad a half
or (as among the old Romanes) of fiue ; alfo;@ foot, or
footings alfo,a pace, gate,or ordinarie traine in going;


alfo,a flrait,narrowp eflrait patb’s\and füch a
| pafage kept by one,or m again all commets ;
ant thence alfo, a


Tournay.-—
Le pas. The firait between Calis and Pros uP
Pas d'AbbÉ:Looke Abbé.”

Pas d'Afne: Fole-foot; Colts-foot, Horfefeob, Hal
_ Poets ax bearbe ; salfo, à fashion of a Port; onWpfét, i in
+ 4 etn 3 alfo, a certaine From ring à in the

Ci MW hièor |
“ae de vel Pas Aie tbe Fe A


Pas de Clere: A foofifh tricke ample par sn vojseouer-
à ue =


at


4 A0) à \»4\ HSE, 3


Originät from
:


PRE ORO, STAFE-UNIVERSITY


sl


ne Pa |


ee


PAS


Pas de larron. See Larron.
s mantle,


or, the point of it,


Salto,or Gallop Galliard,
Lettres de pas. Paffes,or Pafports,


4 fault, error, or mifiaking ; alfo, a fafè


goes.
Mauvais pas, fil way. :
Plus vifte que lepas. Exceeding fa/t, or as faft as bis
legs would carrie bim, Fa
Aller à pas menu, To goc nicely,tread gingerly,mince
it like a maid. ;
Aller le pas. To pace,or goe a foot pactto walke faire
and foftly,or faire and leifurely, A RED
Courir en deux pas vn faut. To rane {peedily fwift-
ly,in baf},apace. ;
Tauray fait en deux pas & vn faut. F fhall baue dif-
- patchedinatrice.
Entamer le pas. To begin, or breake the ice; to lead
the way,or w daunce; to make an entrie,or ouerture)
unto,
Fermer le pas a. To flop the way, to interrupt or fay
the pee) of.


La Mort P attend à deux pas pres. Death is at
rs within an ynch of him, readie to feixe on
ji it


Paffer le pas. To goe the way of all flefb; to dye.
Plandre ones, Esebe Pin: à
Tailler le pas à. as Entamer le pas, To begin
unto, ar
Pas à pasle bœuf prend le lievre: Pro. Srepafiér
Sep the Ox doth catch a Hare; by diligence, and conti
nuance re a direct courfè the dulleft wit comes to great
wledge.
as à pas on va bien loing : Pro, Step after flep goes


€
Pas. (4 Particle that euer inforces,or addes weight unto,
a Negatine;) not at allno way pofibly,by no manner 6 j
meanes, |
Nonpas? Artthou not? is it not ? are we not? arc, ‘|


hee m. Grafing , feeding, or pafluring of Cat-
te
Pafcal. as Pafchal.. «

Phen palchal . The Pafgball Lambesor the Pape
| ouer,

Pafchier: m. 4 Pafure Ground ; or Ground thats.
fier fermesy for nought but the pafluring of cat-
} a mu ite: £, Faded difcolowred,dryed,out of fea»
| for.
 Pafle: com, Palevan,bleake,wbitifh.

Lopal valle rares A rares ml RE vel.


P | SURETEU
PS »vanne[e,lewnefe,bleakne[e,wbi.
> a: (A 2.) ot | AN

Se Paflir. To wax pale jvan,blenke. 07e T
Pafinaifon: £ A Crampe; orsas Pafimoifon, 1-2} nT


qu mon
De Lion. Lions foot,Lions paw,great Sanicle,our
Le pas de la mort. The path of death; a flep unto it,
Trois pas, & vn faut, The Almond,or Alman, leape.


Vn pas,& vn faut, A Pace,and a Leape; a Manage,or
pri Horfèmanfbip, tearmed sbereih, the Pafa-


Vn faux pas. 4 flip, or miffe,in footing ; and bence,
j , or bellow
peece of ground that finkes under a mans foot as he


A


Pafqueages. P, ,0r pafture grounds.
QE 2e 2 arenes


Pafquerette: f. A little Daifie.
Pafques. Looke Patque.

Pafquette : f, A Daifie,
Paullies Pafquille ; or,+s Pafquin.


Pafquin: ms The name of an Image, or Pofte in Rome,
À . Pafquis: m. Paftures,or pajture à
Pafchal: male: £ Pafcball; of;insor belonging to, the |
P
over, É |
Paffablement, Pafably,toWerably, indifferently, reafo-
Paffade: f. An aimes, beneuolence, or intertainment gi.


: La mer fe manie à paffades. (A ch whereby the


: rs a friends boufe,ov elfèwbere.


PA $


Pafiné: m, ée: £ Fallen in a fivoone.
Vn Dauphin d’ argent paliné. Hariant (in Bla-
2


Se Pafiner. To fivoone ; 10 fall into a traunce, or


ne.

Pafinoifon: £ 4 fivoone, or Swoonding ; a traunce

… (caufed by an extreame crampe,or conuulfien.)
afñage : m. Pawnage ; Maflage ; the money récei-
ued, or profit made,by the Lord of à Forreft for the A-
giflement, or feeding of Swine with the Maft , er
(wherein our pawnage commeth fhort,and the French
» % not generall) of Cattell with the herbage, there


Pafque.ou Pattues. (The feaft of) Eafter.
Palgutes or Seba pt he
Pafque fleurie, Palme Sunday.
Paique de foles. The fame.
Devoir de Pafques. A Lambe at Eafler due vntot


Curates of fome places from euerie Sheepmaifier with |


in their Parifhes.
Oeufs de Pafques. Pafle-egges ; egges ginen to chil-
dren at Eafler,
Donner des oeufs de Pafques à routes reftes, 0
pacte ody Ù
Faire Pafques. To communicate ; or, to receine the
Sacrament,
Se faire marchand de poiflén Ia vicille de Paf=
ues ; &,fe faire poiffonnier la vigile de Pafques.
To enter kato acourfe,or undertake an altion,in an un.
fit,or Unfeafonable time.
Pafques long temps defirées font en vn iour toft
teva Proy. The long-defired Paffèouer is in a day
paft oner. OP BEIUSE
Apres Pafques,& Rogatons fy de preftre,& d'oig-
nons : Proy, Looke Oignon,
“A Noel au perron, à Pafques autifon: Proy, et
Chrifimas in the Suune,at Eafter by the fire. ;


rages,& Pafqueraiges. as Pafchiers,


Yh, A Pafquill; a Libel clapt on a Pofle, or


Fmage,


whereon Libels and defamatovie Rimes are faftened,
and (ushered alpiarPalquilles © eet


L’ Oifon n'eft pas digne de monftrer les pafquis à
Poye:Pro. Looke under Oifon. — à
affable +com. Paffable, tolerable, indifferent,currant
enongh ; alfo;which may be trawelled through, or paffed


nably,meanely, fo (0,


* 3 be ombat,
Ë che the fa
D vy mene a dt


Swift courfe of the flowing,and ebbing of the fea,on the |
Sandes,or Wafhes,is meant
Prendre la paffade.To refiefh bim/tlfe,in a long iour-


xm, An Arrow. FGale 5


‘Pat


Nan y 23


3
3
a

3


doi eee en
3 +


PA S


Paffage : m. A paffagesa firait,a way,path, pace,conr/e;
4 paffing,« gate,going,or winding ,alfo,a paage entiie,
-or comming to a place; alfo, a palfe, pafport, fafe-con~
duct, or licence giuen for the free paffage, trauell, or
tran{portation of; alfo,a peece,claufe,text, place of; or
paffage ina booke ; alfo, 2 diuifon,or warbling 5
and (in Riding) a limitted pace of {cboole either for-.


uite vanifhed away. vith irish oy

affé par les armes. Shot to death; or, executed by
paffing we | oe |
le fuis paflé. Fam gone,or onercaft, 7 bane throwne
oucr, at Bowles, ec. " i= 4


On s'en futbien paflé. One might baue beene with.
meme nach ” amare


> à Di


Oe. AT
te


à ward,or backward, Paffe-caille: m, See Cailles.

x Faulcon de paflage. 4 Paffenger. __ | Pafle-chevaux: m. 4 Horfé-boat.

4 Lettre de paflage. A Pafe,or Pafe-portére, (as in Paffe-dix. Such a Game as our Paffage, +

, Paflage.) Tt Pafle-droi&t: m.A refgnationor graunt of right; alfo,

Haut paflage. Aa Jmpofition of vij d in the pound | ~acourtefie or fauor done, a gift or (alarie befowedy be- |

upon Woolls,Clotbes, Linnen, Canuafes, and other fuch yond merit,or aboue ones due. À ae
marchandize. ; ; Ilm'a faiét vn grand pafle-droict. He takes nor of!
Faire le passage. To prepare fruit (which is to be pre- me the extremitie of Law, be bath dealt verie kindly

: ferued ) for the receiuing of Sugar, by boyling it ia with me. |

leere water,untill it be fo tender that a pinne pricked | Paflée: f. A pafage,courfe, paffing along. ar

: into it cannot fetch it vp any height, or bold it up any Lapaflée. 4 manner of catching little birds, by ic


while,

Paffager: m. A Ferryman ; alfo,a pafenger, traueller,
way-faring man, : br ;
Paflager: m. ere: f. Tranfitorie, paffing, fbifting, flit-

ting, vacertaine junfleadie, remouing often,euer chan-
ging places, moft giddie, alwayes gadding vp and
“downe.
Colombe paflagere. À Pigeon thats bred betweene
a tats anes wild one. |
Faulcon cr. A Paffenger. ;
Nef met Ax ordinarse Paffage-boat,or Ship.
Paffager. To paffe, proceed, rwane,or goe on ; to flit; re- |
moue often, eucr be Sifting of abode, alwayes be
gadding up and downe. AD ee
Paflager,& varier la voix, To warble, or diuide, in
fiaging, ot."
Paffageur: m. 4 Ferryman,


Baflagier. as Paflager.
Paflant: m.4 paffenger,traneller, wayfaring man, à


king lyme-twigs, and placing liue birds in cages,amon
the boughedef trees, purpofely fet vp, or fich as “ually
they pallé by. 1
Lespaffées d'un Cerf. Hu racke,or pafages;the pla.
ces which be bath gone through,or by. >.
Les paffées du mois, The dishurfements for Court-
Acates omitted, and not fet downe, untill the laft day
of the month. :

Paflefile: m. ée:£ Curled, frizled, entrammelled, as
out-dravene locks of baire,

Paffe-fillons: m. Small eare-lockes; or curled lockes —
drawne ont on either fide ; hence, any frizled lockes, or !

» entrammelled tufts of baire.

Paffefillonné: mée: f. as Pañlefilé,

Pafle-fin: m. Excellent fine cloth.

Paffe-fleur: £ The Pafeflower, baflard Anemone, or
Windflower ; alfo,red or purple Camomill,red Maths,

: Rofearubie, Adonwred flower; called Palfe-flower by


i) ae


+
L


j | _. the Tranflator of Dodoneus.
Paffans.Pafengers,drc; alfo;the rings through which | Piffe-martelldetemps. A merrie fport, or pafime,
the cords of a (aue(fon paffe, ©: |. wherewith time (ina time of caves) is driuen away.


Paflernent: m.  paffing, pacing, going; an ouerpaffings

 atranfborting, a carrying, or conueying ouer ; alfo, a
*: flrayning throughs alfo,alace,or lacing.

_ Paffementde tcfmoings. Aa examination of wit.


Les paffans d'un boucle, The two holes of acbuc- :
kle, : TIGE % ;
Paffant: m. ante: f. Pafing, going, wending, tranels
ling along ; al/o, firaining, alfa, paffant,currant,uerie
tollerable. 4 Ars Nie p rl sy tie} TNs oneffes. Wis) i
Enpaflant, Sleightly, lightly, curfarily, accidentally, | Paflementé:m.ée: f. Laced,
by the way. | Paflementer, To lace. 1
| Paffature: m. 4 firaynings alfo, theshing thats fray | Paflementier : m. 4 Lace-maker,a Silke-weauer.
ned. vg eee) | Paffe-par-tout. Vn p. 4 zefolute fellow; one that goes
Paffé: m. Time accidents occurrencessor through-flitch with euerie thing be undertakes’; one
whofe courfes no danger can flop,no difficultie flay. -


Pafle: f 4A Henne Sparrow; alfo,as P |
racke of a Croffe-baw ; alfo,the From Go Vne pafle-par-tout. A double key,that opens all the
dores in the Court.


atPalemaille, ee ee :
} Paflede bois. The little brambling, or mountaine Paffe-paffée: f Heypaffe,repaBe; a ingling tricke, or |


> tearme, a
e de Canari


Raffe-pied: m. Acapersorlaftiedriehein dauncine; al: |
ble blak-browne Owfel (or bird’| oa kind ofdennce peculiar tothe youtbof La haute |


ce. A Canarie birds. .


© | tke an Ovefell) thats euer alone, or if in any companie, | Bretaigne. ae |
wit es, among flon v oven. the tops of ‘Paffe-poil: ai A fripped or iadged welt of raffaraseve, À
1 |. na Garment. wo)
| + taf oof (ac bet) alle-pomme: re Poe pera |
Le ~bowes, pou haere meale; (an apple quickly ripe, ;
| Biais paffe, A bias gate doore,searmed fo by work. : ‘eaten’ Ch TO WARS, a 50). ve wi rst 7
: 74 nt RES ceob siita i. : ‘Paffe-port: m. AP Nie a A |
a | La aijeas gone pve p23 | Elleafon -port. She Dowie fs {
y | a j lar yl Ce 0 4 L if.) om 3 }


« ! 7 af x rim fu dy. th 14 ‘ inc Le |: e:f. Al lading, + QE


: - L Le
i _


Le fers pet > - = dd TE


POA S : PAS

8 : ie 3 COLE ’ ; ! À: Good lucke vnbeeded quickly flips away, ; |
verie couragions.

Paffer. To paffe,wend,gor,walke on afore; to proceed or


Quand le chou pafse le cep le vigneron meurt de |
foif: Prov. when the Cabbidge growes fafter then she |
Uine,there will be a great dearthof wine, + |

Qui pafse vn our d'hyver, il pafSe vn defesenne-
mis mortels ; Pro. mortal! foe he Scapes who [capes |
aWinters day.

Qui a des noix il en caffe, & qui n’en ail s’en paf.
fe : Prov, (Ap ble tofuch saci frent things ds We
. €an both pend, and fpare.) :

_ Semelles, & vin pafsent chemin! Pro. viz, Kid

“way apace,

PafSerage. Dittander Dittanie, Pepperwort,
Patserage fauvage.cackoc-flowers, Ladies-finockes,
the leffe water Crepe,

Pafserat: mi A Sparrow.

Pafsereau : m.4 Sparrow; (efpecially the cock; whi
the Prouerbe ;) =
ner & moineaux font de faux oifedux!
Cocke Sparrowes and (young) Monkes are (much of a.

Sipoftion) fbrewd raed : oa
serelles. as Paflerilles,
afscrille. Raifins paferillez. Dried and made Rai-
Jins of the Sunne.”""" rf
Pafserilles : £ Raifins of the Sunne,
in: m,ine:f Sparrow-like, of, or belonging toa
Sparrow.
Langue pafserine. The fuit of the Afh,called Afben
keyes,or Michger..

Passe-rofé :f. The Paffe-rofe, or Pafh-rofe; (a great

flower.)

Pafseteau :m.Aliitle Sparrow,

Pafsetemps : m. Paftime, fport, game, recreation, [o-
lace,delight. ba

e-velours:: m,F lower gentle,Veluet flower Flow.
he Flower valure; (whereof-there bee diuers
inds)
Palo dlbuts branchu. The branched Flower gen-
tle; which yeelds a white feed,whereas all other hinds

baue‘a blacke one. .

Pafse-velouis jaülne. The Gold flower, Gods flow.

£1, yellow or golden Steccados , ‘the golden Flore-a-

mour ; alfo,a kind of Marigold thats as big as a Rofe,

but without amy manner of [ent, — Ë

Paie vent, (4a Epithite fora borfe) fwifter then the

wind, a F

res + ESP dey! fe 4 yt

~ bireling wboMa Captal eon Mufter dayes, foi
H general any fast


bold on a courfe; alfo,to flit,remoue, depart from; al-
So,to firpalfeouergoe, ouerrun, ouerveach,ouertop, o-
nergrow, furmount, exceed, excell; alfo, to paffe, les
goe, fuffer eine way unto; and,to forget omit onerflip ;
run flerghtly ouer ; alfo,to tran{port,conuey, or carrie a-
wer ; alfo,to flraine through ; alfo, to decay, fade, wi-
ther ; deceafé; vani{h away. j
Se pafler. whence; Ife paffe à peu de chofe, He is
contented , be maketh fhift, be doth well ynough, be
can well ynough away,with a little : &; De cela ie ne
puis paffer. 1 cam by no meanes want it, Lcannot be
without it; &,Il a des biens pour fe passer. He bath
goods enow to rub on,or to ferue bis turne with, -
Pafler par arc'S, Bernard. To be berayed,or to be-
ray bimfelfe. X ,

Paffer la capriole. To cut a caper. +
Paffer fa cholere. To dige(t bis choler ; t0 coole bim- |

I; VA :


Jef.
Paffer vne coche. To dive a coach.
fler condemnation, See Condemnation... -
Pafler fon droiét.7o alien paf, part with forgoe,giue
ouer bus right. :
Paffer fon envie. To fatisfie bis longing.
Paffer l'efponge fur. To deface, rafesor blot out,
Pafler par le fil de l'fpée, To kill lay , flaugbter,
misrther, maf[acre. à
Paffer fortune. To ¢/eape,or anoidya misfortune,
Pafler par lafeneftre. S'ils ne veulent paffer pat
qu'ils pu par lafeneftre.If they refüfe,or will
none of that let them take worfe and {pare not.
Paffer plufieurs chofes par vn Fidelinm. Haflily te
Shuffle or buddle up many things together ; to flnbber,
or fleightly run ouer,a bufineffe, .
PafSe fans flux. Not a pinne matter ; let goeféeingit
will be no better, xe 194
Paffer par là. Seeke La; or,Paffler par la fenetre.
‘Pafler en ligne de compte.7o reckon make account,
or giue allowance,of. Oh; iia
Paffer oultre, To tipe up the beeles, to die; :
Pafler cout oultre, Fo paffe, or proceed om: to “goe
» through; alfo,to furpaffe,onerpalfe.ouer gor,
Pafferle pas. To goe the way of all ef, to die.
Paffer le pied fur la gorge À, To tread under bis ‘feet
contemptuoully or conqueror-like, > — B.
 Paffer par les piques. Looke Pique, 4
afSer la plume par le becà, To pull a boyes penne |
through bis Lips; and thence, to abufe, or vfé like a


es


bis companie ; and génera


child ; alfo,to amufe, delay drive off by trifling pretenam dh ng hdd AL RI Pa
ces,or fond and sage friches. a -afSeur: m. À Ferrieman, or profelfed iranfporter of
Paffer Procuration, ‘To grant, yeeld, agree, or gine |" “things ouer ariner. 9 >


confent, unto ; alfo, to appoint an Atturney, or makes | Pafli ité: 6 Pafibilitie, fuffering =~ à

beste of anurnon the St a eet | Paf FA Pa Ape i ait aufing pai

+ PafSer le Rubicon; Towndertake a great, or bazar. ae 7. SERA trict a
it. <a {Sives. Debts owed, or due by vs,untd on


Debtes p
értérbation, trouble, or-affition :
alfo,a ob afin clinton or pdm
mind; alfo,an accident , or Ljmtome concurring with
re afe to throffence,or diftemperature, ‘the bo.
ie; whence; ": RE A te € =
Mliaque pañliôn. Looke Tia rh FA
Nephretique paffion. À pa in the reines, procee-
© din Pos fo gail nbiberein. |
Nulle m ifon fans paffion : Pto. 5 thout
| éme humour." À Et
Pafhonhé:-m.ée:f. Pafioned,)


Sten
nr ir RS


P. To fhend bis time pleafantly merrily, pe


ake ‘bis fill cafe, 10 [fudie,or follow


He PA al


much diftempered,or troubled in mind; of the bindges,
almoft diftraught,wellnigh befides bimfelfe,

Paffionnément. Pafionately, paffienedly. 3

se Paffionner. To grew pafionate,or impatient to difié-
per, affuictor difira& bimfelfe by immoderate paie.

Paffonnerement. Pafhenatel,

Pafson: m, A poffer.

PafSules: f. Raifias. à

Paft : m. A meale, repafi, refection, feeding; alfo,meat,
vidlualls, food,

Le paft nuptial. See Nuptial.

Palté: m.A pie,or paflie ; alfo,a packe (laïd)at cards;al.
fo, ablurre, feraule, potbooke, or ik-faneured whine
whan, in writing.

Pafté en pot. Minced meat boyled in a pot with a lit.
tle broath,and bard yolkes of egges, untill it be balfe


‘by... confumed.
‘Mla defcouvertle pafté. He bath found owt the my/-


terie,
Crouftes de paftez valent bien pain: Prov. See
Croufte, i
‘A celuy quia fon pafté au four on doit donner de
fon tourteau : Prov. Give of thy pie to bim that batha
paflie , doe good to bim thats able torequite thee,
Pafte:£ Pafhor dough,
De bonne pate. Of a good bumor or gentle dia
on; an boneft,and barmele[[e merrie fellow,
De grofie pafte. Clunchie churlifhyclownifh ; of rude,
bomelie,or dull fiuffe.
Us ont toute la pafte entre leurs mains, They hane
got all into their fingers,tbey baue ingroffed all imploy-
ments ; the difpofition of all refis in thesr bands,
Entrer en la pafte iufques aux coudes, Te enter,or
flep farre, into anaët,or bufine[fe.
Mettre la main à la pafte. To afjif, or fet a belping
band unto,
°° Porter la pafte au four. See Four.
Rebeluter la mefme pafte.Te reexamine, or often to
due, one matter. ù
‘~ Rendre pafte pour fougaffe. To yeeld a ticke for a
_ tacke,a Jill for a Jacke ; to returne à man as good
 fluffesor meafiuré, as be bri
: m. Dyers Woad (ofa fer [értuben that which is
leaues tis


P

© called Guelde ; ) al (the hearbe of whofe
made) garden 3 See
Paltel fauvage. Wild Woad ; Woad that comes vp of


it felfe in gr onnds whereintbe End pers Len
 fownez (The tranflator of Pluie calls a kind of wild
“Lettuce that growes in woods Paltel fauv |
Paftenade :£ The garden Carrotor aroot
).of a bloud-red colour ;


a Carrot
Sometimes


ro em ut that by Art ; fome Authors alfo call,


the Parfnip thus. .. ë
- Paftena(e jo. ‘The yellow garden Carrot.
‘Pa rouge. The red,or blacke Carrot.
3 =. The wild Carrot, called Birds-


P AS


Bourfe de pafteur . Shepheards-purfe, Sbepheards.
pouch, Picke-purfe, Toywood, or Toywort, poore mans
Parmacetie,Coofe-weed pr Cafe-weed,
A mol pafteur le loup chic laine: Prov. gentle
Paflor makes the wolfe cacke wool,
Pafteux : m.eufe : £ Dougbie; clammie as bread which


is dough-baked; foft,or yeelding,as dough,


"| Pafticerie. Looke Paftiflerie.


Patties a ved loaues of wood,

+f. Little s nes of wood, ce

Paftin : m, Paf; ora yl of pafl.or of dow
€


¢: m.Paf; or paflameat,fiuffe made of >


or

Paftir. See Patir,

Pattis :m. .4 pafture ground (not inclofed, nor of the
better fort, but as our common, er waft, whereon cat-
tell = but barely line ;) alfo, pafture, or feeding for
cattell,

Paftifsage:m. 4 making, or baking of pies, or palt-
meats,

PaftifSer. To make pies,or paft-meats,

Paftifserie :£ (All kind of ) pies,or baked meats ; pafle-
rie worke ; alfo,the making of pafi-meats.

Mes es :m, Apaflareror pie-maker; alfo,a maker of
pafi-meats,

U a paffé par devant!’ buis du paftiGier. He # a
retchlefe,or cavelefje fellow,

Meftier n'avons de paftifSier roigneux : Prov.Bet-
ter no pies then pies made with {cabd bands.

Pafton : m. A mafh of meale fora borfe ; alfo,a certaine
paft, or mealie ointment that côforts, or firengtbens bis
boofe ; alfo,the peece of leather wherewith the toe of a
fhooe is lined,

Paftophores :m, Sacred Priefls, reucrend Prelates (a-
mong tb’auncient Ægyptians.)

Paftoral: m.ale : £ Paftorall,Shepbeardlie, rural.
Bafton paftoral. # Verge à berger ; e(pecially, wa-
ter Plantaine,

Paftorat : m..4 Paflorall Office,or charge,

Paftoreau : m.A young,or meane Paflor.

Paftoureau.# Paftoreau; or,a Paflor.

Si fouhaits t vrais pastoureaux feroient
Rois : Prov. df wifhes might fucceed poore men would


Paftourellés£ bepbearde[fe

urelle:f, 45 elfes -:

Paftre : m, as Pafteur. 2
Pafturable: org 5 wines ae be turned in-
or put unto,papiure; which» on.

= : m. Paflurage ; a palture ground; alfo, a


graxing, feeding, pafturing in ; or eating of , paflure


grounds, Pole
_ Vain pafturage. as Vaine pafture; or, a eating
pare gil ai in
cif Palture, gralje, Ny J 5
meat, food, nowrifiment, fuflenance, re KA


ding. vs
Pasnnede have. Camells bay,Squimant. |‘
Vaine Medowes whofe bay, arrable ground


' Pople ces a pete 7
Vie paf le temp NE D fotk
€

\ Dis Sint Ana es à ing. time

i the feafon of parmage, or Agif

ing of rine eos fbi 3 dr Law nie beg
“at Holie-rood day,and to end about Martilmas.)

_ Folles femmes n'aiment que pour pafture : Prov.


PA T:


… Whores louetodonger then they. are feds »:
Palturement:m, A pafluring,grazing, feeding...
| Pafturer. To paflure,eraze, feed ; fodder ; alfosto cat,as
grounds with cattell, maya QT
Vainpalturer. To turne bis cattell into, o let them
vunne in,grounds beld Vainepafture. 116
Pafturier: m. 4 Graxier. pans
Vfagiers vain pafturicrs, Which haue the priuiledee


to cat with sberr cattell grounds held Vaine pafture,


Pafturon. as Paturon,

Sereno pre sae paar.
atact: m. A tacke,clap, kre ap, 2 @Gale,

Patafle : £:1he fixe of bread. allowed. by tiens,

Patafleric: f Fopperie, foolerie , ideotifine , idle tri-


ing. “x th a rosy |
Paveque: f, A Neapolitane:coyné worth 200 Qua-
: fins. ‘ he v {
Patarafse, Looke Petaraflé; 401 45 eT
Patart: m. 4 Low-countrey coyne worth a Sol Tour:
nois; or the Stiver , fixe whereof amount unto 6 d.
‘flerl, +. syed
Pataut: m.aute : £ Groffe,corpulent,big, fat,
Pate sf, as Parte; alfi,a plate, or band of yron, ec; for
for the flrengthening of a thing.
| Paté:m.éc:f. Pawcd, broad-footed, or broad atthe
foot ; well underlaid,
Pateade. ¢Rab. Looke Pareade. |
| Patelin : m.4 cogger,colloguer, flatterer, foother fmoo-
ther ; a coufèner ; a pratler,or fond dallier; alfoya Baf-
p scie ViceimaP lay... ty
atelinaye: f, A colloguing, flattering, cogging ; cou-
: Vening; parties ling, idle tatling ; fied foviatg
or dalliance; abuffoonixing, or atting the Vice in a
Play. e + >= shiva
Patcliner. To cog, flatter, footh,collogue with; to inter-
| taine with idle chat, or vaine dalliance ; to coufen, or
_ deccine with fond-faire words ; alfo,to buffoonize itjor
aét the Vices part in a Play, . > HAN
| Patelion. a Parelin, |
| Patelle : The ball,or whirle-bone,of the knee; alfo,the
À little fhell-filb called a'Lympine. usé
| Pateller. To chatter,warble,or, as a young bird , record
| the notes fhe wonld learne. Aw
Patellette de Ja teftiere. The bead-dag; the broad peece
| °° of leather that runnes oner-croffe , or through, the top
ofa beadflal. :
| Patene. as Patine. _ stort ote
| Pateno 5: m, Beads. è ;. q
| Patenoftre. la p: The Pater-nofer, the Lords Prayer.
: | _ Dire la patenoftre à l'envers. To eurfe 112 °t
” Direla paten
À withthe teeth. 7 tam
Patenoftrier : m. A maker,or feller of beads; alfi,an


_ hypocrite,@rc; as Patinoftrier.


ef


Be A tester aa
| Patepelué: com. Haivie-handed,rough-feoted.\ |


‘Paterliqu play the farber,to be fatherlie, °°
| ‘Paternel: m >: f Paternal, fatherlie,of a father of
| the fathersfide, sax
P tne CP ak D, father-like. ‘T
aternité : :
a -no CT: AS) aten Ditre, © |
7 Elion: fo PERE CUT CT LT
|| Patheriquement: Parhericallyspafionately, : +: \
Pathologie: That part of which intreats


oftre du finge. To didder, or chatter


| ‘Patriarchiesfia Parriarchat. | 5 En


the caufes,qualities,and differences of difeafes.
athologique: com. Ofer belonging 10 Pathologie,
Pathonomique: f. A neceffarie,and undoubted ge.
“ALiDie com, Patible, paj]iue, (ufferable. ;
Patibulaire: com. Deferning the gallowes 3 of, or be-


_ «longing tothe ges
ulaire. A gibbet, or gallowes ; Looke |


: i ati
ourche, ....:..
Juftice patibulaire. High Furifdittion; power to
hang off endors ; Looke Pilier.
Signe patibulaire. 4 gebbet, or gallowes; amarke,
or figne of High Jurifdictionin wh owner,
Paticier, Looke Paftifsier.
Paticiere :f.4 Pie-makers wife; or a woman that makes
pies,or pafl-meats to fell,
Patiemment. Patiently,mildly quietly mcekely, obedi«
ently; alfoyrefolutely,or confiant.
atience: £ Patience,long fufferance, much abiding; a
* conflancie in bearing,a courage in induring,euill, alfo,
meckencffe mildnefle; quictnel[e, obedience ; alfa, as
Ja Patiencic,
Patience de Lombard: Prov. 4 férced patience,
Patience paffe fcience: Prov. Patience paffeth {eis
ence,
| Quin’a patience iln'a rien: Prov. He that bath no
patience bath nothing,
atient, Patient ; fuffering,induring, bearing abiding;
meeke, mild, quiet ; obedient; alfa, difeased,burt, af-
felled, afficted, .
Au patient demeurent Jes terres : Prov, The inf?
foal inberit the land (fayes the Pfalmift.)
Patienter. To beare,indure,or attend with patience,
Patientie:f Hearbe Patience, Monkes Rhubarbe.
Patin : m. 4 Pattin,or Clog; aljosthe footfall of a piller.
atine :f. The Patine,or couer of @ Chalice,
Patiner. To bandlerudely, ox carelefly; or 10 toffe, and
turne a (brittle)thing ofien betweene the fingers, :
Patinoftres:: f. Beads, |
Patinoftrier : m, 4 Bead-maher,e>c; as Patenoftrier;
alfajbeads ; or a ftring,lift,ar fet of beads. one
se Pationner, Looke se Pafsionner, fs
Patir. Tofuffersindure,beare, fuftaine,abide. {
Tun patiras. Thou wilt furely fmart , or [moake
it, 233 \ WASHES Gi
»Telenpatitquin’en peut mais: Prov, Said of one
thats Pr 0g bs mg lt f


Patois: m.: Gibridge ; clowaif>.language ,, rulicall
| fpeech(or ehauiour.) WET D ty Pte bu st À

“Patoüil:m, 4 padling, dabling, flabbering; a making
| _ foule by much flurring. ) + eit A fy

Patoiiillardean, 4 padler, dabler, flabberer ; 0


v tramples with his feetin plafhes durtie water, |
- Lu ? ¢ f


ASTI. plefhsorpuda lefpvacts ob 5338
atouille :f..as Patrouille (in the firfi fence.), :.;)
Patoüillé: mée:f. Slabbered; padled, or dabled in
withthe feet; alfo,troubled,or fouled,as liquor by fir-
ringyor by being flared... 221 on ol oy ong
Patoüiller. ‘0 flabber ; ie padic,ar dablein.2ith the


» feet;to flixre'up and dovone jand trouble or make foule, -


fürring. 3


Patriarchat:m: ABatriatcbieor P atriarkfhip. "a


Patriarche: m, 4 Patriarke ;achicfe Father.


Patrice: m. A Senator ofcRomes allo, a great Prince ;


= nino whereof (fayes a French Author) a full, and abfo-


lute King is tobaue under him; and they two faure
Dukes apeccervnder thems 50 2:35: !


soit
up 5 vote


Patricotage : m. wrangling, brangling; idle, ase


— a a ie 4»


>


és
atl St eee ee


2
4
*
q
:


ee ee 2 L2 . a > TT ir Le sé LL = 7 À —— bi , LM


PAT P AV |


L EEE ee
| contention in words, Croix pattée. 4 croffé Pattie or croffe Formie(in Bla- |,
‘Pattie :f A mans countrey,or natine foyle; the Region, rom)

. or place wberembhe was borne. Pattepelué. Seeke Parepeluë. tS

| Patrimoine :m. Patrimonie, birthright, inberitance, Pattiner. To fmble,or bandle toc much ; toburt,or dif- |

À linelybood, order by much handling,

Patrimonial : m.ale : £ Patrimoniall ; of,or belonging | Pattouquis : m, The patting, or pelting found made by
10,the patrimonic,or inberitance of. anuile-beating hammers, ple
Deniers patrimoniaux. Looke Denier. Pattu, as Paru.


Fief patrimonial. 4 Patrimoniall fief; viz. which |. Patu: m.ué:f Broad-pawed, {play-feoted, or large foo-
defcends,or came by defcent. ted. t T
Patriot: m, A father, or protector of the countrey, or Nafeaux patus. ide narrells, great nofethrills.


Commonwealth; alfo,as Patriote. Pigeon Aa Avough-footed Done, : . ‘
Patriote :m. 4 patriote,ones countrey-man, Paturon de cheval, The pallerne of a borfe. t
Patrocincr. To patrocinate maintaine, defend, protect, | Pau:m. A flake.

Support uphold, Pavane: f. A Panane.


Patron: m. À Patroz,P rotecior maintainer, defender, | se Pavaner.æ se Pavonaffer, :
Supporter vpholder ; alfo, the Maifter of a fhip; alfo, | Pavanier :m. 4Panine-maker; a dauncer of Pauines.
the Lord,owncr,or Maifter of a houfe; alfo,apatterne, | P aucher les yeux. Looke Pocher.:' |
ample cxample,precedent, Paucité: f Paucitie, féwncfe, little fore, fmall num-
Patronal : male :£ Patronall; of, or belonging to, a ber of .
Patron; done in remembrance, or folemmixed in bo. | Pavé: m. A pauement ; a floore laied with ftone, bricke,


nour of a Patron, plaifter,e>c.
Patronnage : m. Patronage ; defence, proteétion ; al- Bateur de pavez. 4 pauement-beater; a rakebell,
fo,a Patronfhip. unibrift, looje youth, diffolute ov deboched fellow ; one


Droi& de patronnage. An Aduowfon; the right that walkes much abroadand riots it wherefoener be


: of Seigneurie in, or of prefentation unto, a Benefice; walkes, uy
a. referued by the Lord, or fir? giwer of the glebe,thereof; | Pavé :m.éc: £Paued; layd,or floored with flone,brick,
| Looke under Droiét. © plaifier coc... ' 4
: Patronner. To make,or frame by a patterne, to make | Pavement: tm, Apauing. | |
| the like of ; toimitate or take example by,or follow the | Paver. To paue,to floore with flonesére, |
p" precedent of; al{o,to patronixe,take into protedtiona- | Pavefade. as Pavoifade. .
vow,or allow of. Pavefcher. To fhield, fhelter, forowd, couer. =
Patronymique scom,Derined of the Fathers,or Aun- | Paveur: m. 4 Pauer. (
cefiors names. Pavide: com, Timerous, fearéfill; quaking at euerie* i
Patrouille: £ A full night-watch in warte ; alfo,a danger, flarting at encrie fearber, y 4a
maulkin wherewith an onen is made cleane. Pavidité: £ Dread, feare, timeroufnepe. CRE
Faire la patrouille: Looke Faire. Pavie : f. A baftard Peach,or fruit like a Peach, 4
Patrouillé:m.ée:£. Smecchedbefinéaredibegrimed; | Pavigeade. Looke Pavoifade. à
~alfayfvvept,or made cleane witha maulkin, 1 | Pavillon :m. A Pauillion,tent ; or Tabernacle; al(o,the 1
Patrouillement : m. A/meeching begriming, befnea- | »\ flag borae by an Admiral, or commaunding, fhip. ‘ :
ring ; alfo,a deprauing; alfo, a {weeping with a maul- Le pauillon d’ yn Jiét. A Canopie fir a bed ; and 5
kin; alfo,a padling,or puddering,as inthe water.' |: fometimes alfo, the (round) Teafler of fome kind of j
Patrouiller. To (meech,begrime, bleach, befineare ; al. beds, a ; :
So,malicioufly to mr pra ea am 4 ve | -Pavis. as Pavie. nraiffse | |
or make cleane with a Maulhin ; alfo,topaddleor pud- | Paul: m..Paul (aproper name;) See Pol ; alfo, as |
Pr dd . A be ¥ ms Paule CE prs ‘
atrouilleur: m. A fineecher,begrimer,befinearer; aulcer. as Pocher. ants |
o,a malicious carper or depran L Palys TS 45 Paulé: m.éc:f. Staked,or fet with flakes.
À Patte :£. The parrjor foot of a beaft; alfo, the footfall of | Paulle. Ar Italian coyne worth about 11 d.fterl.
Pigeon te chin AE, chef Tables, greusd ee ra rar be band; alfo, à ball; (and
È e de chat.Cats-(oot ; Al nehoo me:f. The paulme of thehand; alfo, a ball;
IviesGill creepe Le plea yyeS ae > : hence)alfo,Tennis (play ;) alfo,the Palmetree. _,
Patte de cheval ify caf Foleft, | Paule de Chi Nee Aisne es
a CARE AIS cr vd hearbe. Aap hogitn msaty ois }
+ "Parte de lion. Baftard blacke Ellebore, Beaves-foot, | Pau!me Dieu: Thefame |: Ee
Se sSettergralfe; alfoyas Pied de lion. + |  Frapperen paulme. To clap,take, or fhake by the ff:
- Pattedeloup. The Thefalian, and loue-prowoking, | in figneofa Hatters: g
a ucintince yer ass à; Se 5 Sifflant en paulme je me rendray à vous. Iwilbe
Jouvin , or black, mo or “huis ig you call;doe but wbifilelam
pou, sh
fo | Paulmelle sf, Beere Barlie, big Barlie, Barlie wish the |
L hs Ra eA ln |e hla saad <j Gai; Se | 4
| paulpi : f. THeye-lids ; Looke Paupieres. |
| P ! as Paw Mefio::-T af im ET ae
| Paurné: Oree pau. Beer Bar liesbig Barbe, guare-
eared : VEL. 7. ot
cx À fil-paulmed Stags |


AT stag ede ar olnolers a
: 00" Pau-


PUR Vg PE A
Paumée: £ 4 clap, firake , or blow with the band, |.
Cm) Fe


Paumiere :f 4 woman Tennis-Court keeper,
Paumon: m.The Nauell-gall; ahorfes difeafe.
Ps se es PR
avois : m. 4 (great) Sbield,or Targuet.
Pavoifade: 2 Tu Race appecially that of Gal:
leyes, whereby the flaues are defended from the finall
+ (hot 3} the enemie,
Pavoifé : m.ée : f. Defended, fhielded, couered,or ar-
med with a Targuet,or with Targuet-fence. :
se Pavoifèr. To fhield,couer,defénd,or arme bimfelfe,as
with a Targuetor Targuet-fence,


iger.


Payes the


Payraftre i m. À flepfather :@Langued.
Payeur: m, Apayer ; alfo,a pay-maifter,
De mauvais f


Pavot : m. Poppie,Cheesbowls, ‘
Payot blanc. The wbite. feeded gardenPoppie,
Pavot cornu. Horned Poppie, fea Poppre, yellow
Poppie. :
Pavot efcumant. Sparling Poppie, frothie Poppie.
Pavot des lardins, The garden Poppie (of diuers
kinds.)

Payot noir. Blacke garden Poppie, or blacke-feeded

* Poppie,called alfo, red Poppie ; and by fome wild Pop=


Peageau, Tollable; of toll.


oft fuch as paffe through bes territorie,
Peager. To ereé,raife or impofe a toll


bertie whereto,toll is due,
Peagier: m, 4 Toll-gatherer,


Avot rouge, Corne-rofe, wild Poppies the red flower
that growes m corne. :
avot fauvage. as Payot rouge,
Pavoifeux : m. 4 Targueteere,
Paupicres :f. The eyealids; alfa, (but leffe properly) the
baire that growes on their edges,
Prife de paupieres, Looke Prife, ?
Paufe:f 4 paufe; a opsreflsrepofe,or lay, a tarriance,
demurre delay. , :
Paufement. Leafurely, faire and foftly, wit many pau-
fes,
Paute. as Patte : {Langucd.
Pautoniere. Looke Pautonniere. c À
autonncrie:£. Lewdnefe,knauerie, flubborne regue-
rie; faucine[fe,malapertaeffe. 3
-Pautonnier: m. 4 lewd, ubborne,or faucie knaue,
Pautonniere:f, 4 Shepbeards/erip; affa lewd, fiub-
borne or faucie drab.
Pauvre. Seeke Povre.
Pauvreté. as Povreté. ;
| Pauzade a £ A paufing, vefting, repofing; alfo, a refiing
__ feat,or place.
P 4 (A ‘lence-impofng Interieélion) Peace hoe,
 Paÿé: m.ée:f. Payed; requited; fatisfied, contented,
Payelle: f. .4 tile round panne; alfo, a little foing-
._ Panne. ni
Payement:m. A payment,or paying ; a fatisfablion,
Payen:m, 4 Pagan,Paynim, Infi ell, Heathen man.
Payennetie:£ Paganifme, Heathenifme; the fell, er
countrey, of Pagans, _
Payenneté:f. Heatbenifineffe.
Payennie: f.as Payennerie. :
Payer. To pay, fatisfiecontent ;requite ; reward.
: Payer en gambades.To make leg-paiments; torunne
| awiyin debt,
I] paye toutes perfonnes en mefine monnoye. He
- ‘ues one forme of [peech, oF Zines one maner of anfwver,
vato all; alfo,be vfes,or bandles euerie one alike,
“Ine veut ny plaider ny payer.He will neither plead
wor pay; contend nor content ; yeeld nor firine, |


ly with Argent,or white.


bound, :


on,difpofition,


to keepe bimfe
borne,or is fit,


Prov. Looke under Lievre.


Prov, Looke Chat. |


You may write what you li


muft put a differenc


Prov. See Loup,


skinne.


head)almoft inf perably,
Peaultre: f # Peantre.


.


Il s’a beau taire de l'efcor qui ne paye rien: Proy.
He needs not blame a {hot tbat payes nought towards
it; be that will bold bis purfe may hold bis peace.
i“ faulx paye les prez : Prov. viz, Giues them their
Paice veut payer bien fe doit obliger: Proy,
Qui pleige paye Pro. The furetie(fir the moft part)
hee :


Payes. les mortes payes. Looke Morte-payes,


ayeur foin, ou paille: Prov, Ofa de.


Pavoifier : m. A Targueteere. Caying, or disboueft creditor take any thing,
se Pavonafler. 70 firout it ; proudly to glorie in bimfelf, | Pays. Looke Pais,
or fet up bis Peacocks featbers, | s Payfase, as Païfage. |
se Pavonner. The fame ; or(in better,and more tollera- | Pele quau. in flead of, Pat le cor: qGafc.qRab,
ble manner) to take a prettie pride im bimfelfe. Peage’ m, Toll à through-toll or pallage-toll,


Chemin peageau, Wherein toll may be taken,
Peager. Scigneur peager. That claimes, or takes, toll


Peagerie :£ Toll-tahing ;alfo,a paffage whereat, or li.


cagier, as Peager; or, Toll. gathering ,toll-exaéting,

Chemin peagier. Wherein toll is gathered or taken,
Peau: € 4 shin; fell,bide,ér pelt ; alfo, the pill,rind, or

paving of fruit; alfô,a feutcbion, or fhield charged one.


Peau de vieille. The name of an apple thats red on
th'one fide nd white and ragged ontb'otber,
“La — luy tient aux coftes, He à clung, or bide.


Tous compofez d’ yne mefine peau. All whelpes of
a litter,or birds of a feather 3 all of one fifhion affetti-


Se fervir detoutes peaux contre. To fe all meanes,

belpes,or defences ; 10 arme bimfelfé any way,cgainf, |

Seteniren fa tone To hold himfelf2 within bis limits;
fe within the compalfe wheretobe was


Bon eft le lievre dont la peau coufte cent fous:
Celuy a bon gage du chat quien tient la peau:


De mal eft venu l agneau, & à mal retourné la
eau : Pro: Goods badly gotten feldome come to

n la peau de brebis ce quetu veux y eferis: P;

À in afheepes shin, He

En la peau ou lc loup eft uy convient inourit:Pro,

He that lines like a wolfe, fhould die like a wolfe,-

Il faut difcerner la pen: dela chemife: Prov, wee

betweene our skin, and our {hirt,

Le loup mourra en {a peau quine l'efeorchera vif


Peaucier : m, 4 Skitner, Felmonger, Leather-feller.’
Peauicier: meres £, Skinmie; of inyor belonging tothe


Mufcle peaucier.The fefh of the face next under the
skin,whereto it cleaues (1m tbe lips, ye-lids, and for-
Peauflu : m.ué: f, skinaie, or thicke-skinned alfo,lim-
ber, or flaggie, like the looffe skinne of a withered bo.
die, : i
Peautraille : £.Scoapings,or offalls parc -|


We ds boo vt


> a


oe *


yar ©
LE


or ALT EE MERS


Oh Aides wha 6: deb ied


PE C


Pecune : £ Copne,money. 21,1, 2. un
Pecuniaire: com. Pecuniarie,of money,in coyre NY
Pecunieux : m.eufe : € well moneyed, fill of money}
Pedagogie: f An inftrutling, or teaching; ib Office of |
a Teacher ; allo, Pedantifme. (
Pedayogifme :m.# Pedagogie, . ref
Pedagogue : m. 4 Schoolemaifier Inflrnéior Teacher,
Tutor,P edant. Le 4
Pedales : f. (A borfes) kickings, winfiags, yearkings, er
fingings out with the beeles, Te
Pedanées. luges pedanées. Conntrey- Judges, Judges


arafcall or bafé crue offcoundrels. 3,
Peautraillerie:f. Scuruie old fiuffe of skinnes or lea-
ther,
Peautre: £ The flerne of a fhip.
pas +f. Anefeape,litile firine, fmall fault veniall
offence,
Peccant: m.ante: £Sinaing offending ,trefpaffing ; al-
fosoffenfine , whence ; }
L'humeur peccante. The corrupt,or corrupting bu-
mor in the bodse.
Peccatrice : f. # Pecherefle. Py
Pece. as Perrot; or,an Oake,or tree of a middle fixe.
Peché: m, 4 finne,crime, fault offence,trefpaffe,tvanf-
greffion ; alfo,a pot of earth,or flone,c.
Contre peche eft vertu medecine: Pro. Vertue's
a falue gain]! finne. | |
De grand peché grand pardon : &; De petit pe-
ché petit pardon: Prov, 4s isthe fault fo muft the
pardon be.
Vieux peché fait nouvelle honte : Prov. Looke
: Honte. | ‘ :
Charité oingr,& peché poind: Prov. Lone couers,
hate incr eafes,ervours ; ot loue 15 the foules baulme, fin
her bane, |
En coftre ouvert le iufte peché : Prov. An open cof-


fer the theft excufes.

os bar eftpeché eft: Prov, where wealth is of
ces are.

Quand rous pechés font vieux avarice cft encore

ieune: Prov, When all finnes eff be old is anarice


of villages, inferiour Judges.
Pedant: m. 4 Pedant,or erdinarie Schoolemaifier,
Pedanteries: £ Pedanticall bumors, phi afe-affectings,
inkborne-tearmes. ET
Pedantefque : com. Pedanticall,inkbornixing,pedant-


like,

Pedantizer. To pedantize it,or play the Pedant; to do-
mineere ouer lads ; alfo,to inkbornize it. :

Peder. for Petter; To fart: GRab. :

Pederotte : f, Am Opall. fa

culaire :com. Low.

Pedicule :m. The flaulhe of a leafe,or of fruit.

Pedieux.A certaine mufcle wbich iffuing from tbe beele,
and going along on thinflup,ends in fine littlegrifiles,
couched each on the fide of a toe.

Pedion: m. The part of i? influp thats next unto the
toes,and containes fine bones anfwerable unto them,

Pegade:f. A glaffe-full : &Langued.

Pegafe : m, À Pecafus,or flying borfe.

Pege :f. Pitch,

Pegé:mée:f. Pitched,bepitched.

Pegmate : m. A flage; or fiame whereon Pageants be
jet,or carried. :

Pegoufe : f. A kind of Sole-fifh, that bath eye-like hots
on her backe.

Pehoulle: f. Sea-coalé,or flone-coale,

Peignarre: m. 4 Combe-makeri ie

Peigne : m. Acombe ; alfo, as Metacarpe; alfo, as
Parpaigne. i G
Peigne d'Aleman. Foure fingers and a thumb.
Peigne de Venus, Ladies combe,wild Cheruill,Sbep>
beards-needle,mocke-Cheruill.
Faire vn peigne. To flie ,aucid,gine the flip, flinke a.
way. 42,
Faire peigne vüide, The fame.
Tuer yn mercier pour vn peigne: To take a fore re-
nenge of afleight offence; or, 10 mflilt a great penaltie
ona fmall offendor, j ï «
Jamais teigneux n’aima le peigne : Pro. Tho/e that
are tajnted loue no ere


F La


Jeunes à
pecher, Te finne,offend, trefpaffe, tranfgrelfe, commit a
lt, faile in duetie,doe amiffe.
Upeche fagement qui fait folie par confeil: Prov.
“He erres difcreetly that erres by aduife.
Pecherefle : £ 4 female finner.
‘ Pecheur: m. A fianer, tranfgreffor, offendor, trefpaf


for.
‘a grand pecheur efclandre: Prov. Shame is the
lot of finne. à LS

Pecile, Apide,or skude colour of a borfe.

Pecore:f. Afbeepe; and fometimes(mere generally)a-
y fimple or fottifh beaft; whence 5

_ Vavagrofle pecore, Away thou filthie doult ; &;
I luy faudroit fendre les pieds, & Penvoyer paiftre

__ comme ynepecore. He 4 fitter 10 graze among cat-
tell then toconuerfe amongmen.

Pecoul :m, The taile,or arfesand(peculiarly)the flaulke,
feale,or taile of any fruit : ss ;

Pe& :m. (fometimes v{ed) in flead of Pis ; the breaft,or


vader. :

ectoncle: m. A Cockle,or finall Scallop.

etoral: m. A breafiplate; petrell; flomacber, or flo-
 mackecloth.
Pedtoral: m.ale :f. Peélorall; of, o belonging to , the
1 breah alle breafl-curing, breaft-comfurting, breaft-


ing. |
À Peculat:m, 4 robbin the Princes, or publicketrea
D tetes pre to theeucrie,


eculater zm, One that robs the publicke treafure;
= it, by indireël meanes, unto bis primate
Peculativement, By robbing of she Princes, or publick
A i ta | )

Ne Reere pee ee


eigné: m. ce :f. Combed,
Peigner. Tocombe. rs
Peignerre : m. À Combe-maker.
Peigneur :m..A comber ; or as Peignier.
Peignier :m. 4 Combe-maker. bay
Peignoir :m. 4 comb-cafe. od
Peignouoir. The fame. %
Pein :m. te :É Painted,purtrayed,limmed; potted,
ckled ; coloured,er fet out in luelie colours; defiri-
“bed delineated.
Peingtre:m.4 Painter; Pourtrayer,Limmer,Colourer,
‘Peindture :f, 4 pidlure, counter eit, peece of painting,
alfo,painting ; th’ Art,or a of Painting, poli
pen & pure pe . An abfolutefiole,
t xcellent $ on im graine. --
Le ae foy n'a que faire de peinéture: Pro.
Looke Marbre, PAS |
Pein@u.


Peingturer. To pifturetopaint. 1% |

| Peindre. To paint,pidiure,pourtray; c
|. or fet outin colours ; toc

4 write. 19997) , ‘ ; ù à

: Peindre à fraiz. Looke Fraiz, 4 100


: doofé time. i


+ tetb but that to the filing vp of our misfortunes mea-
fine; that being once done we are utterly undone.
Peine :f: 4 paine,penaltie, forfeiture, punifhment sal
2 fo,paines, labour, toyle, foinke, tranell; indeuor; al
. Jo,paine,tronble,relllefncfe;affliétion;angnifh; vexati-
* oascarke,thonght. ) supiriconal
| Peine de faux. Deaths Looke Faux.
Peine dehart, Hanging, »


oe, ; tmatlira

Tay peine ale croire. 1 can hardly beleene it. » >"

] Cestgrand’ peine d'aller a cheval, & vne mort?
+ alleräpied: Prov. 4 toyle it istoride, adeathto goe

4. on foot, ;
|. C’eft grand'peine que d'eftre vieux,mais ilne l'eft
pas qui veut : Prov. Though it be painefill-to be old,

Jet each one is not fo that would,

} Nulsbiens fans eine : Prov. No goods (or good
thing) without erie fe.

Nul pain fans peine: Prov. &, Rien fans peine:

Prov. Nor bread ,nor ought. is gotten without paines.

Qui d'autruy tromper fe met en peine, fouvent

= À ça la peine : Prov. Hee that doth labour

ot =" to beguile , payes oftentimes full decrely for bis

T1 de ts à STE i

| Peiner. LookePener,. [

Pcintre. as Peinâre.

Peinture : f. as Pein@ure.

Pejorer. To impaire; to make,or grow worfe.

Peis. as Poiflon; A ffh: Gaicon; & Provençal ;


|. whence;
| | Peis d'auriou. 4 Mackerell,
| Peis catpa. The fea Carpe; See Carpe. -
| © Peis efcome. The fea Pike, or Spit-fifh.
ï, - Peis efpale. The fea Fox,or fea Dog: fib. :
|" Reis de mefnage, as Belenne.


ie. Sead mular, The buge fifh called awbirlepoole.

oe cis rey. The Kings fifh; or,as Maigre.

| Peis:m. The breafl,@rc sas Pis.

| Pel: m, as Peau ; alfo,lome, dambing,or plaifter for the

walls ofaboufes 5... .

| Pelade :f the falling of the baire, . |

| Pclage: m.Haïrinefeshairesalfo the colour of the baire.

| Pelain: m4 Tanners lime-pit,

Done Fra i

ate :m. Around and pilled,or barked flicke, >

~ | Pelaffe :£ The pilling of the shin ;al/o,the paring of an
_ apple.exc; alfo,the rinde,or barke of a tree.

_ { Pehudé:mée:£f Thwacked, fwindged, canuaffed,

| __ curried vféd roughly,intreated rudely.

Pelauder. Tae


e,belabour,canuaffe,cud=
Gee pst gum
fe. rudelps 2) BV mA
À elauderic :f. A thwacking,a fivindging,a canuaffing,
ME yee rude ban HAE a
intreatic of,al/o, filthie matter beafllie,or ouglie fluffe.
+ Peldure, The name acétiaine hard-skind fig
| Pdc:m.Theboul of alocke & 0
(A Bele: cu hs ia ++ | spite fees
à bar 4 : aie


à TERRA EN LAS


=" : .


, Rirsobur,
incate, or deferibe; alfo,to


Peindre és nuées. To attempt impoffibilities, of
Cela eft pour nous achever de yeindre, There wan-


‘Apeine. Scant, caicely,bardly,not without mnelo’s
d amet ‘a


Pelegrin. as Pclerin,
Pelement : m. 4 pilling ;a pulling off the haire; apa-
P ps ring of. :
10 bauld or pull the haire off; alfo,to pill.
bein nti am Far
en pelera la prune. He will fmart, or be pl
- forits ber like to baue the sk + of it, Pi ane
Aller,& venir font le chemin peler: Prov. Mach
travelling makes bad way. el!
Nul ne pele fon fromage qui n’y ait honte, ou
dommage: Prov. No man pares bis cheese without


a) or loffe.
Pelerin:m. A Pilgrim, Palmer, wanderer, way-faring
mana trauelerin a flrange conntrey ; alfo,a fantaf:
tiedll, giddie ,barebraind , or odde-bumared fellow;
thind of long-winged, fnall-trained, and great-
beaded Faulcon;and(more gencrally)tbe Faulcon tea.
med aPaÿenger.
Diet feait — in :Prov. God knowes
who's 4 good Pilgrim, thebearts of Pilerim
Pies eo ws, of Pilgrims are eft
Le rouge foir; & blanc matin,fontresjouir le pele-
tin: Prov. The euening red and morning gray, are
foefi Jignes by faire day.
clcrin :m,Ine:f, Peregrine, forvaine pay-
faring wandering. en ee
Fencon Pelerin. 4 Pafenger ; or, as beforein Pe.
erin,
Pelerinage: m. 4Peregrination,or Pilgrimage,
Pélerinant: m. ante: f Pe egrinating wandering,or
going on Pilgrimage,
Pelerine:£, 4Pilgrimeffe; a woman that goes on Pil-
grimage.
Pelerine de Venus. Apunke,awbre,
elet:m. A litile baire. hn '
-Ienelen eftime vn pelet moins, 1 thinke notiaiot
the wor{e of bim fir it. |


elican: m. The bird called.a Pelican’; alfo; a }


ie » or Dog; the toole wherewith Barbers pull out
teeth,
Pelication:£ Adepilatorie, or pitchie plai
PRIT Lo serge detre re
Pelice: £.4 skin of fare.
icé : m.ée: fi: Furred.
Pclicieux: m.cufe:f. Pennepelicieufe. A difolute,
wanton,or lafcisious penne.
Pelis : m.The fhort wooll, or growth of wooll, ep
which baue beene fhorne fème little time beforepulled
from their fells bythe Tamyer,ére, à ire


Ske Pelice. ni -

iflon: m. 4 tticoat, or 54 ind of .
ncryegulrodasare mi PA PT Sven F
Pellage. Looke Pelage, were, |
Pelle :m. The bouit of a locke. +:


+. fe as Paelle; “af Some parts of France) as
Peleboties f. Loofé-firifé, Willow bearbe, or bearbe |


Pellerelle: f. The fhooting,or falling of the baire (by dif:
cafe or infirmitie.) ns :
er : oe part of a Prime; (an exceeding final


rime, PEN aS |
Pelleterie:f The trade, or {hop of a Skinner, Fagiier,


or Peltmonger. Tit ey,
Pelletier:m, 4 Skinner, Fellmonger; Furrier; whence ;
En fin lesregnardsfe trouvent chez le pelletier :


“9 Prov: Atdength doe\ fubtiltiesana villanie meet with


their meed.


sayeth
ore


‘Ooo


Pellican : m, as Pelican; alfo,a vefell of cixculation,or
extraction ; a fafhion of Lymbeck,
Pellicule :£. A little skinne, a {mall or thinne rinde.


rindes, 5
Pellucide : com. Bright, fhiming.
Pelon : m. Tb'outmoft rugged buske of a greene Chefi-


Rut.

Pelorde : f A certain little,and thick-(held Cockle,that
lines,and lyes,altogetherbid in the mud.

Pelloffes: & Bullace ; orlittle wild plummes.

Pelote :f. A(band)ball,or tennis ball ; any little ball to
play with ; See Pelotte.’

Peloter. To play at ball ; alfo,to toffe like a ball.

Peloton: m. A clue, or (round)bottome of thread,érc.

Pelotte: £. 4s Pelote; alfa,a fmall casket to keepe rings


monty found among moffe which the working of the fea
bath caft afhore.
Iliouë de moy à la pelotte, Hee toffes me vp and
downe at bis pleafüre,be handles measbe lifts bimfelfe,

Pelourde. as Pelorde. |

Peloufe: £ A Bullace,or Sloe; alf,alittlehill; alfo, the
lower baxard. ina Tenass-comrt; allo, a womans pri-
“wiles.

Pelouze. as Peloufe, sia

Pelu: m.ué: £. Haïrie, fill of,rough with,baire.
Pate peluë, See Patepeluë,

Peluche : f. Shag,plafh. .

Peluette : € Tre bearbe Moufè-eare,

Pelure : f. The pill, skin,rinde,or paring of fruit ; alfo,the
pilling,ov white and inner vinde,of trees.

Pelufle : £ as Peluresefpecially in the laft fence.

Penade:£, 4 bounding, prauncing; bragging, vaun-
ting brauing it,

Penader. To bound, praunce; brag, vaunt, brane it;
Laoke se Pennader.

Penaillons: m. Rags,tatters; patches,old clowts,

Penal : m.ale: £. Pemall infliéling penalties,

pente as Pere 5 F

Penard : m. A melancholie old man; a felfe-afflictin
pot ; or a poore abafhed fellow, whofe bead
bangs continually downewards, either for fhame, or as
a true figne of bis miferie; alfo, a feather, or plume of
feathers; (and fometimés) alfo, ax the Latine Penis ;a
mans yard. k

Penates. &Rab, Houfhold Gods, |

Penault:m. A Boyrgonian meafare containing twelue


Quarts. iy ih
Penault : m.aude?f Abafhed,afhamed, ont of counte-
nance. AT) RER NES

Pencer. Laoke Pancher. bar

i tara Lt combed

Penchon: m.4 declining or weightie inclining; wei

4 Fo RTE wi lets etes trongh Doane

“Pend: de gueta pend. wittingly,willingl, q
: aa néable;that deferues banging thats

ed. esi aot 7


:
£.
|


2 ; A banging matter a |
Abangine, 30! #4 i F
ant : m. A pendant;a any thing that bang.
Er amer Fin ange eh

Les pendans d’une bourfe. The fn
toesciefs A key-clogs ot the firing » t


Fr
Fr


PE L ce


Pelliculeux: m.cufe: £ Full of little skinnes,or thinne |


In,
Pelotte marine. A ball, or little bundle of baire,com-


ee lth


2 Bos
Pendant d'oreille de giber. One that excellently bee
comes,or would, become,a gibbet. Lits")
Elle s’en va par le pendant. So fay they of a purfè
whofe firings are almoft worne in peeces ; alluding
wbereto they fay likewife of one-shats going , or like,
~ to be banged, lis’en va par le pendant.

Pendant: m, ante: f Hanging ; depending , fufpen-
ded; flooping,declining dangling or falling downwards,
Seau pendant à double queuë. A Seale banging by
a double labell ; and metapborically, one that bangs on
4 paire of gallowes, ; q

Pendant cela, (Aduerbially;) inthe meane while,in.the |
meane time,in the meane feafon. à \
Pendant que, wbiles,er,1be whilefl,that. .
Ce pendant. Looke Cependant.

Pendante : f. A labell pendant.

Pendard:m, Arakehell crackrope,gaowclapper; one
for whom the gallowes longeth,

Pendardeau : m. A little crackrope, young fiphring.

Pendement : m. 4 banging. |

Pendentif: m. The key or feutchion of a vault; that :
which hangs direétly downe in the middle thereof.

En pendentif Steepe-banging, leepe-downe ; or as,
A dos d'Afne,vnder Dos,
Pendereau. as Pendardeau.
Penderie :f. Abanging. ;
yllable : com. Of fiue fillables.

Pendiculation :'f. 4 peadiculation ; ora firetching in

ok es ofan Ague,

Pendillant: m.ante : f. Dangling, hanging looffely, or
hanging but balfe. ‘

Pendille. 4 thing that hangs danglingly.

Pendiller. To hang danglingly,looffely, or but by balues,

Pendiloches:f. Jags, danglings, or things that bang
danglingly,

Pend-oreille. À Pendant.

Pendre. To bang floope incline or bow,downewards;to
bang,dangle, fall,or lye downe upon; to bang depend,
refl,or fiay,on,to bang oner about or unto;al/o,to bang,
twitch up,or flrangle,on a paire of gakowes,erc.
Pendre à l'oreille. Seeke Oreille.

Dire pis que pendre. To reuile,or extreamly raile on.
I eur en pend autant à Poel. They are as much fub-
iect unto thu miftbiefsthey ave in as great danger eue-
rie way;they muft one day drink of the fame cup,taft of
the fame faucerun the fame courfe,
Argent fait pendre les gens: Pro.doney brings ma:
ny aman to the gallowes.
Les gros larrons menent pendre les petits: Prov. |
asunder Larron, |
Nul ne fçait ce qu'à l'oeil luy pend : Prov. No man
knowes bow neere he is toa mischic fe,or, what miferie
may befall bim, M mat
Ou rendre,ou pendre, ou mort d'enfer attendre :
Joss Atbiefe muft reflore,or be bangd, or looke to be
ama, ote -


Quia à pendren’a pasa noyer: Prov. He thats ore.
daind to be bangd will neuer be drownd ( [ay we.)
~» Qui plus quiln’a vaillant defpend, il fair la corde
-« à quoy fe :Prov. He that difpends more then
he bathmakes up a rope bis necke to fwath,
Pendu:mué:f. Hanged; banging.
Langue bien pendué. 4 fmeaib;glib ; eloquent, or
ing ton


aa


well. gues oie
Procez pendu au croc, See Croc. yu
Relafche de pendu. A gracelefie crackrope,or,one for
7 Des CYOMES. 1. | TAlEEE .
Pene : m, The boult of a lacke, are ;


Original from
ORIOSTATE UNIVERSITY


’? Fr


‘PP E-N


PEN


Peneau:m. À Flag,or Streamer; alfo,arag, or tater ;
(and in (ome parts of France) alfo,a [lutor flatterne.

Peneliere: # Penil.

Penencier :m. He that after confeffion made,or a nolo-
rious offence committed,cnioyneth the confeffantor of
fendor bis penance,

Pener. To trauell,toyle, fvinke, labour extreamely, doe
bis utmoft mdeuor take great paines ; alfo,to vex,trou-
ble,molef?, put unto paine.

Penetratif: m. iue: f Penetratine,piercing,or entring
into, fearching,or pajfing through.

Penctrer. To penetrate; pierce, enter, fearch , or finke
into; alfo,to paffe through,

Pencuferent. Deieétly,beartlefly; demiffely,lowlily; in
a dumpe,at aplunge or anonplus.

Peneux : meufe : f. Deicéled, beartle[fe,difcouraged,
difinayed, out of countenance with himfelfe , in a piti-


full or miferable taking ; pitifully complayning bumble, :


abieël,lowlic,demiffe.
La femaine pencufe. The Pafion wecke.
| Penible: com. Painfüll,toilefôme laborious.
D, Penide:f 4 Pennet ; the little wreath of fugar taken
in a cold,
| Penidial. fuccrepen, Fine white fugar whereof Pen
| nets be made ; alfo,the Pennets themfèlues. 1
. | Penil :m. 4 mans ,or(moft properly)a womans groine,
‘ Os du penil. The fharve-bone ; or as Os barré; in Os.
. Penillier: m.ere:£ Belonging to the groine; whence ;
OL: Osfeuillier. as Os du Penil.
À Penillons. Looke Penaillons.
> Peninfule : £..4 Peninfula,or half Iftand.
i. Penit :m. French-wheat, Black-wheat, Bolymong ; (a
Bat courfe graine :) Pic. R
Penitence : f. Penitence,penance,repentance,


13 Rouge vifage,& grofle pance ne font fignes de pe- |


à ; nitence : Prov. Looke Pance.
Penitencier. 4s Penencier ; or,the Priefi, &rc, that in-
ioyneth penances,
On te doit envoyer au penitencier. Thou hafinced
10 be fhriudW; or thou mujt be quickly looked to, or elfe
thou wilt be worfe then naught,
| Penitencicux: m.cufe: £Penitentious,verie penitent,
mo(t repentant. :
| Penitent. Penirent,repentant, aggrieued at, forrowing
a À - for, troubled in mind with what be bath done.
- Fillespenitentes. as Filles repentics, under Fille.
Pennache : m, Adbunch, or plume, of feathers; alfo,
| - one great feather bent backe upon, or couched flat-
\ ling about,a bat,or cap after th'old French fafhion.
+. Pennache de boeuf, À faire paire of bornes.
Pennache de mer. 1s neither fifh, nor plant, but a
. certaine creature or excrefcence of the fea; which
© atone end refembles a feather,and th’uncouered nut of
, | @ mans yard at th’other ; and by night fhines like a
Î “ 7


fiarre,
Pennade, as Penade. 13
se Pennader, To brag;boafl, or braue it; to make a


- alfoxto bound or praunce like a proud borfe.


mages | re tea
, ‘Pennarol de Chirurgien.4 Chirurgians (afe or Ettuy;
= ‘the box wherein he carries bis Inflruments.

Penne: f. A quill,or hard feather ; a pen- feather; alfo,

1 =" the feather Bar roo < 033$ ing.
‘y _ Pennes. The rafiers por houfe; called fo,
: ty Eee they fomewbat the fpread wings ofa

ird, wed À


Digitize Go. gle


proud flourifh,or vaine mufter of bimfelfe in publicke 5.
Pennage :m. 4 birds coat, or feathers; alfo, as Paf-:


:Penfil: mile: f (


: Penne de foye. 2s Lobe, :
Penne d'un voile : c’eft Paile de la voile enfilée eh
bouline, We callit,the Leech of a fayle. À
De vent en penne, To bring a fhip vpon the

e, bs
Mettre en penne. The wind to take a fhip vpon
the flayes,

Penneton d'un clef. The bit,or neb of a key.

Pennon: m, A Pennon; Flag,or Streamer,

Les pennons d'une flciche, The feathers of an ar-
rom, | WE

Pennonceau; ou Pennoncel:m. 4 Pennon on the
top of a Launce ; a little Flag,or Streamer,

Pennule. (‘The diminutive of Penon.) A finall peece,
part of a thing (efpecially of flejn, or of our bodie) not
altogether feparated from the whole.

Penon :m. A peecesor part of a thing not altogether fe-
paratcd from it; fuch as be the laps, ov napes of the li
uer; called Penons by the vulgar of Languedoc.

Pens. as Penfce ; or Penfement ; whence:

De guetd pens.Wittingly willingly with premedita-
tion,of fet purpofe.

enfé: m. ée: f Thought, weencd, deemed, imagi-
ned, fuppofed, conieélured ; weighed in mind, perpen-
ded examined ,confidered of:

De fai& à penfé. as De guet à pens.

Penice: f. Aibougbt, fuppofallconictiure, furmife, cogi-
tation,imagimalion ; oncs beart,mind, inward conceit,
opinion, fancie,or iudgement alfo,tbe flower Paunfie,
De guer à penfée: 4s De guet à pens,

Ime vienten penfe que. My mind gines me, my
beart tells mesit comes into my bead,that.,

Penfement :m. as Penfée; or, a thinking, weening,
imagining, alfv,a tending,dieffing,or looking to ; à cua
ving or Phyficking of.

Penser. To thinke, weene, deme, indge, imagine, fp-
pofesconietiure, (urmife; bane an opinion,or be of opi~
nion,that ; alfa, to fiudie, mule, meditate, confider of;
panfe,or deliberate upon; examine, weigh,ponder,per~
pend;reuolue,or ca/t,in mind ; alfo,to dreffestend, looke
vato,baue acareof, prouide for, furnifh with al ne-
ceffaries; alfo,to dreffe, Phyficke;applie medecines vn-
LL PER


Penfer à foys. To bethinke himfelfe, to call vato


mina. 3

Penfer ailleurs, The mind to be vpon fsmewhat elfe,

the wits to ran a wooll-gathering ; no way to mind
', whats gone about. À g

Mal penfe qui ne repenfe : Prov, He thinks not well

that ibinks of all.atonce; or thinks not morethen nce,


barmelefe minded man is foone deceiued. +
Le loup fgait bien que male befte penfe : Pro. One
hnauc M Le gbefle at the drift of another,
Mettez fol à par foy il penfera: Pro. Looke Fol.

: Quand les yeux voyent ce que ne veirent onequés
le coeur penfe cequ'sl ne penfaoncques: Prov.


Heft bien toft deceu qui mal ne penfe: Prov. The
€ !


when ‘théyes bebold vunwoonted things vawoonted


thoughts poffeffe the heart":


Penfereffe i: 4 weman that thinketh, imaginetb mu-


fèth,or careth much. ME!
Penfeur:m, 4 thinker, np A TE Suppofers alfo; one
that vfes-to fladie,mufe 30’ deliberaie;om matters.
PenfeufesfiasPenferefle. RON
Penfif: mue: f. Penfiue,beauie thoughifull; carefall;
‘ alfo, thinking of; and hence; co pirie!
Fille oïfive à mal dite : Prov. Nahe
lei


- Ooo y


ightly banging. ' Te A


à: de #
Tea. PNR


a ae ES er PONT


P E N PER
game at Cards wherein fèure rewes be laid; one fir a
\ paire ; the Second for moft of a fuit ; the third for fiufh;
and the fourth for afequence.
Per à compaignon. 4 Peere match, mate, equal fel-
low comer ade.
Per ou non per. The game called Euen and odde.
Il entendbien fon per, He vnderfiands well ynough
wbat be goes about, uth
Pris à per et à la couche, as in Pris, ;
Peragration:f. 4 peragration,going about, wandering
through, trauelling ouer.
Peramefe : f. 4 Ninth, or a proportion of nine, in Mu-


Verruepenfile. A great wart that bangs but by 4

finall tbread,or root. ;
Penfion: £. A penfion, fipend, fee; anyerelie payment;

alfo,money payed for the tabling, or boording of cbil-


ec ren,érc.

a Penfionifte : m. 4 Penfioner.
Penfionnaire: com. A Penfioner; one that hath, or
payeth,an yearelie penfion; alfo, a tabler, or boorder;
- alfo, a Scholler who lyes witbin a Colledge,and is tied,
= and {ubieét,onely unto it; therein differmg from Gal-

, loche,who lying abroad,is at more libertie.

er Penfionné: m. ée :f. Penfioned, flipended, bired by


; penfion,that takes an yearelie flipend. : ’ ficke.
Pensiveté : f. Penfineneffe,carke, forrow,beauine[fe. Peratre. as Paraftre.


Perattendre. To attend throughly, or feafonably; to at-
tend untill be baue a fit opportunitie; whence;
Mal attend que ne perattend: Prov. ~

Perce: f.as Percement ; alfo,that kind of Loach which
bath a prickle neere unto either of ber gills, :
Mettre le vinen perce. To pierce,or broach wine.

Percé:m.ée:f, Pierced,bored, gored, thruft into, ‘er


Pent d'un rets, 4 whole pane, peece, or fould of a
Net. à
La figure hexagone à fix pents. Hawing (ix Cants.
È Pentagone: com. Fiue-cornered.
Pentaïnetre :m,. 4 Pentameter, or verfe confifling of


fine feet.

Pentaphylle. cingefoyle,Cinkefield, Fine-finger eraffe,
Fiue-leaued graffe.

Pente:£ The declining, downeward bent, flopeneffe, or
flope-banging of a bill, ditch, roofè,é*c ; alfo,a peece of
banging ; alfo,an inclining towards a fall,


Chaire percée. A clofe fioole,
Perce-fueille: f. Through-wax , through-leafe ; (an
hearbe.)


4 4 Lespentes d'yn iG, The Valance. Percele. Blew-bottle,Blew-blaw,Corne-flower. l

‘+ Donner de pente à, (Inwrafiling) to give anaduan- | Perce-lettre: £ The little infirument wherewith Secre.
4 > tage vato. taries make ouertures for the labells with which they
: Penteur :m. 4 Penant; the name of one of the ropes clofe their letters.

3 which paffe ouer the tap,or upper partof a Maft, Percellé : m.ée:£. Pierced, flrucken; ouerthrowne,bea-
: Penthiere. # Panthiere. ten downe ; abated, abafhed, appalled ; vexed, trou


bled,
Percement : m. A piercing, boring,or goring; a thruf-
ting into,or through, rt
Perc’-oreille.(The worme,or Infeét called)an Eartwig.
Perce-pain. as Perce-orcille.
Percepceux : meuf: f.(fruids percepceus. Taken,
gathered,receined.
Percepierre :f. (4 general name for moft flone-brea.
king hear bes ; but chiefly for thofe wiht we call)Saxi-
frage,and Sampbire. |
Percepierre rouge. Red Saxifrage, Filipendula,
‘Dropwort,
Perceptible : com. Perceptible; perceiuable , ap-
gion fenfible; alfo, takeable, gatherable,recei-
. sable,
Perception:f. 4 perception; aperceiuing, apprehén-
is ne Sa a , a gathering, taking, recei-


Penture :f. The bindge of a doore.

Penule:f. Along cloake fit to be worne in rainie wea-
ther.

Penurie : f. Penurie, fcarcitie, need, neceffitie, dearth,
lacke,want.

Peone: £ Peonie,Kings-bloome,Rofe of the Mount.

Pepelon :m. The nipple of a dug,

Pepetiller. Tocrackle,or fparkle often.

Pephage. Looke Pamphage.

Pepiant : m.ante:; f. Cheeping,peeping,paling,or crying
like ayonng bird ; alfo, lifping.

Pepie : £ The Pip. : ae

Pepiement: m. The cheeping,or peeping of yong birds;
any re puling noife; alfo, a lifbing, or faultering in


À Pepier : m. as Pepiement. cs
À Pepier. To peepe, cheepe,or pule,as ayoung bird in the
ne ; alfo,to lifpe. 77 ; : | |
Pepier de foif. Thetongue to pele by reafon of an cx.
À treame thirfl, ‘ ae Ro |
1} Pepicur :m. 4 peeper,cheeper ; puler.
Pepitn: m. À Pippinor kernells the fed of fruit.
= Lespepins des raifins. The flomes of grapes,
Or depepin. Looke Or, * sei
erie : £4 Seed-plot,Nurferie Nur fing Orchardor


uing of, <
Percer. To pierce, gore, transfix; thrafi into, bore |
») through, q
! Percer vne maifon, To breake open,or into,a boufe. |

Percer le mors. A horfe to thrufi bis tongue with eafe, |

and at libertie,under the Port of bis Bite: + + Î
Percet :m. 4 Peach. ‘
Perceu: m.cué :f Taken,gatbetedireceined. : 2°.
Perche : £ Apearchto bang things, or fet Hawkés,on;


| > part of an Orchard, wherein the pippins, kernells, or
} Dane of fit b fowen. i So aa alfo,the Pei ; alfo,the Beame of a Bucksbead,
iere: f. 4 Pepinerie, and the broach of a Stags ; alfo, the pearch, polesor big :
vod wherwith land is meafured; and which thoughit |


# 3
3


contain not,all France ouer, one and the fame number |
of feet(for im fome places it is 20,in others 22, in otbers

25,0nd in others but 18(the mofl generall,, and mofi v-

fuall one)yet is it euerie where fix faddomesor Toiles,
the different feantling wherof, caufes fo great adiffe-

--vence of Perches,in fexerall plates, ny)

»  Lesperches d'un bouc fauvage: The bead;or bornes

ofa wild Goat. - Mr


Per-


= £ LE ~ tary ft Türe : :
Sp ei Pappern fated it Peer.
$ f. ed; AT
ep ts Peppered oe Peppe
Peque:f. A mare,


| as Pair ; A Pe ago; si
Pate gaan pre rimes


» | , (The name of) a certaine dre fees 2


at :


f 2e Le . yFiGinal fron
igiized ty (SOK gle THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


through; transfixed open, fill of holes, or windowes. |.


add TR oe tee


thi


PE R

Perche de mer, The fea Pearch; awholefeme,yough-
find and tongueleffe, rocke-fifb. 9° LE

Perché : m.ée:f, Pearched,placed, or fet (as'a bird) on
a pearch, or on the bough of a tree; alfo, propped, fup-

© ported,or vnderfèt with pearches,or poles,

_ Ila perché à vn arbre. He bath banged bim on a
tree,

Percher. To fèt,or put ona pearch; alfo,to alight sat/o,to

fit,or pearch (as a bird) ona tree; alfo, to bang, or
| > twitch vp,at a bow; alfo,as Percer.
Percheux: m. eufe: f. Belonging to,or ft of pearches,
Perclorre. To benumme, firike or make lame,take away
the ufe of the limmes.

Perclus de fes membres. Taken,blafled, fiviken,benum-
med, faddenly growne lame, or deprined of the vfe, of
bis immes. vi
Oeil perclus. Ax eye that cannot moue becanfé the
muskles belonging to it are benummed,

Perclufion :f. A blafting,lameneffe, or numnelfe in the
members, 4

Perdable : com. Loofable; fit,or likelie;to be loft,

Pcrdement :m. 4 loofing ,a forgoing.

Perdeur : m. A loofer, :
Efchar plaidoyeur eft hardi perdeur : Prov. The mi-

férable pleader is a miferable jpeeder ; the fparing of a.
fee is ofien the fpoyle of a canfe.

} Perdigonne : f. The name ofanexcellent plumme.

Perdition : f, Perdition,deftruétion, extreame loffe, un-

___ doing,ruine,

Perdre. To loot 310 caft away ; to ouerflipomit,let goes

\ alfé,to marre, fpayle,or fpend idly,

se Perdre. To perifh,to decay; to flip,runne, fall,or goe


away. - .

Perdre les ambles. il y perdit les ambles. There.

va he put beyond bis bias , or out of all patience; be

knew not bow to carrie, or bow 10 containe , bimfelfe!

when be came thither.

Perdrel'inftance; & perdre le procez, To be ouer-

throvwne, or haue the worfe in a, fuit; to be cafl,or bis

canfe to ee a bim.

Perdre piedT}y perdoit pied. There be loft ground,

he voas put to bis {hifis,or to bis plunges,there.

Je n’en perds que l'attente. Tis but a little tarrying
it.


“Agens de bien on ne perd rien: Prov. He that
deales with boneflmen is feldome, or neuer a loofer;
one loofes nought by good men,
Apres perdre perd on bien:Prov. One il lucke
Succeeds in the necke of another; or, when one begins
to loofé he leanes not vntill all be gone. het
“A tour reiln’y a qu'un coup perilleux: Pro.
| One right-fet blow would ferne to finke vs all.
“Argent fait perdre gent: Prov, Looke Argent. “|
x Affenrement chante qui n'a que perdre: Pro. And
whadoth fing fo merrie a note ashe that cannot change
.. @ grote? east
+ Aflez gaïgnequi malheur perd: Prov. He gaines
: ynough that mifses a misfortune. | \
En feureté ¢ inaqueperdre: Prov, He that
_ canloofe nought fleepes with great fecuritie,
~ I faut perdre vn-veron pour pefcher vn faulmon‘
Prov. One muft bend a little to gaine much,
Ine perd rien quine perd Dieu: Prov, Hee that
heepes God to friend can nothing loofe. €
Marchand qui perd ne peutrire: Prov. We fay,they
laugh ge ba 3 beebie É a
: + On ne doit point querir brebis qui fe veut pi :
| Prov. A wifi finner afi necbe rer À te je


PER


Par trop prefler l'anguille on la perd : Prov. Seeke
| rived! d À
ui perd le fien perd Icfens; Prov. He that loofes
“his eet loves ps wit, ‘ "
« Qui ad perdre perdtoufours: Prov. The rich man
loofes fomewhat euerie day; or, be thats ordaind to
. loofe is ener loofing.
Qui ne retire de fa vache que la queué ne perd pas
tout: Prov, He that recouers but the tayle of bis
u a loofes not all bis cow; better faue a little then loofe


au,
Qui prefteà Pamy perd au double: Prov. viz.Both
money, and friend,
Qui tout convoite tout perd : Prov, He that couets
all keepes,or comes by, notbing.

Perdreau: m. A young Partridge.

Perdriau. as Perdreau,

Perdris, as Perdrix,

Perdrifeur: m. A Pavtridgerjor Partridge-taker : alfo,
an Officer that bath thecommaund of that Game, in
France, 3

Perdrix : f 4 Partridge.
LaPerdrixdes Archers de la garde du Roy, 4
Sheepes bead (wherewith commonly they breake their |


falls.)

Perdrix blanche de Savoye. as Arbenne.

Perdrix des champs. Tb’ ordinarie Partridge.
Perdrix gaille, gauleor gaye. Tbe great b/owne-bo-
died,and red-legd Partridge, the French Partridge.
Perdrix goache. as Perdrix griefche.

Perdrix griefche. Th'ordinarie, or little, Partridge,
Perdrix grignette, gringette, & grife. as Perdrix
gricfche. :

Perdrix maillée. 4 Menild,or potted Partridge.
Perdrix demer. The Sole-ffb.

— de montaigne, as Francolin, im the taft
fence.
Perdrix rouge,ou aux pieds rouges. The great red-
legd Partridge, *
Perdrix des terres neuves, The Guinnie Henne,
Ocil de Pérdrix. Looke Oeil,

Perdu: m.uë : f Loft, perifhed; forlorne,paft hope efre-
couerie,caflaway; forgone;omitted, over flipped, run,
or fallen aways alfo,lewd,nauchtie, wicked, vngraci-
eus,or pafl grace,

Coup perdu: See Coup.) >

Enfans perdus, Perdus; or the forlorne hope; of a
campe (are commonly Gentlemen of Companies.)
Fille perdué.4 punke,whore,barlet,commonbackney.
Gens perdus. as Enfans perdus ; alfo, retcblef[eyor
defperate people.


“A corpsperd
care ys all of his skinne.» :
‘A pps nab;enen as they fall,one with
another, » SS: |
Ila perdu fncein@ure. Hebathneither money, nef
meanes, left him; all is confumed, all wafled, all

one.
Bien faiétn’eft iamais perdu: Prov, Newer came
loffe by dotag a good deed. +‘:
Chofe perdué eft lors cogneué: Prov we kaw thé
worth of things whenwe baue lofi them. ;
De chofe-perduë le confeil ne fe remuë: Prov,
In vaine we goe to law wben things be loft. à
Toureftpérdu ce qu'on donne à fol: Prov. AU
thats befluved on fooles is cafl away.” 1x
Tout ce que gift en peril n’eft pas perdü: Prov,
Al is not toff tbatin fome dangers. 10000
Ooo i¥


Original fron


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSER


u. Defperately, beadleng, without any


Per |


FOR PORTES


RCE 2


a
:
:


ak) |e ami


PER


Perducllifine : m.Treafon again{t Prince, or Countrey.
Perdurable: com. Perdurable, perpetuall,euerlafiing,
aye-duriag, :
Perdurablement. Perpetualy, euerlaftingly,for ener.
Pere: m. A father; alo, an auncient Monke, or Frier,
e(pecially if be be a Confelfor; alfo,a lefuite,or the Ti-
tle of a lefuite. '
Beau pete. Looke Beaupere.
Hommes,& peres de la Cour, as Pairs.
Ils font à table aifes comme peres. (Whoft bellies
being filled their greateft care is taken.)
‘A pere,d maiftre,à Dieu tout puiflant,nul ne peut
rendre l’equivalent : Prov. No man can doe ynough
for bis father mailler,and Maker,
‘A pere amafleur fils gafpilleur: Pro. A warie father
bath a wafifull fonne; The like is;
De pere gardien fils garde-rien: Pro.
Celuy là eft bien pere qui nourrit : Prov, He that
doth feed ,or fofter me,may well be called my father,
Peré: m. Perrie; drinke made of Peares.
Peregrin: m. 4 firanger, forrainer, alien, outlander, or
outlandifh man.
Peregrin: m. ine: £ Peregrine, forraine, alien, firan-
ger outlandifb.
Faulcon peregrin. À pafenger.
Peregrination: £ A peregrination, farre iourney, long
trauell, pilerimage. 4
Peregriner. To tranell, take long iourneyes, wander in
frange countries,goe on pilgrimage.
Peregrineux: m.eufe : f as Peregrin.
Peregrinité: f. Strangene[fe,outlandifhneffe, forraine-
nefeforraine fpeech,habit,culiome,bebauier,@rc.
Peremption d'inftance. A Nonfuite, or letting a fuit
fall; a quitting,or forlaking of a caufe.
Peremptoire,& decififdu procez, Aperemptorie rule
which determines a caufe, |
Pereinptoire : com. Peremptorie,infulting, imperious ;
abfalute; forcible ; earnelt,that will bauenonay; alfo,
prefent, fudden. ;
Adjournement mptoire. À peremptorie fum-
mons, after which no day will be gimen, but the caufe
forthwith proceeded in.
Peremptoirement.Peremptorily imperioufly; earnef-


_ ty; abfolutely; prefently, fuddenly, without further de-


CS

Peremptorifé. Heritage peremptorifé. whofé chal-
lengers, bauing after fummons made default, are no
more admitted to profecute,or continue their claime.

Peremptorifer. Toperemptorife; ta grant, or palfé a-
way peremptorily ; or(as in Peremptorife) to exclude a
challenger after a default made by bim.

Perenne : com, Perpetuall,continuall, endleffe, ay-du-
ring without ceafing euerlafting. 5
Eau perenne. Continually running nener drie.

Perennel: melle :f. as Perenne,

Perennifer. To perpetuate, eternixe, make euerlafiing.

Perennité: £ Perenaitieeternitie perpetuitic, euerlaf-

one,


tin i f
erequant:m. uallrater,taxer ale others;

fe ere ere Apps #4
= :


10
Paruaon E2/ £Equalling; alfo;rating equally,


PER


__ complifh,end wbolly, finifh abfolutely.
Perfigue : f. 4 Peare-plumme.

uier :m, 4 Peare-plumme tree,
Perflable : com, which may be blowne through.


: Perfoliate : € Througb-wax, through-leafe; (an bearb.)


Perforatif: mue: f Boring, piercing, or thrufting
through,

Perfumé : m.ée:f. Perfimed,fweetened throughly. |

Perfumement : m. 4 perfiming.

Perfumer. To perfime, fweeten throughly, or gine a
fweet fent vnto, ‘


meur: m, A Per, i


Perfums: m, Perfimes, pleasant fimes, delicate finels,


gracious odors.
Perger. To proceed,or goe on.
Pergude. Perifhed,lofi: qGafc.
Peti ey :f Perifbed,lofi,gone; abolifhed, annulled,
oyled.
eris en croix, enface, ouen pal, &c. In(rofft,
in effe,im Pale exc ; a tearme of Blazon.
Perle. A medecine banged about any part of the bo-
1€. 1
Pericarde:m, The membrane, filme, or flender skinne
wherein the beart is wrapped.
Pericardique : com. Of, or belonging to, the Pericar-
dium ; whence,Veine becicardique : Looke Veine.
Pcricharié : f. Exceffine ioy.
— ee Woodbind,or Ho-
ne €. +
ericliter. To ieopard,baxar d,endanger,
ericraine: m. The Pericranion, hasie fcaulpe, whole
skinne of the (cull,
Perier: m, The giferne of a Henne,erc.
Perigée : m. The point of heauen wherein any Planet is
neereft unto the center of the earth.
Peril: m. Perill,danger ieopard,baxard.
Tout ce que gift en peril n’eft pas perdu:Pro. AU is
not loft thats in fome hazard.
Periller, To perifh ; al/o,to be in fome perill,or baxard.
, dangerous,


Perilleufement. Periloufly, danger

Perilleux : meufe : £ Perillous, or p
ieopardous,bazardous.

Perimer. To fpoyle,abolifhouerthrow ,difappoint vtter-
ly, take away wholly, ;

Perinée : m.The fèame,or line thatrunnes betweene the
fündament i

Periode:f. 4 period, perfeét sentence, fill fence, con-
clafion,or endsalfo,a courfeto a finifhing, or the terme
wherein a thing is finifhed.


Periodic: m.ique :£ Periodicall ; ended, finifhed,con-
_ cluded ; alfo,reuolutine,comming or going by courfe,or |.


fits.
Periodiquement. By periods ; endingly, concludingly,


or towards a conclufion; alfo,renaluingly, by courfe.or
fitsyor with acontinuall,and interchanged courfe.
Periofte : m. The skinne wherewith the ribs be cone-
ved ; or (more generally) the thinne skinne wher cin any
bone is couered, l
Petipherée:f. The circumference, edge, or borderof a
circle, rc.


 Periphrafer. To parapbrafe, vfe circumlocutions , ex-
- | preffe one word by


Eh Er M :
pneumonie. £ Th tion of the Lungs.


i.
À Perit. Te perifhmiféarrie,die; decay,confume,wither3to


come to ruine,or te naught; to be lofl,mard , fpoildyeaft


Sea-mian comes at length fhort bome,
e-


away. <<
| proc omar ares ifle: Prov. The |
i Pele


Original trom
LRAEOFIO STATE WNIVERSITY


PE R:


Periffable: com, Perifhable, momentarie, loofeable, or
Jubieët unto lope; which by ouer-long keeping will be


Spoyled,and lof: ; ?
Periftile: m. A cloifier walking place, or long entrie fet
: about with pillars. :


eritoine: m, The inner thinne rind,kell or skis where-
with the intralls be couered.
Perjure: com, Periured, forfworne,
Perle: f. A Pearle ; an Vion ; alfo,a Berrie,
Perle de compte. A Paragon; an orientall, or faire
eat Pearle, ;
| Herbe aux perles. Pearle-plant Lichwall Gromell.
 Perlé: m.ée: f. Rough, rugged, or notfinooth; whence,
Dragée perlée is oppofed unto Dragée vnie.
Fil pee Hard-twifted thread,
Tefte bien perlée. whofe Burre is well (potted, and
: curled.
| Perles : £ The little potted Curlings wherewith the
Burre of a Decres head is powdered,

Perlette: f, 4 fimall Pearle, re
Perlon: m,4 Rochet,Redfifh,Gurnard ,erc,(tearmed fo
in Xaintonge.) à

Perlure: £ as Perles; or the Burre it [elfe
Permanable: com, Permanent, conflant, remaining,
durable, abiding.
Permanent. as Permanable.
Permeable: com. Quickly running,or paffing through,
Perinettre. To permit, fuffer,tollerate beare with,wink
at, giuc libertie or way, graunt authoritie or power,
unto,
Perinis: m. ife : £. Permitted ,tollerated, fuffered,borne
with winked at; alfo.licenced,or Lavofull,
Permiffion: £, A permiffion, toleration, fufferance ;
leaue,licence allowance, (Permiflion s'oétroye par
le Roy pour vn temps, & rantque bon luy femble-
ra, par lettres patentes addreflées aux Maiftres des
Forrefts.) 1e NI
ther.
-Permutateur: m. A barterer,excbanters alterer,
Permutation £ Permutation,bartéring, trucking, ex-
changing. ANS) |
Permuter. To barter,trucke,exchange, q
| Pernicieufeent.Perniciou[ly,peftilentl,mifchienoufly,
noifomely,moft burtfülly.
Pernicieux: m. eufe: f. Pernicious, deadlie, mortall,
+ drain ; molt dangerous, mifcbienous , noifome,
fill, |


povwtches,or fatchels.of leather. j
Peroration: f 4 pevoration; ee of an Ora~!
_ tion, applyed to the bumors, or praying fauors,of the


n A. storie,

Perot. Looke Perrot. A
L mes. Fits of amagues +1 > eh
Perpeigne. as Parpaigne ; or Perpin. SR.
Perperidiculaire: com: Perpendicular, downe-vight,


e downe,direëtly :
Perpendiculairement. Perpendicularly.


Perpetrer. To perpetrate,ae?,commit. ee
Perpetuation: f, 4 per ion, or perpetuating.
Perpetuel: m. elle: f eternal, continual,
euerlafling, ay-during. : 1 vi) OTR
Perpetuellement. Perpetually, eternally enerlaptingly,
co À CALE RALG 1° os + B93
P 1. To perpetuate, eternixe, immortalixe, make
-enerlafting. ne ee site


Permiftion: f. À mixing, mingling, tempering toge-


Perroquet: mA Parrat; alfo,the bearbe Aloe di Sea


Pernis. Pierres de pernis. as Parpaignes;w Perpins.
‘Perons + m. Sterappigh Daves, er boat a bags! | RAM
© "| Perrot: m. 4a O2fewbich bath bee (i? might ane


Perruque: f 4 or tuffof PE ve oui ct
Il Vine RE pue. APeriwig a Gregorian, >

Perruqué: m.éc?f, Wearing: a locké,or curled rift ;
Perruquet: m. One that smeares an foninate lack i

DL neon eke |
Perruquier: m, "4 Periwig-maker ; alfo, ax Petru- |.
Perruquicté} € À Te mater,
Pérs:m.Péeres.
Pe
Pe
|“ neere collection; fall {canning,


PER

Perpetuité : £ Perpetuitie,eternitie,immortalitie,end-

- defaelfe.enerlaftingne|fe.
Perpetuller. ro tickle; (an old word.)
etuions: m. Perpetwally-beoging Friers. F

Perpins: m. Perpendersior perpent flones ; flones made
inf as thick as a wall,and hewing their fesoothed ends
07 either fide thereof.

lex: m, exe: f. Perplexed; intricate, intangled ;
vexed, or peflered in (prit, plunged, granelled, in a-
maxe,at his wits end. |

Perplexement. Perplexedly, intricately,
troublefomely.

Perplexité:f Perplexitie; intricacie, intangledneffe;
Vacertaintie, doubtfilnel/e what to doe, or what to de-

, me and hence alfo, vexation, perturbation of
mind.

Perprendte. Ta feixe,or take into bis bands ground that
lyes wafl,or common...

Perprinfe. as Perprifon,

Perprifon : f° A féixingsor taking into bis owne bands
(without leaue of Lord, or other) ground that lycs waft,
or is ufed in common,

Perpuce. as Prepuce. ;

Perquifiteur: m. A diligent fearcher, an induftrions
Seeker, a fevions inquirer.

Perquifition: £ A perquifition diligent fearch, or feri-
ous inquirie. :

Perrefine: f Rofin.

Perrette, & Pertichon. womens names,deriued from
Pierre.

Perric:f A
Peere. -

Perrier: m, The Ship-Artillerie called, a Fowler.

Perriere: f as Perrier ; al/o,a quarvey of flone.

Perron: m. 4» open lodge, paffavt, or walke of Plane
railed, (ome quantitie of {aires dire(ly before the fore-
doze of a great boufe ; alfo, a (quare Bafe of ‘tone, or
mettall fome fiue or fix foot high, whereon,ia old time,
Knights errant placed [ome difcour{, challenge, or
proofe,of an dduenture,
A Noel au perron, à Pafques au tifon! Prov. ae
Chriflmas varie thee in the Sunne, at Eafter by the

re. :


intangledly,


Peeredome} the cflate, or dignitie of a


Aigreene;alfija black-backt yellow-Vellied and gréène-
find Ph : TA ale like the River |
earch, lait eae sna

‘Bec de perrdqitet, See Bec, i" LE 21h
Graine à perroquet. Baflard ST Lo en the |


mocke Saffton,Saffron Dorte. -\*


© beene for the age thereof) twvice lopped; lf, à mans
Ereber name, being ET Vin ga


“long-haired. > «


quet,.


n Attn makers 00:
MusM.251


man that makes Perriwigs or Atiires.


: no. Perfe: & Watcher btunket shie-eoloired,”
Crutation: f. 4 through (earch, diligent inguinie, |


Perf:


Original from


Crey
ASE
Le ~


THE_OHIO STATEMAAMVE


«


er fe oe :


wry


4


F F
a ee


»


pe
om
fs


PER


Perfe: £. The piercin ingof a veffell.
erlecuté: m.€e: f. Perfecuted, of fodoned
with extremitie; vexed affucted continually.
Perfecuter. To perfecute, profecute ; follow with extre-
mitie ; vex,or a fflét contin
Perfecution: £ Perfécution, profecution, a cruel fol-
lowing of ,extreame purfuit after,
Pe eguier. as Perfiguier.
Perfz-pierre. See Perce-pierre.
Perler. Looke Percer.
Perfeveramment. Perféneringh, continningly, con-
flantly, fledfaftly.
Perfeverance: f.Per{eucrance continuance ,conftancie,
a vefolute flicking to,or abiding by.
Perfeverant. Perle perfil iting, fledfaft, conkant,
continuing to the end in.
Perfeverer. To perfeuer, per fifi, continue, or abide by;
to bold fliffly maintaine floutly, fledfaflly to vemaine in,
a good courfe,or opinion,
Per icaire. Dead Arfefmart,dead Culerage, Ciderage,
Terchwort.
Pe —_ Perfan,of Perfia ; whence,Feu Perfien,Leoke


PER


rie refidence,is underflood (in the cufiomes of Amiens, |
Arras,& Cambray.)
Perfonnel: m. my f, Perfonl in perfon,bedilie, be
longing to the perfon,or bod:
Cour perfonnelle. Wherein füitors are to appeare,
and plead,in perfon,and not by atturney
Debtes perfonnelles. Debts due a Bill,or Scroll,
or upon a bare promife. .
Tailles perfonnelles. mpofed,or leuied by Poll; and
tr not the land, but the perfon, of the fubiet us |
lyable.
Perfonnellement.Perfnally, in perfom,by prefence he; |
sect H fonally ,in perfon,by prefence,bo- |
Perfonnerie: f. 4 Partnerfbip, or Coparctnerfbip ;. a


asia Sharing, ioyning, or enioying, with ano-
ther


or Coparcener ; and, a foint-tenant , or Tenant iat
common ; alfo, a contributor with otbersin the pay-
ment of | taxes, or other publicke duties ; alfo, one

that ioynes in an Attion, or Suit with another ; oof
So, an acceffarie, or complice in an offence, or ef.

- pape,

Perfonnier : m. ere: £ Partaking, fharing ; contri-
ss à 3 accefarie ; ioyning, or enioying, with ano-
toer.

Moulin perfonnier. 4 common Mill.

Perfpective: £ The Perfpeëtiue,P rofpectie,or Ont
pin

rfpicacité: f. Perfpicacitie; quicke fight, nimble à in-
fight readie apprebenfion, harpe und, erflanding.
vance Perfpicuitie,cleercneffe,or plaineneffe of
peech
Perfpirable: com. which may be breathed through,

Perspiration: f. 4 perfpiration,or breathing through.

Perspité : m. Ge: f. Sprinckled,bedeawed,moiflentd.

Perstraindre. as Perftreindre,
erftreindre.To wring,or Squeere hard; alfo,to courfe,
checke chide, be verie round with.

Pour le. envn mot. To be brief, or
make Shore; to veftraine it within knit pt vp in compre-
hend it vnder.one word.

‘Perfiradé: m. esf. Perfiaded; moued, induced, ex-

borted aduifédvnto.

Perfuader, To perfuade ; aduife, exhort, moue, induce,
‘wats tomake beleeue,brecd beliefé, put into the bead,
make finke ints. the thougbt,or mind.

Perfuadeur: m. A perfuader; aduifer, counfellor;mo-


Perfil m.Parfely:
Perfil aigrun, "Wild Parfeley, great water Parfeley,
{allade Parfeley,Belldars,Bellrags.
Perfil Alexandrin, Alexanders.
Perfil d'afne. Affe-Parfèley, wild Cheruill, mocke
Cheruill, great Cheruill,fweet Cheruill, Mirrhis Cafh,
or Kex.
Perfil baftard. Baffard Parfeley,Hennes-foot,
“Perfil d'eau. water Parfeley, fallade Par{eley ;afo,as
Perfil de marais.
Perfil de Macedoine. Hearbe Alexanders, or Ali-
Saunders; alfo, rocke Parfeley, flone Parfeley.
Res de marais. Smallage ; or, wild water Parfe-


Perk Idemontaigne. Mouataine Parfeley.
‘Perfil de roc, ou de rocher. Rocke Parfeley, flone
Parfeley, frange Parfeley,true Parfeley.
Perfil fauvage, wild Parfeley,
Perfil vray. Stone Parfeley;(tbough the leaft common,
. yet held the trueRt,Parfeley.)
. Grand perfil. Great Parfeley,bearbe Alexanders, «;
_Grefler fur lep peril. To venture boldly on, or fwag-
“ger ee with, a knowne-weake aduerfarie.
Perfin. as Per


ras To per: if, peur oise ae fash


abide by. ucer-vnto,
Perfoir: m. 4 Piercer. Pe De 2 «ap Perfuafible, perfuadeable.
Perfonat: m.4 Place,or Title ANS b abes; Perfuasiblement. Perfuadeably.

rey Per RE 20 On 4 Grp Perfi


hasif: m. ine: f. Perfusfine,perfuading, aduifing,
D. TE FA a inducing ,mouing.
 Perfonate: te =
eto
image, badie, perfon tage


Per uasion: £ A  perfafon; edalet inducement; be
‘ee ae ste
2


Pesfiafoire com. Perfuaforie, perfuafiue, pa


a COMB*] | ding Rests > abl

€, LEA fhe Beret il ape “Paroir sit appeareth.

me 3 yo oa, sdammags, detriment ; p binderananee rH
inedecay. xx
Perte de finance: Loffe of the publicke treafure by a)
violent robberie;decay of prinat fubfiance eres;
: orneedleffeVfurie, whence, Prendre à perte de
| nan Prendre.
fo cdes-ftuiêts. 15 incurred by a vaffall, whena

Lord bath entred on bis land fer yoant o homagesand


| due bim; the La pure
aes arc 5 the like is ms to
erte


Original from


giaitized by (GO gle THE OH|O. STATE UNIVERSITY


Perfonnier: m, APartner in trading; alfoya Cobeire, |


PER:


Perte de Veuë, Difcours à p. Looke Veuë. .
ertinemment, Pertineatly, properly, fitly, aptly, to
purpofe.
Pertinent:m.ente: f, Pertinent; fit,apt, proper, unto


purpofe.
Pertroubler. To trouble,or perturbe extreamely,
Pertuis: m. A hole.
Pertuis de l’Araigne, The centre of an Aflrolabesthe
bole wherein all the tables thereof are,by «pin or nayle,
ioyned together. J
Les pertuis des poelles. Two trunkes, or gutters of
wood whereby fea-water (for Salt-making)is conueyed
fiom the receptacle called Forans vnte thofé which
are called Virefons. 5
Les gens qui regardent par vn is. Monkes,or
Fryers (by reafon of their nee)
pare vn pertuis dedans vn trou. To doe inf? no-
thing,
es tel pertuis telle cheville : Prov. Looke Che-
+ vile. À
Pertuifane:f. 4 Partifan,or leading flaffe.
} Pertuifanon: m. À little Partifan.
ertuifé: m.ée : f Holed,or full of holes.
ertuifer. To make a bole or boles,to bore fill of holes.
Perturbateur: m. À perturbator;difturber, difquieter;
vexer troubler; an importunate,or bufie felow.
Perturbation: f. Perturbation ; diflurbance, vnquiet-
nope of mind; a troublefome paffion, reflle[fe affection;
an agitation of {pirit. RUN
Pour er. To perturbe,diflurbe,tronble, difquiet, blun-
erguexs wy ;
Pervenche: f. Periwinkle,or Peruincle (an bearbe.)
Pervers: m.erfe:f. Perner{?, croffe, aukeward, ouer-
thwart, skittifh, froward untoward ; alfo,naught,cor-
ruptsmard ; wry skewing,
Perverfement. Peruerfy, crofely, aukewardly, ouer-
thwartly, frowardly untowardly ; malicioufly;askance,
' askew,awry.
Perverfion: £ A peruerfion; an-untewpard,or ill-fauou:
|. red wrying ; whence, Perverfion-de bouche; 4
crampe, or conuulfion, whereby the mouth is drawne


awry. fl)
Perverfité: f. Peruerfitie, crofnelfe, ouerthwartneffe,
aukewardnelfe ; frowardne(fe,har{bnefe of difpofition;
a skitti(h, giddie,or untoward bumor to doe an vnlaw:
—_ fiill,or ill thing.
_| Perverti: mie: £ Perwerted,depraued, corrupted, ft:
|" duced ; malicioufly wrefied.
Pervertir. To peruert, (educe, deptane, corrupt, marre;
Spoyle; to wrelt malicioufly, to turne awry, orto awry
| courfi.
| Pervertiflement: m. 4 peruerting, deprauing, fedus
| _ cing ; a falfè,or malicions wrepting of.
Pervertifleur : m, À peruerter, deprauer, feducer; à
<sfalfesor malicious wrefier. ‘ i
Pera ge
es. Peis...
| Pefade: f. Looke Pofade. :.
Pefant: m. Le pefant de: The weight,or burthen of:
5 Pefant: m, ante: f. weightie, ponderous, beanie, bur-
à -vthenfome; alfà,peifingor weighing,
; Il ne trouve rien trop chaud, ny trop pefant, He
finds nothing too bot, nor too beanie for bim ; nothing
| comesamiffe untohim. test]
*3 Pefanteur: £ weightineffe, ponderofitie, beauineffesalfo,
; a weight,burthen,charge.
“a . Pefanteurdé tefte, Az i bi25
“a Pefart: m. Thedifeafe calle ightmare, 9


«


Go gle


PES


Pefchage: m. 4 fifhing; or place to ffh in.

Pelche?t A fifhing ; alfo, the caf, Ft of a fib-
net ; alfo, the Ah gotten thereby ; alfo, a Peach;
whence ; ate i
Pefche blanche. Our ordinariewhite Peach,

jaulne, as Pefche-coing.

Pefche d'or. The gold Peach; one of the mofi delicate

inds of that fruit.

efche rougejoufanguine, The red Peachsthe little,
round, and ruddie Peach, whofe Pulpe, neere:to the
flone,is of a fanguine bue.
Pefche de Troyes, 4a Apricocke ; or 4 finall and de-
licate Peach refémbling an Apricocke.

Pefcheable : com, Fifhable,which may be fifbed in,
efche-amande, The Almond Peach; a delicate Ja
lian Peach,whofe kernel is a verie fweet Almond,

Pefche-coing, The Quince-Peach, or yellow Peach,
more hard,and more delicate,then any other.

Pefchement: m.4 ffbing.

Pefche-noire, The blacke Peach,

Pefche-noix. The Nut Peach; is of a frme,or bard fub-
ftance; and not much valike, nor much inferior, to the

Péléher: m. À Fifb-pond (br buy
eicher: m. 4 Fifh-po r boufebold prouifion:) at.
So,a6 Pefchier. he
Se mettre en la vigne iufques au pefcher. To be
tipled with wine.

Pescher. To fifhj to catch fifh.
Pefcher eneau trouble. To ffh in troubled waters,
Looke Eau, «

Pefcher des eftourgeonsen l'air, To attempt im
poffiblesar vaine matters.

Pefcher au maillet, See Maillet.

Pefchérau plat. Tocwt, and carue at pleafure; to
take what,and where,one likes.

Il fait mind A eneau large: Prov, There is #0
ffhing othe fea,

Il faut perdre: yn veron pout pefcher vn fanl-
mon: Pro. Somewhat muft-be loft that much may be
gotten 03 11 d t 3 i
Toufiours pefche qui en prend vn: Prov. And yet
he fifhes who. catches one; or, be that takes one, may
well be (aid to fifh.

Pefchereffe: f. 4 ffbereffé,a woman fiber. : Ts
Grenouillepefcherefle... The fea-Frog, fea-Toad, or
fea-Diuell; a moft ouglie fifb. ile

ne: vomir A fifi aljosa little fifh-pond. 1 "|
eicheteau : m. The fea-Fr a Toad, ov À

p peng 9 an Fin} un Teapiel,
efcheur: m. A ffher,or fifhevman; alfo; the Kings:
filer, called a fé Martinet cheur. PT.

our de pefcheur: Pro, Great bazarding. at
aed stern mid { MEANY * rt fo |
INficvn tour de pefcheur.: He expofed bimfeife onto
much danger to obtaine a thing of much worth, ©

«. ‘Argrand'pefcheurefchappe anguille: Prov. #8
Eele efcapes the cunning fibers bands. ini

Pefcheuxkmieufe : £. Fifhing ; or,full of fifhing,’ © 1

chier:\ins..A Peachtree... sf

p ann ene ape ee ex
efé: m.ée: f. Peifed, poifèd,weigbed ; pondered, conf
RAR ee? “3 if nae


Pefée: €. A peifingyor meighing ; al, poifesor weight,
Refeh To peife, poife, weigh; to ponder, perpend, confs-
er. * >
Pefer fur la plume.To leane vponapenne;
Celame polle.that tyes pur ei flomacke or ex:
cecdinglygrienes me. BEC Fe


rl ah, ce Là


:
?


eee eS ed Pot) eek et ae


:
*


PES


PET


Ime pefe fur le cœur. He vexeth me at the heart; 7
can inno fort abide bim,1 can by no meants away with
him,
“A vn chafcun fon fardeau poife: Pro. Euerie one is
Senfible of bis owne burthen,
Mal poife re ne contrepoife: Pro. He weighes but
ill that weighes not one with another.
Petite chofe de loing poife; &,
Petit fardeau poife à la longue: Pro,A little truffe
farre-carvied seemeth beanie.

Pefeur: m. A peiftr, weigher; ponderer,

Pefles.m, The boult of a locke.

Pefle: f. as Poile; whence ;
Il fait le doux Dieu deflous vne pefle. He bebaues
himfelfe gently, beares himfelfe mildly, he is a faire con-
ditioned man; or be is too nice quatat,precife;be min-
cessor fimpers it too much. à

Pefle-meflé:.m.ée:f. Pell-melled, confifedly ming-


led.
Pefle-mefle. Pell-mell,confifedly,band ouer bead,allon
a heape,one with another.
Pefles : f. Thrummes ; or that which bangs at the end of
a peece of cloth like fringe.
Pefñe: m. The boult of a locke.
Pefon: m.A wherue,or wherle to put on a Spindle; See
Pezon, & ts
Fufée avec fes pefons. The finall Rundle, or Member
of Architecture, called otbermife Aftragalc; and thus
called, becaufe it is (commonly) made to refemble many
indles and wherues threaded,or fet together.
Pefqueur. as Pefcheur:Norm. > «
PefSaire: m. A Pefarie;a great Suppofitorie made of
oft wooll and fafhioned like a finger.
Pefle. The Pitch tree; alfo,a kind of pretious lone.
Peffeau. a Paifieau.
Peffon. # Paiflon. u |
Pete: f. The plaguc,or peflilence; a death,contagion,in-
| feltion ; alfo, a pefliferous fellow, one that ruses, or
fpoyles others. s
emede contre la pefte par art, fuir toft & loing,
retourner tard: Prov. Art thus prefcribes where
plague doth raigne, fly foone and farve, turne late a-
gaine, (a) Es,
Pefteil: m. A pefllesor peftell. > Fist
Pefteux: m. eufe: f. Plaguie, fil of the plague; mofl
peflilent infeélious,contagious, — Wiles
eftifere: com. Pefliférous, peftilent, pernicious,dead-
: die infééhious,conta joués, LETHON "1
Pre ry F mél : or, that hath the plague,
Peftilence: £ 4 peflilence,or plague, 0 7
Peffilent: m, ente: £ Peftilent, plaguie,imfectious,con-
Sten:


: tagious. { re ek
Peftilentiel.Peftilentiall ; or 4s Peftilentieux.


Peftilentieux: m.eufe: f Peflilentious , full of the
__ pefttlence.


| im ll Bes peer aici fh ecier’ *


Ÿ € L :
2° CR gr ame AS
dt Gr rl dal fat
| Fc Rad


Pet: m. A fart; féapé,tayle-fhot,or cracke.
Pet de boulengier. Such a one as makes the Bren to


eten gueule. The name of an Yew-game.
oa de maflon. A fart in fÿrrup, a fquittering
rt. 2
Taymeroy autant tirer vn pet d'un Afne mort,que:
FJ would as foone undertake to get a fart of a dead
man, as Oe.


Chantez à l’afne il vous fera des pets: Pro. Looke


ne.

Petacé: m. ée : f. Peeced,bepatched.

Petaliftne: m. 4 forme,or fentence,of banifhment among
the old Syracufans, writing bis name whom they would
be vid of in an Oliue leafe,

Petarade. See Petarrade.

Petarafle: £ A clap, yerke, or flroake on the buttockes ;
alfa,the farting of a luftie (and leaping) borfe. :

Petard. as Petart; alfo, a Squib.

Petardé: m.ée: f. Petarded, burft open with a Pe-
tard.

Petarder. To bur{t open with a Petard.

Petardier: m. 4 Petarder ; one that vfes or fhoots off,
aPetard,

Petarrade: f Gunfhot of farting; alfo,a borfes kicking,
winfing, or yerking out behind, accompanied, for the
molt part,with farting,

Petart: m, A Petard,or Petarre; an Engine (made like
a Bell, or Morter) wherewith {trong gates are burft


~ open,

Petas s m, A mole,or wart; alfo,a kind of (Rouncinall)
Peale,

Petafite: f, Lagwort,Butter-burre(an bearbe.)

Petaud: m. 4 farters alfo,a footman.
C’ eft la Court du Koy Petaud, ou chafcun eft
maiftre: Pro. Applyable to an Anarchie , or a difor=
rie familie ; wherein euerie one may doe what be

eth, ‘

Petault. as Peraud, :

Petauriftique! com, ‘Tumbling, vaulting, going vpoa
ropes, running Upon [laues, in the aire.

Petelement: mess Petelis.

Peteler, To flampé, trample, or tread bard;vpon,

Petelis: m. 4 famping,or trampling upon.

Peter, To farts cracke,let a frape.

Petereau: m.A little fart,or Squib.

Peteufé: € 4fmall, and bitter fifh of the Riner Seine;
as Bouviere.

Petiere. Cane petiere. See Canepeticre.

von: m. The orders and cuftomes obferued by
Maïrchants in their trading,and cuflome-paying.

Petillant. Crackling ; fparkling ; alfo, flamping,or tram-
pling; al(o,quaking,or fhaking. . .

Petillement: m, A cracking, or /parkling ; al/o, a qua-
king, faking, panting, throbbing; alfo, a flamping, or
trampling ; alfo, the {pitting of a candie, dc. 7 =.

Petiller. To crackle, or fparkle ; al/o, to quake, fhaké;
throb,or pant ; beat thicke and Jhort; alfo,to flampe,or


+ lumiere petille. The candle fparkles,or (pits.


Vn oeil qui petille. À fparkling, or ofien-twinckling À


n den? wt
Pesce otte fi Verie little.
Petit: m. The whelpe, cub, or puppie, the little one, or
young one,of à fis ce;

Faire fes petits. as under Faire.


Petit: my ites £ Little, final ; exile. à ?
prettie 5) feant, farce , meant, pet +; low, Ja


|
|
|


a PE T!


Petit bras, The upper part of the arme,fiomthe elbow
to the fhoulder, |. od LS q
Petit cheval de Dieu. The little Fnfeth calledsa Lady-


COM = | | A:
Petits choux. A kind of puffe-cakes of two forts;the
one ronnd,and plump as an apple; the other alforound; |
but much flatter. L |
La petite oye. The Goofe-giblets ; Looke Oye.
Petit pied. See Pied.
Petit à petit. Faireand (ofilynow one and thenone,
“wiredrawer-like; by leifure, degrees,paw/és little pee-
> €es,or parcels, ; IK I"
Faire le petit, To bow,encline, or humble bimfelfe ; to
lowie it,or beare bimfelfe lowly; aifo, to line meanely,
ncerely, or poorely; to make no manner of {oem in tbe
world,
Petit à petit on vabien loing: Pro. Faire and foft-
Ly goeth farres wad
: Pctite chofe de loing poife ; &, Petit fardeau poif |
à la longue: Prov. A light thing farre borne beawie
2rowes, \ >) a ie
Petit homme abar grand chefne: Pro, 4 low man
fells atall Oke. Ni.
Petite pluye abat grand vent: Pro. See Grand. ‘|
Les petis ruifleaux fonc les grandes rivieres: Pro.
‘Of narvow brookes come nauigable riuers. I
. Depetit petit,& d'aflez aflez : Prov, Ofa little take
_ alitile,of a mickle mickle, |
+Deperitechofe peu de plaid: Prov. A fleight caufe |
f … needeth but fleight canuaffing. ol
a De petit enfant petit dueil: Pro. Seeke Enfant. :!
|. Depetit ef uillbn poind on bien grande afneffe :
ae Pro, The little goad pricks on the gest fhe Affe. À
aa De petit peché petit pardon: Prov, Small pardon
= | willfaffce fora fal fut,
_ |  Dupetitvientonau grand: Pro,SeeGrand,
Enpetit buiffon trouve on grand lievre ; &,
En petite cheminée fait on bien grand feu; &,


f ; En petite maifon Dieu à grand part; &,
+ En petite tefte gift grand tens; &,
° Es petites boiftes met on les bons onguens. (Pr6:


uerbs in commendation of little things.) i
De grands vanteurs petis faifeurs: Pro.Great boafi}
- aad fall roafl; big words poore worke; the more you
talke the lefe you will doe, €
:eleft petit qui boit bien: Prov. À little man may
r haue a great fivallow.
+ Petitemenit. Sally, flenderly; (carcely; fcantly;meanes
ly, poorely,lovelily ; foortly lowly.
Petitefle: & Smallneffeslittleneffes prettineffe; exilitie,
flenderneffe exiguitie ; (carcitte,fcantnefe; pooreneffe
> eas ob lowlineffe ; fhortnel]e , lovonefte, young~
neffe.
 Petiteur : £ as Petiteffe. |
Petition: £ A petition ; fait; tequef, requirall, de
Petitoire: m, 4 petition; clayme,demaund. q
Petitoite: com. Petitorie ; clayming, demaunding, re-
QAI NE.” SAVERISISE Lay + :
Aion pre A Clayme; a writ of right,anattion
de. tés “2 “— t


: (of demauñd wou ou

| Petitofe: f. The garbage of fowle; (an old word.)

| Peron: m. ttle fbi lender ake of leaf,
clip lat Sos Mis


à or ofa fruit, 0) :
- : | : Monpeton. Myprettie fi ntle impe;(any
& uch Watering te med Ip tae


on their À


Petoncl: am Celina Seal.


| Go gle’ ,


Petonner.Te pat,or tread dore the earth by often ftep-


| Petreux. Os pet. The bone of the Temples ; one of the


| Petnfié: meée: £Atade flonie,turned into flore,


P EV


~\ping,or trampling on it.

Petoucle. as Petoncle, i

py m. A wild Sparrow, lefe then the tame one,
xi n,
Pearquifer. To Petrarkife it,to write like a poffionate


“eight bones whereof the skull confifis.
t ification: f.,A petrification ; a making fionieya tur-
ning into flone.


Petrifier. Tomake flonie,to turne into flone.
Petrinal: m. APetronell,or horfemans peece.
Petrir, Seeke Pefhir

Petrol: m. Petrole,& Petrolle: £ 2s Naphre,

Petteler: as Pereler.

Petulance:f Petwlancie, malapertnefe, impudencie,
fawcineffe.

Petum:m:Tobacco,

* Petuin femelle. Ænglifh Tobacco ; the right yellow
Henbane ; or a {mall kind of Nicotian.

Petutn mafle, Nicotian, French Tobacco,

Peu. (4 Participle of the verbe Paiftre) fed, eaten, re-
pated, paflured. ?

Peu. (Of the Verbe Pouvoir) Pay peu. 1 could,or might
baue beene able,

Peu. (Am Aduerbe of quantitie) little, final féant, farce,
few; a pittance,modicum, (mall deale, flender compa-
nie, almoft notbing or no bodie.

Peu à peu. See Perit petit,
je plus peu moins. Litile more or lefe, therea-
outs.
Peu s'en faut; &,à peu pres. Almoft, wellnigh,verie
neere, lacking but little ymifing but narrowly, likelie to
“'haue beene.
Peu fouvent, Seldome,rarely not verie often,
Hamme de peu, À worthlef[e, poore, or weake-{piri-
ted, fellow, à
Pre peu d'un. One is too few; or thats too few
one.
Tant foit peu. But verie fleightly newer fo little,
Peu de chofe ne fait qu'un peu de mal: Prov. A lit-
tle thing does but a EX Noel
Peu 4 peu leloup mange l'oye: Prov. Bit after bit |
the Wolfé eates up the Gaofe, — .
Peu & paix eft don de Dieu: Pro, A little with qui-
etnelle is a ve gift. a 2x97
De peu dec ofe peu de ofe: Pro. Little done faone
debbered litle a ed jaict bacbeotal, | er
‘ui pets feme peu prend ; Prov. Of fall feeding a
{mall crop, aes aS
Trois beaucoup, & trois peu deftruifent l homme :
Pro. viz. To fpeake much, and know bat httle; to
(pend much, and haue but little ; to prefume much, and
be butlittle a! : sist

Peucedane: m.Horfe-ftrong,Hore ftrange,Sowfennell,
Sulpherwort, t

Pevier. Canon peyier. 4 Cannon Peuier, or Perrier ?
See Canon, NU

Peuille, as Peulle. 423

Peulle: f+ Before new money be déliuered out of the
Miat, an el called L’ Eflayeur dinides a peece
thereof into foüre parts ; one be giues tothe Maifier, a
Second unto the Wardens of the Mint; the other two
be keepes,and touches or makes a trial of one of them:
Now each of thefe parts wrapt vp in a peece of paper,
([pecifying the quantitie weight,allay, and day of deli~

| serie


re
à
a


i portal


in Ne ee eT a ide eT Sy a


PE V


serie out of the coÿne) is tearmed Peulle,

Pevoefne:f. Peonie Pionie, Kings-bloome Rf of the
Mount ; Looke Pivoine.

Pevoifne. as Pevoefne.

Peuplade: £ A Colonie, or Troope of peep à in
a Plantation.

Peuplaye: f 4 Groue of Popler trees.

Peuples m People ; or folke.
Le menu peuple. The vulgar, multitude, or jh
ner fort; the commons, or common people of a Towne,


dc.
Peuple en multitude errant ne nous fert pas de
ee Prov, The erring multitude is no fit warrant


Pat ile: m, The Poplar, or Peplar tree ( efpecially, the
oh one.) Sce Peuplier.
le blanc. The white Poplar,or Abeell tree.

Peupl ple: m.ée: f. Peopled ; populous inbabited,planted
or ou flored with folke.

Peuplement: m. 4 peopling ; a floring with peoples
Peuplement de vigne. 4 fieraifhing, or ving it
with Vine-plants.

Peupler. To people;make populous, fiurnifh with people,
plant or flore with inbabitants.

Peupleraye: f. À Groue,or Wood of Poplar trees.

Peuplier: m. The Poplarsor Peplar tree; (efpecially the
blacke one.)

Peuplier des Alpes. as Peuplier.de Lybie. |
Peuplier blanc, The white Poplar or Abel tree.
Peuplier de Lybie, The ere Alpen tree.


d
Peuplier demontai a nant ter


Peur: fi Feare,dread,

rorya fright, or flight.
Peur Sainé Valier : Prov. Feare of an approaching
mifchiefe that breedes effects of a prefent one ; as a
man to die (being threatened a death) before any | blow
be ginen him,

~ Quia peur ileft afleur: Prov. A(warie, and proui-
eae Jar breeds great fecuritie.

: ur des fueilles ne doit aller au bois : Pro.
Letbim thats shard’ by leaues keepe from the wood.
Telmenace qui a geal peur: Pro. Some shreases
highlythat ave illa aid,

Peurefie. 7n flead of Pleurefie. (Ruftically.)

Peureufement. Fearefilly,timero

Peureux: m.eufe: £ Fearful imerous fain-bearted,

white-linered.

Pezar: m. Abel Peal ,0r Beane fiaulke

Pezart: m. The Night-mare; (a difeafe.) - |

Pezon: m. as Pefon; alfo,a Ae
(any) final weight.

-Pezze : £ The Pitch-tree.

Phagedaine: m, 4 kind er Canker.

be OUË: f. Looke at

der. 2s Faifan
Phalan ce. The name AE FAT Spider; alfoya
À foure-fquare troope, or batallion of (8000, fome fay


-
=
3
=
;


A ones batter yor dtoat, which à in the aight
sto >be fluttering about candles, ;

m.ée : f, Barbed, appel, as a Soudiors
EL To ris with Barbes, or (marke) trap-


plais: é Bas éme) varie Bre bmp


Phalot. as Falot.
7 m. The Lanterne of a Gallego Ship. .


Phan £.A fancie,or fantafieya conceit,an io.
Dhenchee :m,ée:f. Fancied,or conceined in rind;


Dhara f. A Creffet. €Langued.Looke Farafle.


Phare m.enne: f. Higher light, as a watch-tower


jimples,
P nue: rm. A fimple,or drug.
Pharol: m. The Lanterne of a Ship, or Gallie.
Pharot. The fame ; alfo,a Creffet,or paper Lanterne,


Phahoee rs Bhat
Parier: m. A Risgdeue, Qucefl, Coufhot, woodcul.


Phée: f, A Fairie yor one of the D
Phéé: m. éée: f. Fatal, defined,


Phelandrion. Smald Burnet Saxifrage; and not medow


Phengite. (The name of) a certaine bright flone,
Phenicé: m. ée: f. Crimfon,or Skarletsof colour.


 Philaétere,& PhilaCterie. Loo
Anne Fa f. Lowe of filuer, conetoufnefie.


Philippe: m. Philip ; (fignifies 2 vu a louer of bor-
of final come; af, |


se] fun ranked fo as they may incounter the


ry ni À, % Side
MTS -


PH A!


ot. as Falot,


fained imagined deuifed ; alfo, pi or made, fn


pie À
hantofine: m. # Fantofine.


hares: m. Towers, or bigh places neere the mouth of a
on ge wherein continuall nightlie fires,or lights


onthe fea-coaft.

Pharique. A kind of dangerous poifon,

Pharisien : m.enne : £. Hypocriticall,Pharifie-like,
Pharmacie: £ A curing,or medecining with drugs.
Pharmakeutie:£ Phificke which cureth by drugs, or


les: m. Phafells,long Peafon,Kidney Beanes,Ro-
man or French Beanes, garden Smilax.
ses efpineux. The common rough Bindweed.
hafeoles ps 2 ten oe Kidney Beanes.
ols. #5 Phafeoles. &


eflinies.


e-appointed ; alfo
inchaunted, bewitched, forefpoken, # r


‘Rue,as the Parifien Phifitions errontoufly bold it to be,
fayes Gerard,


Phenoinenes: 4prie Per iv qRab.
iladelphe: m. A louer of bis rath


A proper name for aman; and particu.
larly,the name of a certaine Bourgonian. Saint; where-


Chaine de S. Philibert. 4 kind of counterfeit


fs 3alfo,a valiant bardi jé,or warlike
ippe daller.A Philips Dal Low-countrey


oyne.)
A f. An Ediél whereby Philip the Faire afiu-


med to bimfelfe the abfolute beftowing, and difpofall of
Regall Benefices,


Philippus : m. 4 golden c ne worth about ii) s flerl..
Phi pus dates seri ele
Philly re: f, Mocke-prike
Phil e: f, Lowe of
Plog basta inexicated ponies be


bis wits end.
CO, A louer of learning, fiudie;or dif
meffe. Alouer ofthe Mage.


Phi hanes, A onl light. qRab,
lok te Phikfphcalf, according to the


Pifoophe: m. 4 re loner of wife-
“Fuuile


P HR


\ on, from tiles, or brickes,which bane lyen a good while
Sleeping in verie old oyle, ar
Ocufsdes philofophes. Looke Ocuf. ‘

hilofopher. To philofophize it; co write argue or dif-
courfe pepincally.

. Philofopher à la martingale. See Martingale. -

Philofophie: f. Philofopbie ; the louesor fludie of wif-

me.


one. ‘
Philotheamon. 4 loner of our gods. Rab.
Philotime: com, Ambitious, affeéting bonor.
Philototne. 4 louer of Paffions.


Philtatodelphe: m. An exceffive lower (and by confe-


quent a bater) of his brother.
Philtre: m. 2 amorous potion,or loue-procuring medi-
cine; al(o,the hollow,or gutter of the upper lip.
Phiole: f. 4 ioll,or finall glaffe-bottle.
Phiphre : £ 4 Fife,or /mall Pipe.
hisicalement. Naturally.
| Phiffane. 4 certaine tumbling tricke ; or, a licentious
- Fafbion of dauncing,or finging, vfed, in fome places, by
Buffoons,or the Vices in Playes.
| Phlebotomer. To tet bloud. |
Done f.Phlebotomie,bloud-letting.


legmagogue. 4 medicine that purgeth flegme.


- | Phiegmatique: com. Phlegmaticke,


| Phlegmc: m, Flegme.
© Phlegine falé, 4 moff itching manginefe bred by [alt


Pegme.
tyre in . A Phlegman; a certaine inflammation of
the bloud which caufeth a bot and red fwelling; alfo, a
little, and long wart breeding among the haire of the
eye-lids, : à
Phlegmoneux: m.cufe: f. Swelling with inflammati-
"on; alfa, flegmie. NUE ETS
Phlegmonné: m. ée: f. Swollen with bot bloud ; or,
troubled with a Phlegman,
Phlomie. + Phlymoufe,


fiognomie.
Phoebe: f The Moone.
| Phoenicoptere:m. A certaine crimfon-winged bird.
Pholade; f. as Pelorde. @Langued.
À Phoque:f 4 fea-Ccalfe.. >
Phougue. See Fougue.
Phrene. The ‘midriff Rab.
Phrenefie: f. Frenzie,lunacie,
Phrigie. Zooke Phrygie.
Phrontifte, The fiftranke. ea
Phrontiftere. The front,or fore-part of a building,
Phrygie: f. Phrygian melodie; à kind of tune,ar mu-
ROBE they fèemed to-be a dinine fivie.
Phryllelimeufe, & Phryllelimoufe. 4s Phyfiogno-
(pe ee Dk fe. The 4 è
£ neufe,& moufe. Thefame.. ]
Ph AFri eland horfé. Looke Frifon.
| +: € The lowfie euill.qRab.
i ble) vlceration of the


| bodie. an \
| Phtifique : com, ‘Tyficall ;\or; troubled with the Ty-


| laétere : £. A prifons alfo,a (written prefernatine
Piya Sea OT
Phylacteric: £ Aferoll of Parchment, with inet


a hae ors
Es Go--gle
ha aks ae. Dre 8


i


: Huile des hilofophes. Oyle extratted; by dipillati-


Phlynoufe, (Ruflically, or corruptly) in lead of Phy-


Piauler. 70 peepe, or-cheepe (as ayoung bird;) alfo, to


| Piaux: m. Newlp-batched chickens,or birds,
.Pibale: & Ayoung Lamprey.


an (incur
ed with aconfiimption of the whole


|. fiche. een | |
|Phy;Seavaiteephiy phy. Le
ifte: m. A Gaolerp aPrifimn

b Rte ns 4 er,or Keeper of a Prifom.


-Picadilles. Looke Piccadilles.


Pe) 1 ; Ar


 Commaundements written in it,worne by the Pharifies |
about their heads end armes. :

Phylomie,& Phylonomie. (fed corruptly) im flead

of, Phyfiognomnie.

Phylofomie,& Phylofonomie. ‘The fame.

Phyfetere, The whirlepoole (a huge fifb.)

Phyficien:m. 4 natural! Philofopher.

Phyfiognomie: f. Phifognomie; a guefe at the nature,
or the inward difpofition, by the feature, or outrard
lineaments.

Phyfiologie: f. A reafbning ,difputing,or fearching ont
of the nature of things; alfo,anatomixing Phificke, or
that part of Phificke which treats of the compofition,or
flruéture of mans bodie.

Phyfique: f.'Naturall Philofophie.

Phyfis sf Nature. Grec. ERab.

Piaffard:m.arde: £ Braggard, firouting vaine-glori-
ows, proudlyvaunting, fondly braning it.

Piaffe: £ A bragging, flrouting, fond brauing of it ; a
difdainefull carriage,boapting demeanour,vainglorious
behauior,

Piaffer. To brag, or braue it fondly ; to boaft, or frrout it
bine ; 10 make a vaine-glorious, or foolifh mufler of

cbimfelf,

Piaffeur: m. A braggard, or braggadochio; a firou-
ting, or boafting fop ; a proud vaine-glorious cocks- \
combe, ;

Piaffeufement. Braggingly, proudly, vaine-plorioufly,

routinglp,vauntingly, +. à :

Piailler. To cheepe, or cry like a chicke; alfo, to bib, fip,
tiple,or drive away time by drinking.

Piailleur: m. A bibber, fipper, wine-fwiller ; a tipler,
bowfer, pot-goffip,or Goffip-pint-pot.

Piaifon: f. A bibbing,fipping tipline; (willing immode-

rate drinking.

Pialer: m. Dodder; aweed.

ie sees pian. To march leifurely, goe faire and
efily. - Pans!

Pianelle: f. 4 aight flipper, or choppine, a Pantofle for
the chamber.

Pianelleux:.m.eufe: f. wearing, full of, or belonging
to flippers,or chamber-pantofles,

Piaftre. A Turkifhcoyne worth about iii} s flerl,

Piat: m. 4 young Pye.


pule,or bowle (as a young whclpe.)


Pible: & The pixtle,on yard fier tu pelt}
ible: f The pizxleor yard of a beaft. ing
Pibole:£ A kind of Bagpipe. ia
Piboleur: m. 4 Piper. Poitevin. +


Pic: m. À Wood:picker) HickwaysGrecnepeake s aa |


(Mafèns) pickax ; al/o,a thruff, foyne,or punch, ,
Pic d'Auvergne. A wall-pecker. ‘

© Picdefarine, A Meafire which containes about nine
of our Pecks; (for it  toweigh 325 pounds.) =, —
Piciaulne, The ordinarie Woodpecker. 1 "1"
Pic de mer. A certaine rock fifh, of fandrie co-
lours. | Er ;

Pic de muraille. The fall Hickway called, a wall.
pecker. : :
Pic rouge. A Speight,or Specht. ie
Pic verd. The Greene-peake, or ordinarie wood-
pecker, Od. Rad in os
La Cofte à pic; ou,en pic. À fil-deepe floresa coaft

a plumpe or dovone-right depth. € Norm.


Picardent. #5 Piquardant, ee
Ppp ° Pi


PIC
Picardifer. To Picardize it; to fpeake, or doe like a Pi-


card, À

Picarel : m. The finall,and white Cackarell fifb,wbereof:
the befi Garum,or pickle is made.

Pication: £.A pitching or bepitching,

Piccadilles: & Piccadslles; the feuerall dinifions or pee-
ces faftened together about the brimme of the collar
of a doublet,oc. : :

Piccon: m. A prickle,or fmall pricke.

Piccoter. as Piquoter.

Piccotin. See Picotin.

Picé: m.ée: f. Pitched,or pitchie.

Picealtre. The wild Pitch tree.

Picée : f. The Pitch tree. ;

Pichier: m. A Pitcher (pot.) ¢Langued,

Picmart: m. À Speight, Woodpecker, Highaw,Hickway,

Picorée: f. Picorie; a forraging, ranfacking, {poyling
of, or preying on, the (poore) counireyman (friend, or


€.

Picore 1. To forrage,ranfacke,rifle, rob,or prey vpon,the
poore busbandman,be be friend,or foe.

Picoreur: m. A boothaler (ina friends countrey;) a ra-
uening, or filcbing fouldior.

Picotage: m, A pricking bere and there; alfo, a fpot-
ting, or fpeckling. N', ;

Picote: f, The full Bocks.

Picoté: m. ée: f. Spotted, fpecked, or fpeckled ; alfo,

picoter. Se Piquoter. +.

| Picoterie: £ A girding,nipping,or

| aiarre,odds,or difpute,in words.


Picoteure: £ 4 prickes a [pot ; a freckle ,or pimple; See
| Piquoteure.
Picotin': m. À (French) Pecke ; or the fourth part of a
Boifleau ; comes to about fine Pints of our meafure ;
and is ufed onely in the meafuring of Oates.
Picoture:f. as Picoteure. à
Picquamment. 'Prickingly, piercingly.
Picquant. See Piquant.
Picque : f, A Spade,at Cards ; alfo,as Pique. LS. 4
C’eft bien rentré de picques noires. Yea marry fir, .


quippingin fpeecbes,


| now you bane bit it; (Ironically.) ( ;
| Picquement, & Picquer. « Piquement, & Pi-


uer, sui |

Picquéton: m. Alittle Pike; a Faueline,or Dart; See
Piqueron.

| Picque-feiche. Lonke Pique-fciche. … : |

Picquet: m, 4 little Pickax,or Mattocke ; alfo,the peg,
or jlicke thruft dovene into the earth bya Surueyor that
meafures with cord,or chaine. = > ie

Piqueure,


_ Pie de mer. The Oline, or fea-Pye; 4 daintie fo wle.


igre comme vne pie, We {ay (to the fame pésrpo)
gpépen pra PA ‘ panpae).


Monté iufques au nid de la pie. 4¢ bis füll beight
À great, rich, or powerfull poss be can, pans ;
e,


Vous ne fuftes onques de mauvaife pie couvez.You
are of no ill progenie ; you baue no taint of sl brce-
ding in you.
Pie:f, Drinke, bowfing, liquor ; alfo, a Goofe ; the
broyled thicke skinne of a peece of Beefe ; alfü, the |
monfirous appetite of maides, and big-bellied women,
unto Coales, Afhes, Paper, and füch otbervnnatuvall
meats, L
C'eft vn croque la pie, He is a notable tofe-pot, or
licke-fpiggot. L |
Pie: com. Piows, godlie, religions, bolie, deuout; mer-
nad gentle ; alfo, pied ; or blacke and white as a
ie,

Pie mere de la tefte, Looke Mere. s
Picca. Agreat wbile fince,long agoe ; alfo,beretofore,or
in times paff. xe
Piece: f A peece, parcell, part, fragment ; morcell; gob-

bet,lumpe,cantill; {hare of. ; ;
La piecedu chef, A French Coyfe; the Sattin Coyfe À
worne now-adayes by diners of our Ladies, and Gen-
tlewomen. ; ; :
:: Piece de drap. A whole Cloth
Cloth) == 3
"à Piece de hui& heures. as Aloyau; tearmed (0, be- .
_ caufe the Clarks of the Palace commonly fetch it at the |
\ Cookes about eight of the clocke in the morning.
Piece a pm Looke Pommette. |
Les pieces d’un Procez. The Bookes, Pleadings.
Copies of Fnftruments, vfed in a pu 2 Fd
Gens de toutes pieces. Men of all (orts,and quali- |
ties, tag-rag, wise and fooles, rich and poore,one with |
another. salar à
v La grande piece. The upmoft, and broadeft peec
of a poutre ; or, a broad ane of nee eas |
placed betweene the bottome of the belmet, and the.
| Pouldron, er À
La haute piece, The Pouldron.
En piece. Of a long time, of agreatwbile.
Ie n'aurois en piece dit,nefait,cela. 1 would not for !
any thing haue done, tt, the leaftpart of that.
A chef de piece. Fa the endsat the length; oraftera |
long time £ r 4


Il n’y a piece d'eux. There is ot one among thems. d |
Tourd'unépiece. All of a peece; alfo, of one whole
colour ; of onely one colour allouer. F1


(as well as a peece of \


 #


icqueure. as EEE toa
| Fi uicr:im. À Pike-man, a (orfelete. le ne {cay quelle piece couldre à cecy. ow not |
D dubisc APickax. 1 ees ~ what helpe nos be OEM Ten
, | Picquot: m. 4 rickle,or fmall pricke. not bow to vemedie, fupply,vepaireyit, a
: Picquoté, & Picquoter. See Piquoté, & Piquo- aye? :f. Afbred, bit, marfell, mammocke ; a finall
ae ae ee js |. parcelonpeegs lets. d

_| Piéte. 4 (French) fartbings the fourth part of theDe- | Pied: m. 4 foots.apa »; alfa footing or fetting of the 4

i pier, RE der me Du |: foots alfa, a Ba - ep tt |
f The breaft,bofome ke. un > Je fallor foundationsalfo,the mealitre of a foot;(for: ich
mn, The bulke, or pitch of the bodies (or more pro- AS argimall word.) d fa cr a fe
» Ai + Piead re. Bartrane, or Bertram; Pellitorie.
ee | Re a of Spaine, ; if bb ue
oH: | Pied d'Alouëtre. Larkes purre, Larkes claw, Larkes


x


“2 -
2


(|. Pied d'un cancre. The cler,or claw of a


_ becle,DManker-boed,Kings Confound. © ie.
Pied de biche, The onto th Gafle of a Croffecbem.


TR Con A Orac 2
“Pied


ie


Orla


ginal-from
MP OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


+.
a
.


*« Hennes foot ; alfo,as under Geline.


Starchwort,Cuckoe-pint, Priefls-pint.

Faire,ou le pied de veau. Looke Veau.

Colombier à pied. A round, or fquare Doue-cole
- built of floné er c, from the verie ground.


| Hautle pied, S'en aller haut le ps ‘To fie with tie!


PEE

Pied de chat. The port,or vpfètt of fome bitts, made
like the foot of a Cat. 6

Pieds chauds. I a les pieds chauds. He prattles,
tattles, babbles verie much ; bis tongue neuer flints,ne-
wer leaues,neucr les ; alfo, he is lutié, gamefome, fro-
licke,wanton ; alfo,be is iealous.

Pied de chevre. Looke Chevre.

Pied de colombe, Doues-foot, Pigeons-foot ; a kind of
Pinkneedle.

Pied de coq. Hedze-fhmitorie, Hennes-foot; Gerard
calls baftard Parfeley Hennes-foot,and another calls it


ied de coq. =
Pied de cotta: Crofofoot, Butter-flower, Kings-cob,
Gold-cups,Gold-knops.
Pied decorneille, Cromfiot Plantaine, Harts-borne
Plantaine,Buck-borne,Harts-horne, Sandwoït,bearbe
Iuie,hearbe Eu.
Pieds corniers. Looke Pieds-corniers,
Pied droié d'une cheminée,feneftre,porte,&c.The
iaumb,or iaume of a chimney,erc.
Pied fourchu. Ary clouen-footed beaft; as an Oxe,
Hog,Sbheepe ec ; alfo,the toll thats taken upon the fale
of any of them in Markets or Faires.
Pied de geline. Hedge Fumitorie, yellow Fumitorie,


ied de Griffon. À Griffons foot ; an Jnftrument
wherewith Surgeons draw Moles, or the pecces of a
dead child out of womens wombes.
Ove gris. A clone ,boore binde, (waine ; a countrey


Pied de jars. Goofe-foot wild Orache,
Pied delievre, Hares-foot, Hare-foot Trefoile, bafe
Trefoileyough Clauer,
Pied de Lion. Lions foot, Lions pay, Ladies mantle,
great Sanicle,Padelion.
Pied de Loup. Wolues-claw, Club-moffe.
Pied de milan. The bearbe Kites-foot,
La pied de monnoye. The ground of reckening , and’
Sor the rate,of money ; which was untill the yere 1577,
by folz,but hath beene ener fince by Efcus.
Pieds neufs. Faire pieds neufs. À woman to be deli-
ucred a horfe to caft bis hoofes.
Vn pied de nez, Great fhame, extreame difgrace (or
Que of difgrace.)
ied d’ oifon. Goofe-foot,wild Orache; called alfo
Swines-bane, becaufe it kills, or meazels, the Swine.
which eat of it. 7
Pied d'oye. The fame.
Pied de pigeon. as Pied de Colombe.
Pied de poulain.Fole.foot, Colts-foot ,Hall-foot,Horf-
foot, Bull-foot.
Pieds pouldreux. Looke Pouldreux.
Pied rond. Any whole-hoofed beaft ; as a Horfé,Cam-
mel, Moyle, Alfe,ec; alfo,the toll thats taken upon the
fale of fach beafis. b
Pied de ftat. as Pied-ftal. :
Pied de veau. Calues-foot,wake-Robin,Ramp, Aaron,


Ferd pied. Elle n’a euferapied. Shes untainted,
ndefiled, unbroken vp. :
Froid aux pied Avoir froid aux pieds; &, Avoir.
les pions De bt Froid, ESE
Le grand pie thigh, l oot altogether; |,
ne bp Anatomilts. Fe FE


- Go gle


BE -E


Up legs,or as faff as bis legs can carrie bim.


Sergent à pied. 4 Sergeant, or Officer that arrefts, |


Sc, onely within fome peculiar Towne or Townefhip.
Tiers pied. 2s Trepicd, à ü


Pied pied. 5} utele and little; flep afier Rep; one


foat before another by degrees,
Pied a pied de. Clofe by neere unto,
Les pieds aufeu. i} femble qu'il ait les pieds au


feu. He keepes fuch a figging that one would thinke bis


ee ria in the fire,

“A pied coy. Stilly, fofily; alfo, fettledly, repofedly:

wilh a bac Ah pleas Vian dés au
Apieddegrue. 7x fufpence,on doubtful tearmes;
or not well,or but balfe,fettled,like a (vane that flands
but upon one leg,

‘A picd levé, Refpondre à pied levé. To anfiver ex-
tempore.

Au pied levé, Pourfuivre au pied levé, To fallow

Soot-bot,or hard at the heels,

Prendre au pied levé, To fap vp in words ; to take
verie fhort, or at all adwantages ; to trip a man vna-
wares,on a fieddain, or when be is not prouided;to take
things at the worft.

“Apied de plomb. Slomly,heauily duly,

‘Apied de plomb,& de pompe. The fame ; alfo,ftate-
ly,oaughtily maieftically.

‘A pied cout porté, Looke Porté.

‘A plein pied, Mettre à plein pied, To raxeor lay e-

uen with the ground.

Entre le picd,& le carreau. the midde/l of danger,

in the height of affliétion.

Et au picd. And to bis beeles he betooke bim,and away

he got him; or (more briefely) And away.

Tufques à la femelle du pied feulement. Sleight,

barely ,as little as may be.

Sur ce pied. pon this ground or occafion, bere-

upon. |

Sur le plein pied. Mettre fur le plein pied. To /et-

tle make [are make faft.

Aller de l'un pied furl’ autre. To affeét,or mince it,

in treading.

Aller du pied comme vn chat maigre. Looke Aller.

Cercher cinq pieds en vn mouton. To look for more

then can be bad,.

Clocher fur vn pied. Te fçay bien fur quel pied il

cloche. 7 know fill well his infirmitie, or ares or

know well enough what be ayles, what be lacks,

Donner pied à. To fet on foot, gine a beginning, make

an ouerture,lay a foundationunto, ;

Donner pied ferme à. To/éttle, or gine fire footing


unto, oF

Donner dupied 3.7 Kite, Mara anew jie

Faire felon Ja jambe le pied. To doe things orderly ;

10 keepe, obferne, or bold a iuft proportion.

Faucher l'herbe fous les pieds à. To fipplant, or put

the nofe out of ioynt ; to depriue, or preuent one of a

thing which be expected.

Fendre les pieds. Looke Fendte.

Gaigner au pied. To run bis countrey or to run away.

Iouér à quattre pieds contre. To kicke,wiafe,or let

fÿ at with all foure ; to contend, or play reakes,againft

with all his power.

Marcher de pied en terre. Il ne marche &c, He is fo

prond,or fo glad, that be knowes not the ground be goes
7.


on.

Mettre fous pied. To forgine,and forget.

Ilmefe maine pas L pied.

warie whorefon. a
Ppp y Paffer


He is acraftie, fubtill, |


——
+


'PPFRPORES


-


P I ; E


Paflerle pied fur la gorge à. Looke Paffer. ”
Perdre pied. To loofé ground; or be driven to a be-
bind-band (and thereupon,to bis fhifts.) |
Plancé fur le pied gauche, Setled in an euill poflure,
or on the wrong fide ; badly di(pofed in affection; or in-
Laged in an umull caufe.

Prendre pied à. To regard, beed; build upon, make
reckoning ; take notice of; alfo,to be difcontented or ag-
grieucd,at,

Rencontrer, ou trouver chauffeure à leur pied. To
meet with their matches,or with fuch as will bold them
tacke ; alfo,to light upon fluffe for their purpofé,or that
which will ferue their turne. :
Saulter à deux pieds fur le ventre à. Looke Saul-


ter.
Seicher fur les pieds. To be in great perplexitie,or in
“a pecke of troubles. Looke Seicher. .
Tenirpied à. To keepe play, bold tacke or footing;
© march ranke in ranke,walke cheeke by iowle,witb; al-
fo,te tarrie long or abide by it.
Tenir pied à boale, To follow a bufineffe throughly,to


flick hard,or land clofe,vnto it(from the play at Ninc- _


Pinnes,wherein a man mujt fland where bis bowle doth
lye.)

aan pied en foulier. II leur fit tenir pied en fou-
lier. He curbed them, kept them from raunging, beld
them in,or in awe.

Ilentirera pied ou aile, He will carrie away either
leg or wing, either more or lefe, one part or another, of
i


is Sis

‘Le pied faifit le chef. The floore,or foyle,commaunds
the houfè ; be that is Lord of the one may feize the o-
ther; (or,be thats owner of the one may owne the other;)
Area enim eft pars vel maxima edificij (fay the Ci-
uilians;) The cuftomes of Chalons,Art. 143. expound
this Maxime otberwife ; viz. that a man may build bis
houfe upright as high as be will, and ‘compell a neigh-
bor to withdraw any thing that fball binder bim there-
in,of what continuance foeuer it baue beene, À
‘A l'Advocarle pied en main: Prov. viz. Of Par-


be now and then prefented. ;
"A l’afe marche à pied qui meine fon cheval parla
‘brides Prov. Looke Cheval, 4 =
. ‘A panfe chaude jeans ERP 6 I à
füllsbe is fitter to den entorunne, .
Aflez porche qui bigs kel pied: Prov. He does il
yaough that helps to doe exh. Re
Barbe rafe pied ferrat: Pro, Looke Barbe.
Bouche fretcheypied de Pro. A cor : mouth,and a
dry foot (preferue a'man long time aline.) —
Le beau foulier bleffe fouvent le


|‘ Mieux vautyn pied ue deux efchaffes: Prov. One
| dater tes toms. |
ae


4 Prov. Leoke


x vaut vn pied nud que nul: Pro, Better a na-
then no.foot. APES
vaut glifer du pied que de la langue: Prov.
yates 5 nuids ne doit femer des ef-
Prov. He that i bare-foot ge muf? plant no
ied Ja forme: Pro, Fabio our lf accar-
tefte, au demeurant vi-


- Mieux


tridges ,Phefants,Capons,ec, wherewith they looke to |,


Pie


pe ) in meafuring. {
éd de bois. A certaine meafure vfed at,and about,
Bourdeaux ; Looke Pied de ville.
Pied de Clermont, 15 but eleuen yncbes long.
Pied cube, 15 twelue ordinarie feet, and containes e-
uerie way twelue times 144 ynches.
Pied d’Engoulefne. 15 a fixteenth part longer then
the ordinarie foot. x
© Pied Geometrique. 15 foure hand-breadthes, or the
breadth of fixteene fingers. |
Pied Royal, ou de Roy. The ordinarie twelue-pnch
© foot, a foot according to the Standard; contames in

{quare 144 yncbes,

Bied de terre. Is longer then the ordinarie foot by an
eight part in three quarters; and vfed about Bourde-
aux fr the meafuring of land. La

Pied de ville, Exceeds the ordinarie foot by fiue eight
parts of an ynch; and is vfed at Bourdeaux in the
meafiring of Timber Wain{cot,and other wood,
Le petit pied. A fmall meafure (belike fome ynches
Shorter then the ordinarie foot) which French Mafons,
and Carpenters vfually carry about them. .
Reduiét au petit pie Contratted, firaitned, fiinted ;
whofe plumes are plucked , fortune fcanted, meanes
withdrawne; that cannot doe as be bath done ; that is
not the rie be bath beene. fx
“A pied. By line and leuell, by compaffe and meafure,
proportionably,

. Aupied de. According to; after the rate, proportion,
or scantling of; whence, Au pied de la lettre; accor-
ding to the literall fence,or literally,

A tout pied. Ames à tout pied. Soules of all fixes,
Sbirits for all purpofes. ,
Tour d'un pied. Luen, leuell, plaine, without anyaf-
cent,or defcending.
Pied-bornier : m. 4 tree that fernes to diuide feuerall
Tenements,or fnheritances.
Pied-bot: m, 4 club-foot,or fiub-foot; alfa, one that
p isi gene qu Gen SAUT m
iedefief. A fief difmembred, which a vafall
bis benefit,alien to whem be lift. werenih
Pied-oris: m. 4 clowne,bob,binde,or boore of the coun-


trey.

Pied-leger. as Pied-vifte. 4

Picd-poul: m.Tbe round-rooted;or Onion-rooted Crow-

foot; fomealfo call Purflane fo...

ieds-corniérs : m. Certaine trees marked out for
limits vato the fale of Wood ; or as bounds betweene
Groues of Timber-wood, and Copfes of Vnderwood ; |
alfo, trees that diuide [enerall Tenements,or Jnheri- |
tances. '

Pied-fonnant T'omisgermeliag the ground ringa- ||
gaine with bis proud fleps €


Pied-ftal: m. The pedeftal or footfall of a pillar; that |


— Se oe


whereon it flands an end. j
Pied-terre. An alighting, re Vi onthe ground; |
whence,Cela amispicd-terre à l'homme; bathjet | -


| footon earth for man,

‘Pied-vilte: com. Light-footed, fwift of foot.
À ieee: m, Afnare,ginne,or grime,

|


ujourd'huy en fiege, demain en piege : Prov. To

day ingomptste morrow in prifon. : À

Pienne.Rofe de pienne. Peonie,Pionie,Kings-bloome,
Roft of the Mount. if


Pin mt frei Baroy, |


MDE So
rite to aa AR


Original from


THE OHIO STATEUNIVERSITY


~~ Pierre ematite. The Bloud-fl


PIE


Pierre du Coignet. 4 Monkie-like Image of flone
in our Ladies Church at Paris,where it was at firfi (et
up,to the difgrace of one of that nawme,a great aduer{a-
rie unto the Clergie. :
Herbe de S. Pierre. Sampire,Creflmarin.
Defcouvrir S. Pierre pour couvrir S. Paul. To bor-
row of Peter to pay Paule. - :
“Ala S, Pierre l'hyver s’en va,ouil referre: Prov.
LookeKeferrer. ;
Pierre: f. 4 ftoae; alfo,the ftone,
Pierre Afrodifiace. A certaine ruddie white flone,
Pierre aguifoire,ou,d aguifer. A Whetflonesor Grin-
leflone. .
Pierre d'aigle. An Eagle-flone; a flone found in the
re of an Eagle, and beld eafefull unto women in la-
OUT,
Pierre Alabandique. À certaine bloud-prouoking
flone sof a blacke and purple bue. ï |
Picrre Arabique, A white flone,cleere, and tranfpa-
ee as glaffe, in flead whereof it was in old time
vfed,
Pierre d’Armenie, as Verd d'Azur.
Pierre Affienne, ou d’Aflo. A certaine light, and
Spungious flone (full of yellow freakes, and eafie to be
broken)whereon there giowes a mouldie,or bairic flow-
er, faltifh in taft, and good to preferue things in; and
therefore baue fame imployed it in the imbaulming of
dead bodies, (whofe fuperfluous flefh it foone confumes)
this,befides the diners ufes thereof in Phificke wherein
\ allo the lone it felfe is uftd ; though wub leffe effect
then the flower. ai
Pierre d'azur.The Azure flone, called al/o,Lapis La-
zuli, at
Pierre bife. A certaine hard tone of fandrie colours,
and bright as flint,which it fomewhat refembles.
Pierre calaminaire. Sée Calaminaire, *
Pierre de Canon, 4 Cannon bullet.’ à
Pierre de caftille. Lyme-ftone; called fo in fame parts
oft wa a Bey ee VOT Yow
Pierre à chaux: Lyme-flome. © 8%
Pierres de colique. (ertaine flones found in the bead
te the ffh Maigre, and goodagainft the Collicke
> “gg the vulgar) if they be ginen , but not if they be


ee: The Honnie flone ; or,as Pierre me-


itite.
Pierre d’eau de mer. An Agat s'or,an Opal; (for it
yeelds an Axurelufire.) wat


ones.


ierres d'efcrevifle. Two whitifly flones, found in
the beads of fome old Creniffes ; taken in white Wine,
they flrengthen the beart ; and preuent ; oi difolue,
the Stone; the powder of them fernes alfo'to

be teeth. à Mesgic col oem a ff
Pierres d'efponge. certaine flones found in ordina-
rie Spunges ; being putin liquor they melt intova milkie
3 drunken in Wine,they breake the(Kidney-trons

bili Stone, PUY SECTEURS ’ %
Pierre d’eftanche. The Blond-flone) > ia
Pierre deftoilles. The farrie Carbuncle ; a precions
|  flone wherein be no gold, and Parre-lke-foining
| drops. Se MG Meat... -Tontogai4
re à feu. A Marcafite, or Fire-lone’s alfo,a

: F ar À CHATS dt Ay - 4 Moy
Pierre du fiel de bœuf. 4 yellow lone, (fometimes
as big,and ener as britile,as an egge) taken in drinke.
cakes the Baden is vere ft


it breakes the lone in the | s
…raigne again]} the Jaundice ; being fauft vp impow-


Dig


©” flaunchetb bloud.


© colours) wberewith in old time(for now adaies itis not


© Phifitions and Dyers ; but now out of date,and feldome


© Samien earth;and of a cooling,and refiringent qualitie, |.
icrre fanguine, A Bloud-flone ; Looke Sanguine.
* Picrre fciffile. À yellow fone eafie to be cleft,and full
Of veines, which are fpread oner it like the teeth of a
Pierre Selenite. as Pierre à miroir ; forwhick looke


| afpotted ofb-coloursothers white or besir
… grad agabift héadaich, cothe flinging


Pierre détaille. Free fomey’ | 95 a:
into water kindles;into oyle quénhes.  : neo ©


POI LES


der, it cleeres the fight, dryes up the immmoderate bu
à of the eyes, and eafés thofé that bauc the falling
eu.


‘Pierrefranche, The /oft,and white,Free-ftone,
Pierre à fufil, 4 Flint,
Pierre gälaëtite. The mile lone; a certaine white
» which being pownded, and put into water, be-

comes of a milkie tafle,colour and confifience,
Pierre Geodes. 4 certaine round jime of the colour
ofruflie Fron; containes within it a yellowifh earth ;
and is good again{t inflammations in the priuities,
Pierre à grain. A kind of potted Free-flone,

ierrede gtifon, See Grifon,

ierre Hematide. The Bloud-fone.
Pierre Herculienne. 4 Load-flone,

ierre Hieracite: A kind of Bloud-fione, or flone that


Pierre d'Iris. The Opall; Seeke Iris.

Pierre ludaïque, 4 faire white flone, fifhioned like

ee Akorae, and compaled with many equall-diflant
nes.


Pierre de laict. as Pierre galaGtite,

Pierre déS: Leu, An excellent Frec-flone, little infe.

vior to the white marble of Italie.

Pierrede limagon. See Limaçon,

Pierre matiniere. The Adamant,or Load-flone.

pu marmaride, A-verie bard kind of gray mar-
le .

Pierre Melitite. ‘The fweet fone, or Honnie lone ;

white like the milke lone; and tafting like Honnie,

Pierre Memphites. A fimall lone (oylie,and of diners


found,or not vfed) members tobe cut off were without :
any danger, fo mortified, as the patient felt no paine in
the cutting, | 8 ye a

_ Pierre menvé. A kind of Tyilé-one.’

Pierre de Mine. 4 Markefite. Fu: ti.
Pierre à miroir. Looke Miroirs": - TS
Pierre Naïenne.The whetflone,’ * TIR
‘Pierre noire. Feat, ‘ 1 pions #1
Pierre Phrygienne# A certaine pale-colouved, and


white Preaked Capadocian flone; ved in old time by


or newer found, "=. 78
om plombiete. Lead-oare or Léad-flone,before it
e tryed, en Bs RUE
Pierre deS, Pol. 4 Terre Satienie; or, a hind of
flone found in à certaine Caue in Malta." ©.
Pierre ponce, The Pummis lone s the rugged, aid
Spungic fabflance wherewith Parchment it (moothed,
Pierré Samienne. Awh und :


(Combe.


r.)° a
Picrreferpentine.A medicinable fléne whereof there
be diuers kinds; ome blacke,bard, Sr beanie; others of

Pwith white
lines: any one of them, bangii ig about the necke,is held
icrre {peculaire. as Pierre à miroirs (for which
looke Miroir.) #1 #42 hu -
dirt
ietie Thracienne, A certaine flone, which caft bot


Pppig Pi.


1


Ig


)HIO ‘STATESUNIVERSIERY


x Dune pierre faire mn coups, To. kill two birds


.


Pu, i ft of two find à


Pi  E:


Pierre Thyite.Agrenifh flone which being fleeped in
liquor yeelds a milkie,or white

Pierre de tuffe, À white fand- -flonesor afoft and brit-
tle flone,which us eafily crumbled unto fand

Pierre Snir is ee vf st
La pierre ly is pat ; the
Pa caf ; the b mé a =f mm et and
gone.

C’eft yne pierre re en fon jardin. This thorne is
thrust into bis foot; this bone is thrown for bim to gnaw
on; thefe words doe touch, and tax bim; ave meant or
direéted unto bim,what otber fhew foeuer they carry.
Cette pierre tomboit en fon jardin. This blow a-
lighted on bis fhoulders;this mifchiefe was a preindice,
this inuectiue bad relation;onely unto him.


tentreading, feppin or flamping

Pietonneux : me: £. Treading no and fhort,of-
ten flepping or flamping on the earth. }
etre: com. Ja bad plight, in bare taking, inill array,
beggarlie,wretched, poore,needie; alfo,meane,bomelie,

pends frere c a
etrement,Poorely,barely nee ily rete Wysbegear
dy; alfo, falfely,or badly,

Pietrer. To ftampe on, tread downe, trample-under the |


+ mo f, Barenefe, miferie, wr wretchednee, needi-
Pict: f A Puet.

paul Les vit lee er piles 3 alfo,the latch of adoore, '
Piano Ernie PL Flic
Biase, maire VE


with one flone (fay we.)

Faire de ppictres pain.To make ufe,or take aduantage,

\ of any thing,
Jjette la picrre,& cache le bras. Ha does the mrangs
and yet will not be feene in't; be gines the blow, an
will not be aknowne of’te ;

il Mettre toutes pierres en oeuvre Toimploy,or make
‘ule of euerie thing, (This phrafe is alfo applyable unto
a iret: sat Le cu der Jlonesto grind at ber
Mi


mire Toattempt all comet try all


€ en puis n'eft pas 10: Proys Stones rot
ake bent of a wells they: area fit places


ous.

Pige: f as Pis; or as Pinge:

Pigeaflé: méc:f, Pied, particoloured,

Pigeon: m,4 Pigeon,or Done ; alfoya fop,cokes,noddie,

AMINE?»

Pigeon de palette; &, Pigeon patté; a rongh:foo-
ted Doue,

+ Pigeon room : ¢ QucefsCoofoot, culueryüodent
uer, Blockdoue,Rin,

:. Pigeonde yoni A Abind of Turpentine.
Pied de pigeon. :Dowes foot,Pigeons foot,an bearbe.


Mon Preneur de pigeons. A Conycatcher. |
… Hn'eft pas SAT a pierres refutes Pro. Heis no Le pigeon eftau colombier. The Poccard is in bis :
.» Mafon Me reat 16S. Pris ig Tub,


Cela chañera les pigeons. ~ colombier. See Co-
lombier.

Semer vn grain d’ orge pour attraper vn pigeon. |
To sine, ras a conne alittle in bape fe Es |


. Quiremue les pierres. fes doigts. cafle: Pro. The bu-
fie flone-remouer lames bis fingers.
Pierrerie: f. 4 Quarceyof, ans nee
… jewels,or precious [longs 1, :
Pierrette: f. Alittleflone hos.) nic me ayy id
Pierreux: m. eufe: Sipe? sete: vockie. Pigeon toa wore les De ameres: Pio» Said |
La cholique pierre ufe. 4 { paie. e the Génie pt of one who loathes, or. derides, bis. owne douiiér 0 |
comming of à fone in the ki eflate, |
| La cenfure oi les pigeons!aiffant aller les
ma CucheauE libres: Prov. Looke Cenfure, ania ‘or |
eau.
, Omne un pigeon faire vn vif ef eke
Prov. Fe À igee Sparbawke nere ch tbe;
6 t.to which purpofe we fay) a man cannot
a Cheucrill purfeof a Sowes eare.
Qui veut tenir netrémaïfon, il n’y faut preftre, ny
BE RU ie ont a neat boufe will cm


Pp Dao fA Dillingsor ? Pigeon-like buis
“mani mA Pigeon,a yong Doue.
a eg pi (+ “Legs ba da man 2


Pico ru - potas
Pigeonn ¥ yt ein,
or Rich oner, lie He en
a Pigeon; to Eh li laftinrous kiffes: + :

reine of Pigeons 5 and ee, «


Pi connet: gris 3 little Pigeon. ed

Pigeonnier: m, LS TR

eon-keeper ; one that lookes unto Pigeons ; a
ay


tel
emp

esor Box for precions
aplacemherein flonesare


ones. ENE A
us. See ins #
Pierrot. (A diminutiue

Rep Pete
Pigott. mall


no
ne cn SNS


Vétiodit = noie a winplee subis
efette: f.4 peece,or compartiment the ioi D
abthe players are are banged iu tbe port or vpfett


place wherein wherein Poccards ae to


5 > ‘ dinar fis de dein des


qe


Pig. |


tized by i : : ? Ori gine al, fro
é: Go gle THE OHIO STATE. JNVERSITY


Pignolat: m. The preferued kernell of à Pine-apple ;


PTL


Pignarefle :f. 4 Flaxavoman, 1%

Pignates:f. Pots,or balls of wild-fire, ue 4

Pivnaux de colliers, The ailes, or prickles of a ban-
dogscoller, ie) ;

| Pigne. as Peigne.

| Pigneon. Looke Pignon.

Pignes. The griftlie parts of the eye-lids, |

| Pignet:m.Tbe female Pine-apple salfo,tbe Pitch-tyee,

or wild Pine-tree.


- ov conferue of Pine-kernells.

| Pignolat. Chardon pignolat. The Teaxill, card Tea-

| xull, Fullers Thiflle. b

Pignon :m.A Finiall,Cop,or final Pinacle on the ridge
or top of abonfe; alfo,the nut, or kernel of a Pine-ap-
ple; alfa, as Pagnon, :
Ila pignon fur rue. He is well lined, ov well to line 5
be may be (afely put into the Subfidie. d

Pignoratif: m.iue: f Pignoratine, impledeing, inga-
ging by faretifhip,er with a pane.

Pignoration: f. 4 (training, or difiraining ; a Seifing or
taking for a dillrefe; alfo,an impledging.

| Pignore. 4 difire(fe; or a thing thats taken Dammage

fefant, .

| Pignorer. To diftraine ; to feifeor take, for a diftreffe,
ar ia rejpett of dammage done;alf,10 impledge,

Pienoiier: m. 4 combe-cafe,

Pihourt. The name of a Mafon of Rennes; whence:
Refolu comme Pihourt en fes Heteroclites, Looke


olu, :
Pilaftre. 4 Pilafter,orfinall Piller yalfa,th'in flamation,
or fowe ling of the Vunla, growne thereby all of a big.
neffe. k
Piles, A (footmans) Javelin, or Dart ; about fiue feat
long,and headed with fieele, ©
Pilé. 4 Suppofitarie,
Pile :£..4 ball 10 play with,a hand-ball; ao, pile,beap,
* or fhacke; alfo, the pile, or vnder-yron of the flampe
\ whereia money is amped ; and the pile-fide of a peece
of money, th’oppoftte whereof isa croffe; (wbence,le
© Way croix ny pile;) al/o,the bulkesor bodie ofa great
tree ; alfo, a fiat, or the bowle of a fiuntaine ; alfo, a
great morter; or trough of flone, rc ; alfo, the pile, ov
whole maffe,of weights vfed by Goldfmithes gr,
ile trigone. A triangle peece of yron to be thrown at
“a ring , through which be that paffes itwins the came.
| Metre à Ja pile, To beat, pound, flampe,crufh, real;
_ trounfe, come; ruine, fpoyle, r
ne . y ée: Pelle, aten, bruifed crushed, pour.
ed, flamped, # a
Piléc: f as Pilements4 pealing, ec} alfa, the thing
mes pealed. nt AT he ie
Uement : m.. A pealing, ing, flamping, bray
beating ; a fier eg 4
Piler. 70 peale;pound, flampeite bray,beat, or breake,in
a morter,¢; alfo, to fettle, or finke ; whence, cette


© Pilerl'eauenv mortier, To lo labour; or 19 im.
Ply mat vain |


Piletrig ke Pile.
Pilctte :£ 4 dittle ball; piles bodie of atree; fiat; or
; oer.


morter.
~ Pilettes, Pimples about the nofé,or chin.
Pileur :m. 4 pealer,pounder, flamper,brayer,
Pile oe AP lth. WE tee, aon ji
iliers boutans. : elfes, or pr
pm via ere
| Pilier & Carcan, 15 (not much unlike a Pillotie) an
titi \


pan am.


er 2


| Pillies see pave 4


Pit
Engine,orInftrument of uflice for the punifhment ,e-
difgrace of offendors nes Carcan,

Le Pilier de la republique. The chiefe fay, principal!
ength,onely fupporter,of the Commonwealth. :

Pilier detaverne. 4 common tipler ; or onethat both,

‘Confumes bis owne meanes and is the meanés of otber
mens confumption.in Tauernes.

Tuftice patibulaire à deux piliers. 4 paire of gal-
lowes, or power to bang offendors on galtowes , that

* fland on trio pilers, belong unto a Lord Tufticier; à
trois piliers,to a Lord Chaftclain; 3 4 Piliers, ur.
10a Baron; & à 6 piliers, vaio an Earle; (Sceke
Fourche)

Piliforine. One of the (alle membranes of the eye, be-
Sore whofe glaffie bumor it Lands,

Pillage: m. Pillage bootie, Pole; a prey.

ie m.arde: fFilcbing,pilfering purloyning fheet-

£a ang.

Pillars: m. Pilfrers, filchers, purloyners, benne-flea-
lers ; or, fiich as take (other mens )fheets off hedges,
Quand les pillars ont pillé,& les pillez font pillez,
les pillez auront du pain, & les pillars mouront
de faitn : Prov.

Pillaftre, «s Pilaftre.

Pille :m. Seeke Pile. |
ille :£ A great morter,or trouzh of fione or wood, ec;
See Pile. ‘

Pillé: m. €e:£ Pilled rauaged yanfacked robbed def:
poyled,or bereaned of all,

— les pillars auront pillé , &c. Loôke Pil-
ars.

Pillemaille, 2s Palemaille; or Sich a box as our Lon-

\ don Prentices beg witball before Chrifimas.

Pillement: m. 4 illing rauaging, ranfacking robbing,

. rifling; ovasPillerie,  .

iller. To piliraua gesranfäacke,rifle;rob ; make boot, oy
bauocke of; rauine, or exaët from ; deprine , ov def: |
Doyle of all; alfo,torub,or robat cards, ¥
Ce qu’affemble pille pille, defatfemble tire tirer:
Pro. Looke Aflembler. ‘ re
Pillerie: £ A pilingfkauagin sranfacking, robbing, ri
fing 3 banocke,r 107, {poyle, extortion,
eur: m, Api ger, aranfacker, a rauenoys
exatlor. pags! si


Pillolet: m.Puicke morta, bi Tin, wild Time,
x ne | A Fa " een 1 4


Pillori: m, as Pilori.’


Pillorifement tit. 4 /etting oh tbe Pillanie, © ig
oe seas pe ia Fe eS ES ace 4
illot: m: 47 an 507 RE an aba SS ee

Pillotage : m. 4 pi et svorke, à dri
TM tr om
or flrengthened with, piles um "à


Pillotet. Ta picke,artake op bere ad there; t6 gather
one by one ; alfo,as Piller, SK


Pilloterie :f, 4 picking or taking Sp beré aiid theres a

gathering one by one ; baa Bs + Re
Pilloti. aéPiloti; alfa pi 1 2 Re
Pillule. # Pilule, G PRE
Piloir:m, 4 Peflell. --


Pilon: m. 4 Pefiell ; à pounder,o? i itd i.
cone M BA mec
Pilori:m. 4 Pillorie ; ale Tambrell, I>
Pare eek Sea tit. ne
Pillorier, ro Jètor make f tein tine .
Pilofelle: £ Pilsfétta, mdufe-tare,  * * : i,


oo
pt


PIM


Pilofelle grande. Great Monfe-caréS beares a yel-
“low


omer.
Pilufell petite, Small Moufe-eare, or broad-leaued
Moufe-eare, bath alfo, ayellow flower ; but anotber
kind of this bearbe is called blew Moufe-eare, of the
colour of it flower, and is like ynough to be Fufchius
bis little Moufe-eare.
Pilot: m, .A Pilot,or Steerefinan; bee that diveéts the
courfe of a {hip ; alfo,a little (footmans) Javelin,
Pilotage : m, Pilotifme ; th’ Office, or Art of a Pilot; the
the skillfull guiding, or conduction of a flip ; alfa, as
'_ Pillotage.
Piloter. as Pilloter ; al/o,as Pilotier.
Piloti : m, 4 Commaunder,or Water-fledge ; the infiru-
mént wherewith piles are driuen downe ; alfo, a pi-


ling.

Pilotier.70 play the Pilotzand,to found the depth of wa-
ters with aline, and plummet,

Pilotis. as Piloti. :

Pilotifé : m.ée : f. Piled ; founded on,or underfet with,
piles ; under layed,underpropped, fupported.

Pilotifer. To pile, or flrengthen with piles ; to make a
foundation of piles ; alfo, to fupport, underlay, vnder-

[et ,underprop. .
Pilule:£. A(Phyfcall)pill; alfo,afinall ball, or bowle.
Pilure:f. Apill; whence;
Vnepilure formentine vne, dragme farmentine,
& la iournée d'une geline, eftla meilleure mede-
cine: Prov, Amanchet,cup of wine, and hennes
dayes taske , is the befi Phyficke a ficke man can aske.

Pimard : m.4 Heighaw,or Wood-pecker.

Pimbefche :f. Awilie queane, fubiile wench, cunning
drab; one that can.finely execute ber Mifirefes kna-
uifh denifes. |

Piment: m. Oake of Ferufalem, or Oake of Paradife;
(an bearbe ; ).alfo.a kind of wholefome peare.

Pimente :£ Spurge Oliue Widow waile ; (a fhrub.)

Pimef. To quinch,crawle, moue, flirre.

Pimpant : m.ante: f Spruce,compt, picked, neat, gay,


fine,trimme, ° 1e a Toy
Pimpé:m. ée:f, Sprucified, fnified; curioufly pran-
hed, comptly tricked ss Eat;
impenauder, To pranke,trimme,tricke vp.
impenelle. asPimpinelle,
Pimper. To fprucifie, or finifie it; curioufly to pranke,
trimme,or tricke vp bimfelfee. À
Pimperneau :m, A grig, fcaffling, fpitchcocke, fonfon
Erle. PR TOUR ti
-Pimpernelle: £ Burnet; See Pimpinelle... ; : ©
Pimpinelle :£ Barnet. Wena. Een
Pimpinelle grande, Great, or wild Burnet.


me inelle petite. Garden Burnet.
eee Pimpinele Bsifrage. Barnet Saxifrage,gr eat Sax-
| EE Dimpinelle. Great Pimpinell ; orsgreat Saxe
Pimpompet. 4 kind of Game wherein three bit each
ber tame with one of their fet, sive!
jeneatt : m, as Pimpernean ; 40% a knene, raf


p Kyot-gralfes (a water bearbe,
A4 two kinds,a greatand a


‘Pinart. The fame; alfo, fuch a title as is our fellow, ee;


Pot: Nr


Pinacle: m. 4 Pinacle; a Spire.
Pinard: m, An exceeding fmall peece of money.


‘whence,le pinart rencontrafrere Adam, &c; the fel-.
low met Frier Adam,érc.

Pinafle :f The Pitch-tree; aifo,a Pinnace.

Pinaftre : m. The wildPine tree,

Pinatelle:£ A copper coyne bauing fome finall quanti-
tie of filuer in it,and worth about fiue Liards,

Pinatellier: m. 4 coyner of Pinatelles.

Pinates à feu. See Pignates.

Pinaux. The name of kind of Grapes.

Pince:f. 4 croe, great barre, or leauer of yron; alfo,a

+ Pincer; alfo,a Pinke ; alfo, the view, or footing of a
Deere; and (more generally) the tip, or edge of the
bottome of a beafis beofé; that which in er ff
touches the ground,

Pincé : m,ée: f. Pinched nipped or twitched.

Pinceau :m. 4 Penfill; alfoja whitelimers Brufft.
Pinceau de mer, 4 fhellie reed,or thing like-a reed,
which at tb’one end ftickes unto rocks, at th’other puts
ont, fometimes, a fifbie fubflance,(whev of it is fill) and
then refembles a Penfill.

Pince-maille. Seeke Pinfe-maille,

Pincement: m. A pinching nipping,twitching.

Pincer.To pinch,nip,twitch(with the fingers crc.)
Pinceér fans rire. Looke Rire.

Pincerfi, & Pincervin :m. The Linden tree: €Pro-
vengail, ‘

Pinces:f. 4 paire of Pincers ; alfo,Pinke(flowers.)

Pinceter. To pinch thicke ; to nip, or twitch often ; alfo,
Lo tonch a Lute,érc,nimbly ; alfo, to pull off’ baives, or
moats with {mall Pincers.

Pinche:f. as Pine(in the later fence.)

Pinchons. ia ftead of Piochons: €Rab.

Pinçotter. To pinch,or nip,often,

Pindarifer. To affect in peech ; or to (peak nicely fpruce-
ly,curioufly; alfè,to (peake (hrilly,or vebemently as one
thats loath bis Auditorie fhoutd loofè a word by


bim, 4
Pic as Quille; A Kayle; alfo, a pricke, member,
Le


able,
Pineau: m, The feed,or kernel ofa Grape; alfo,akind
of white, and longifh grape, whereof;
_ Vin pineau. Excelent flrong wine.
Pinet:m. Hogs Fennell, fore Fennell , Sulpburewort,
= Brimflenwort, Horefirong;or Horefirange.

Pinette : £.4 kind of Cyder made of water mingled with
tbe nee of crabs, or wild apples; alfo, a groue, or
wood of Pine-apples. :
Pineux: m.eufe: £.0f or belonging to,aljo, full of, Pine.

trees.
Pinge:f, A pillocke,member,bable,dre.
Pingres. aux p. A(womanifh)play with Ivorie balls,
Pinguereaux. 4 kind of fweet Cherries.
Pinhadar: m. 43. litle wild Pine. «
Pinier : m. The Rofen tree ; or any other, whofe fruit re-
… fembles a Pine-applesas tbe great Cedar ,Cypreffe,éc.
Piniolat. 2s Pignola |


Pinne :f The (el fh called a Neral feof be


a fifh; alfosthe broad, and grifilie part of the eare ; al-
So,asPinge. |
Pinne dunez. The grifile of the nofé; the bone wher-
by the np are diuided. Là ET
Gest 22 4 ge, fe mis
innoph Ÿ i ittle Sea-fifl itt
Pinnother . 4 little Shell-fifh y of the ind of
_ Shrimpes, LV nse ee Din


Pinnule :f, 4 Gittlefinneofafih : ~
Pros The fights belonging to th Albidada of an
Sfirolabe. | x TT

Pinocque. 4 greene Indian fuit of the bignefe of à

_ Cherrie. ;

Pinon, The pinnion of a clocke, dc; the nut in whofe
notches the teeth of the wheeles doe run; Looke Pag-
non, 5

Pinot: m. The name of a red-flocked, and round-lea-
ued Vine,

Pinfade:£. A pinching,or nipping ; al/o,extortion,extre-
mitie,bard o7 fore dealing, :

_Pinfe:£ Looke Pince.

Pinfegreneut d'Amadis. À Phrafemonger, bruce dif.
courftr,affecling fpeaker. :

Pinfe-maille:com. A pinch-penie, fèrape-good, nig-

__ gard mifer,penie-futber. ‘

Pinfer. as Pincer.

Pinfes: € A paire of Pincers.’

Pinfettes: £ Nippers, little Pincers, |

Pinloir:m, A certaine Engine (made of yron-beaded

| _ flakes, pwherewith fifh is caught,

| Pin{on : m. A Spinke,chaffinch,or Sheldaple.

| Pinfon d'Ardenne, 4 Brambling,

Pinfon montain, The fame,
Pinfon royal. 42 afh-coloured , and great-beaded
+ birdcaked otherwife, Grosbec.

Pinte: € 4 pinte ; the French, or Parifien pinte; fome~
whatlefe then a fixt part [hort of our Quart; (for in
weight it is about 27 ounces, our Quart 32 ; ) and the
4 part ofa Muid; alfoany final wine. potsor veffell
of pewter. 2 -

, La pinte de S. Dennis, & de plufiewrs autres lieux
à l'éntour de Paris, Is balfé as big againe as 1b'ordi=
narie one of Paris. } Bie Fe
Appetiffement de la courte pinte, as Appctific-
fe de mefure.Looke Mefure,

Pinteler. To tipple,or plie the pot.

Pintelette : £ 4 fall pinte.
inteur: m, A tippler, pot-companien, fPiggot-fucker.

| Pintier: m. 4 Pewterer. t

Pinton. as Pinteur. '

Pinules: £:7wofmall tablets in tb’ Alhidada ofan Afivo-
labe,bauing in them two little bales, through which the

+ height of the Sunne, ris taken; [ome call them, the
fights of tl’ Albidada. ;
i sf. A little Pickax,or French Infirument of buf:
tenets à not much unlike a Pickax ; (and fometimes)
alfayas Piot. $ ‘

Piocher. To dig,or breake up the earth with a Pioche.

Piocheur: m.A digcer,or breaker vp of the earth with

> 4Pioche; and (more generally) any fuch labouring

man, ~
Pioghon :m, A little Pioche, q
iolé:m.ée: £. Spotted,or eckled; whence ; k
épiolé. Gaudiew on alfo, dinerfified, orfet
xi


;


_ ont with fundrie colour |
Piole : 3 The puling, or cheeping of Sparrowes,
or young birds, 5


H
|
1


Pi oles: Ta pule cheepesor chirpe,like a Sparrow or yong


Piolet de cle Pacing jpe

Pioleur :m, A puler,cheeper,chirper. >

Pion : m, A certaine greats vound,and Bulbus.rooted
flower of one whale colour (though there be of them

| white Re à ones ; ve jus Bulfnch;

|. 44/04 you dling, 28,07 L 5. a

| brefs tree; alfa, @ pawne at Chefs, ‘fo, an


H
|


Go gle


an exceffiue drinking; whence ; ;
Malde pion, The drunken dife
ing.


comes by exceffiue drink,
lonnier sm. A Pioner,


Pioner-like,


Piorioler. To diner fifie with variable colours,
Piot:m, Drinkesliquor,nippitatie ; (clowm


hy.)


Pioter. as Pioler; 449, t0:11pple.
Pioupiou. Peepe peepe ; thevoyce of chichins.


Pipe:£ À birdecall, or little woo
Fowlers dos counterfeit the vdy
would take ; alfo,the veffell, or me


ces


afe; or a difeafe that


3 MCE : f. Made by,or belonging toa Pioner;


dden pipe, wherewith
of the birds they
afure called a Pipe


(ufed as well for corneas for wine 34l/0,a kind of diz.


xinef[e,or digzie turning difeafe , ¢


drunkennefe.


oufen germaine ta


Pipé: m.ée : f. Deceined,confened, ouerraught, culled,


beguiled,


Cartes pipées; &, Dez pipez. Falfe cards,or dice,
+ 1PEAU+ M. An vaten pipe; a bird-call.
Pipée : f. The pecping,or chirping of fmalt birds counters


feited bya Bird-catcher salfo,
countenance, diffembling


ther frefh
Prife des oifeaux à la
4 thicke bufh,or tree, ‘tn


4 counterfeit fhem, fufe


apparance, of Sifficiencie,


¢530r growes coole.


Ce
Ea re dufor.Th'edge of th’ewening when the wea-


ipée. Is thus : à Fowler bid in


uing an Owle faft pearche


a bird,and pinching a line
others hearing, flie thither


and fà beconie intangled.
Ii fait bonne pipée.He would faine feeme wife,or bo.


nell though be be not.


uke full of lime-twigs and ha-


‘d necré tobim , cries like
one, makes her cries which
torefcne her from th’ Owle,


Piper. To whifileor chirpe,like a binds ‘alo, to chien,


deceine; cheat, gull, overrcach, begu


: falfe cards, or dice.)


Piperelle: f, Gith, Nigella,


Rome,


ile (eSpecially, by
Bifhopswort, Coriander. of


Piperic:f A coufeningdeceinine,


f A beguiling, onerreach.
ing; a gulling,or cheating.


Pipet : m. A fall pipe, Fowlers pipe or bird-call Ë
Pipette :f The listle knot,or tufison the top of a cap,
Pipeur: m. A whiftler, chi

coufener cheater ,decemer,


that vfeth falfe cards,or dice,
Pipeufement:Deceitfilly,g


utrreaching, cheating,


P
birds,
Pippe. a Pipe. - -


3 bird. catcher ; alfa, a.’ t


Pippeau :m. 4 bird-call, = À


Pipper. as


| Piquant :m.antetf Pricking : pierci
& rm 4 3 purring; A st


Pi uardant. The name 0 Gr ethar els adie LÀ
de levered: “ f 3 12 "a 3 supe 4


Does A fpeckled Gilloflower :


Que: f. AP ies alfo,a Pikeman à


quarrell,grudge; Looke Picque,


THE OHIO:


fina


Sea is
SIALTE


5?


to KERTRAT ET
Pipion. 4 Spanifh coyne worth about 18 diftetl,
pS ln, cir igo fat |


…


| Pippeur,& Pippis. Looke Pipeur,& Pipis
Piquant:m, 7he point of a Dart


prickle,or fharpe top of fome ki des
a — ete ts of flem-end of a fh


tring |
mca |


c; alfe,


care, € the |
of léanes, as Of the }
pe |


guilefilly,couferiingly,


Pipeux :m.eufe:f Drceifull, guite I, cos


SANs


Te
#4
\


eryand pecially one. |


Gt


sr


Langued, : ae


from


INTVE


EX 7
RSITY


ry


Vo, a pikesdebate,|
3390p: -


Pi. ||


2. AIT


P42, Q: LR


Piramidal : m.ale:f, Piramidal! ; broad beneatb and
Sharpening upwards, — ‘ :

Piramide :f. 4 Piramides ; any peece of building made
broad, and fquare below , and the higher it goes the
fmaller growing. .
Piramide d'un trepane. The little point, or prickle,
appearing, or peering out at th'end, or bead of a Tre-
pane.

Pirate :m. 4 Pirat,Rouer, Sea-robber.

Piraterie: f. Piracie,souing, fea-robbing,

Piratique: com. Piraticall, Pirat-iike ; of, or beleng-
ing 10, a Prrat.

Piraufte. 4 Fire-flie; or a werme bred, and liuing in
the fire, from which if it bee but alitile 100 fre, it
dieth prefently,

Pire :com. worfe, badder, lewder, naughtier; meaner,
unwor thier ; of finaller value,cf leffe account ; (fome..
times)alfo,bad ; whence ; Vrayement,voila que n’eft
= pire. Truely there’s no great fault 10 be found with
that,

Piretre: m, Hearbe Bartram, baflard Pellitorie, right
PeHitorie of Spaine. :

Pirevollet :m. 4 whirligig. a

Pirole: f. wild Beets ; or, b'hearbe Pirola.

Piromantie :f. Divination by fire : &Rab.

Pirope. as Pyrope.

Pirot: m. The Pot,or Hag-fifh; a kind of long fre.


fy

Pirou :m. 4 greene Goofe: Poitevin.

Piroüette: £.AWhirligig;alfo,a whirling aboutya quick
turne often redoubled ; and bence,a dauncers turning
on the toe.

i To whirle, twirle, trill, turne fwifily a-

out.

Piroüetteux :m. eufe : f whirling, twirling, trilling,
turning fwiftly about.

© Pis: m. The breaft, bofome, or flomacke of a man; the
dug, or vdder of a Cow, Yew, fhe Goat,e>c; the bris-
het of an Oxe,or Beefe; the nauell of a dog.

Pis. (Adverb.) worfe; alfo,worft; whence ;


Pique feiche. Am unarmed Pikeman.
Branfler la pique. To frig.
Jouër à pique en cul. See Cul, °
Vay passé par leurs piques. 1 baue beene throughly
courfed,or canualfed by them; Ibaue felt their uimoft
efforts ; 1haue efcaped them faire. t
Piqué:m.ée:£ Pricked ; flung, nettled ; pierced,or
thruft into; nipped,pinched,vexed ; ridden,or fpurved;
alfo,qnilted,or fet thick with oylet- boles;al(o,wrought,
or broken up, with a pickax ; alfo,faftened, plamed, or
driuen into the ground.
Pique-boeuf: m. (4 nickname for) aclowne, plougb-
churle,bind. à

Piquement :m. A pricking ; flicking piercing,or thruf=
ting into; a flinging,or nettling; a [pwrring ; mpping,
pinching ; vexing ; alfo,a quilting. à

Piquenaire : m. 4 Pikeman. (v.m.)

Pique papier: m. A Scribe, Scriuener, meane Clerke,

bafe Peitifogger. '

Pique-poule. The name of a certaine grape.

Piquer. To pricke,pierce,or shruft into; alfo,to nettle,or
ne ; al/o, to (purre; alfo,to ride a borfe ,alfo, to mip,
cut quip,taunt,gird;vexe,vrge, exafberate with per

= or biting words ; alfo,te quilt ; and thence alfo, to fiif-
fen a coller exc; alfo,te worke,dig.or breake vp, with
a pickax ; al(o,to faften,plant,or fet,into tbe ground,
Sc piquer. To be titchie, foone o ‘ended, quickly mo-
ued ;(alfo, to prouoke, or exite bimfélfe onto the doing
of a thing ; Sepiquer
Piquer lavoine. To ride abor{e verie hard,to make
him earne bis prouender. 1 |
Piquer les chiens. To gallop afier (and in galloping,

10 put on)the hounds.

Le poiffon sp Begins to baue a tacke, or ill taf;
begins to be fale. ,

Inc fent point quand on luy pique la chair. 4
phrafe appliable botbto a laxer ; andto a cowardlie,
thicke-skinned,or fenceleffe, loxell.

Qui fe fait piquer à tous les pas. That muft be fpur-
ved encrie hee (appliable, from a dull iade, unto any


dullard,) mg Au Fe aller, ua best how it will be, let the
Piqueron: m. A prickle ; fall pricke, fing, pure wort come to the wor,
pr alfo, a publicke exaélor ; Eph or plumer of Pifay : m. as Pizé.’


Pifcantine:f. 4 kind of finall, or well-watered wine,

Pifcine: f. 4 fifh-pond; alfo, a poole so water borfes, or
heepe Duckes,c>c,in.

Piffafphalte : m. Piffa{pbaltum ; or Pitch mingled with
Bitumen, either by accident, or Art ; The former is
much the better, & comes from Apolloniain Epirus,


the Commonwealth; alfo,as Picqueron. ©
Pique-feiche. Looke under Pique.
Piquet. as Picquet.
Piqueton : 4 prickle,as of a tborne ere.
Piquette :£ 4 fower drinke,or verinyce, made of wild
apples (by the Picards) or of plummes (by the Nor-


mands.) where it firft comes by that mixture. | 1
Piqueu : m. 4 Des > Thifile, tearmedfo about Blois. Piffat : m. Piffe,vrine,lant, flale,
Piqueur :m. À pricker ; aljo, aRider ; and (in bunting) | Pi auliét. A fife-ball , puckfiffe, pufifie, or ball
onetbat onborfébacke purfues the dogs in their full | _ fifte.
fred, Piflé. Piffed, flaled. H
Piqueure :f. A pricking, exc ; as Piquement; 4/6, a Ila pissé en beaucoup de neiges, He hath lived mas
pth ke, fling ; prach,cut,quip. | myawinter, ae a
| Piquier : m. 4 Pikeman. : | Piffe-chaude:f 4 burnt P.alfo, the Venerian flux; oad
Pique ce :f. Loske Picoté, the Gonorrbean,or contagions running.

} nent :m, À frequent pricking,or flinging;an | Piffement:m. 4 piffing. |
piercing ; alfo,a Lane opie 4 de ss ez. The baflards of villaines, or q

|: pri e often: to ues

| peckle, 4 | ea ee Piffenliét: m. Dandelion, Prief!s crowne,Monks bead,

piquoteure :£ A pricke, fling; pot, freckle, fpeckle; Swines fnowt,

 alfos Piquotement. 11 | Differ. To piffe,to flale to make water,

L | Piquotere era de Judas, Red pimples rifing es pifle, The milke fpinnes out of ber breafls,or

in ee, Ta RE LL ic: > = |
Piquotte: Small wine  ferwants wine; or,asPi- |. Lesbonnes gens, pour cela,ne pifferont pas plu

AE ee ; ie roide, mi der bes mach; ar foa beens hi, ;


Digitizec Go gle , LHESOHIO TARE NIVE RS


&
L


=, rs NE DRE
ea j Te mae
» are mes ry wary ee i Rnd ee


PIV


or a pinne of mettall, fharpe at tb'one end to enter into
Wood erc.em bauing a round éye at th’ other for acur-
taine-rod,crc,to enter into; and bence ; ÿ
Piton à vis. 4 skrue with an eye ; or fuch a pinne
Pos Skruing at the ead where th’ordinarie Piton is


the better for it, : |
iffeux: meule: £ Pifing much, and often; 41/5, full
of piffe; whence; ~ se
Langepifleule. 4 childs piffe-clowt. ore
Orangepiffeufe. 4n Orange full of liquor, or which
© yeeldeth lore of liquor,
Pifloir : m. A pifing place.
Piflolaire : m. The fheath,or skinne of a borfes yard,
Piffon: m. 4 Pipkin.
Pifloter. To piffe often. :
Piflotiere : f. The pifing toole; or the veceptacle of piffes
alfo,a piffing place ; alfo, the running of a bucking tub.
iftaces: € Piflachoes, fiflicke nuts.
Piftacher :m. The Piftacho tree, the Fifickenut-tree,
Piftaches. as Piftaces.
Piftaulendrier :m, 4 mans yard,
Pifte: € The flrayne,or view of a Deere ; the print of any
foot. P
Pifté : méc:f. eu ne Ma brayed.
Pifteau: m. 4 Peftell.
Pitter. To bray, pound,or fampe, ;
Piftolade :f. The fhot of'a Piftoll; the blow giuen by a
aifcharged Piftoll,
Piftolandier.« Piftaulendrier. -
Piftole :£ A Piffoll; a great ( borfémans) Dag.
Piftole de Sancerre. A Sling,
Piftolet: m. 4 Piftolet ; a Dag,ar little Pifloll; alfo,tde
| . golden coyne tearmed a Piftolet.
Piftolier im. 4 Piftoleere ; a borfeman that ferues with
aPifiol. ..
Piftolochie:f. A kind of{the bearbe)long Birthwort.
| Pifton :m. À Pefiell,or pounding flicke, :
Canon àpifton. A certaine Bit which gines the
tongue liber tie without-a Port, Fe
Piftrine: f. 4 Bakeboufe,or boufe wherein, before th'in-
uention of Mills the Romanes caufed therr flanes, and
vnrulie feruants,to bray all their corne in morters,
Pit: m. as Pis : Breton, |
Pitance: f Meat, food; acates; viltuall of all forts
(bread and drinke excepted.) : |
| Pitancier: m.The SManciple,or diftributor of viélualls,
‘| ina Monafierie.
| Pitancier:m.ere:f, Seruing for a Pittance ; of a Pit-
tance. ats
Pitaulder. 7 bebane bimfelf rudely,to play ibe clowne.
Pitaulderie : f Rudeneffe, clowaifhneffe, vnmannerli-
Ae ffe,inciuilitie chur li{hne(fe,


‘


Pitroy:m, Durt,mud mire,

Pittasse, whence ; elle faifoit chere pit. Her bebaniour
was full of difcontentment 3 Or, fhe chawed ber Pittle

in flead of falling to her vittle.
ittouér : m, A Bittor(corruptly.)

Pituitaire : com, Flegmaticke: fniseLie, fhottie ; flae
uering.

Glande pituitaire. See Glande.

Pituite: f. Fleame, fninell, .

Pituiteux : meufe: £ Full of flame ÿfninell flanering,

not,

Pityocampe. A venomous worme that breeds in Pine
trees,

Pive:f, The fuit of the Pine,or Pitch tree,

Piverd: m.°4 Woodpecker Hickmay,Greenpeake. ,
iugarreau:m, A great,whiti{h,and fwectifh Cherrie,
whofe bard pulpe cleanes bard unto the fone,

Piuler. Te pule, or cheepe like a little chicken.

Pivocfne. 2s Pivoine.

Pivoinc:f Peonie, Pionie, Kings Bloome, Rofe of the
mount; alfo, a little blacke-headed, and blacke-taild
bird called a Gnat-fnapper ; alfo,a Bullfinch,or Nowp,
Pivoine femelle. The female Peonie, whereof there
be diners kinds;as the double,ved and white,Peonies;
the maiden ot vir gine Peonie ; and others,

Pivoine mafle. Male Peonie.

Pivot: m. The Piwot,or(as fome callit) the Tampin of a

Sale,o great dodre : (apeece of ron, ec, made, for


and fharpe at th'otber,voberby it enters into the Crap-
paudine; and fèrues as well to beare up the gate (in
whofe bottome Wis placed) as to facilitate the motion
thereof. 1t is alfo made, fometimes twofold in the up.
Per partyand nailed unto both fides of the Chardon.
nereau; and fometimes like a Spindle, fharpe at both
ends, tb'üpper flicking in the [aid Chardonnereau 5)
Hence alfo,the principall Stay, Support, or Piller ofa
Kingdome State, Citie,Houfe,or Familie; alfo,a kind
of Une = ;
bivome vnhuis, To hang a doore on Pivots. >
izé. whence; Murailles de pizé, Earthen walls,


itaule: m. 4 clowne, boore, fivaine, lob, carle, churle, | Placard. See Plaquard, 3 |

…_clufler Placardé : m. éc:f Faflenedor pafled,as a Siquis,e>c, |
Pite:f The balfe of a Maille,a(Frencb) farthing jalfo, a on a pop. me, 1 RL
|| Moathor Mite, eater. Placart. a Plaquard, ae


| Pitel :m. The panne of a clofe-floole.

| Piteux: m.cufe: f, Pisifill, mercifull, charitable, ten
‘der, gentle, kind ,alfo, wretched, miferable, di "4

afflicted, in re cafe,ill faking, wofüll eflate.

ous nous Ja baillez bien piteufe. You make vs a

Asi homelie relation, you tell vs but à forie tale,’ LT
Vi] tant d ec) fait yne mortelle playe: Prov, |


Placcar. as Plaquarde #22 mt
Huis qui fe ferment’ doubles placcars. Dos
which are fbut with double locks, =

\ Faces dt pleee anne, eats 2 (pace, a fead ; alfo,

an Office, , Dignitie, Charge; alfe, a plaine
and unhoufed,evound, fayle,ov hore; and bence,a fpa-
cious plaine,or plot of ground in the middeft of: 4 town,
and vfed as a Market fead, or as-an Exthang


Bs ek
de


sur


gi 93 ange for

Fone fair afamille teigneufe: Pro, | Marchants ; or as an Auditorie,. for the deciding of

|. 4 pitiful bi | Makes a pitifall boufhold; The controucr fies(but then there is a Tribunal,or fame open
[ike is fee ||, bouge upon its) alfoa faire large Court beferen church,


__ Merepiteufe fait fa fille roigneufe
Pitié:f. Pitie, ruth scompalfion,com
kindne (fe, or tenderneffe o


“or houfe ; alfo,a Cafile, Fort, Fortreffe,or Hold; alfo,a
Shot,or dapple,on a borfe, es

., Place mage, Looke Mage. Re.

+, Place marchande. A Market place, or place ofordi-
marie bargaining ; hence,any free, or i

. wherat men may meet or deale,on euen tearmes. -


:T


* the moft part tke a Top,round c> broad at th'one end, |


iferent place


ee


A ae es
4


i


yay ee


PEL À


. PUR a oe


Pi FA


Place Maubert, The Market-flead,and place of exe-

. cutton, for the V'aiuerfitie of Paris; Looke Maubert.
Laplace des niais äla table, Th'upper end; (among
the auncient Romanes the befl man ener fate in the
middefl; and at this day th'Italians bold the middle
place moft houourable.)
Pain de la place. Browne bread,houfhold bread,
Bien de fa place part qui fon ami y laiffe : Pro, He
leaues a place well that leaues a friend init.
Ceux qui meurent Jaiffent leur place à ceux qui
demeurent : Prov, They that die poffe(fors leaue all to
their fuccefors,

Placé: m.ée :f. Placed, feated, lodged, fettled, fixed,
planted,

Placer. To place ; to feat, lodge,plant, fettle, appoint a
roome unto.


Placet :m. 4 low floole ; alfo, a fort Petition,or Ticket | \


of requelt , without infcription, and beginning with
the(e words, Plaife à tel,&c ; (Therein differing from
a Requefte, which is much longer, and beginnes thus,
Supplie (naming the Petitioner, whieh the Placet
doth net) and fpecifies in aninfeription,the mame, and
title of bim it is prefented unto.)

Placide: com, Calme, gentle, quiet, mild, peaceable,
tratlable.

Placidement. Gently, quietly, mildly tratlably.

Placitre. 4 faire large (ourt before a Church, or (great)


boufe.
Placque :f, A flat Lingot, or barre of mettall; alfo, as
atart, he
core de marbre, A flat paning peece of Mar-
Lf


le.

Placque de plomb. see Plaque,

Placqué : m.ée: f. Pargetted,or rough-caft ; alfo, clap-
ped, flat,or prete on; laied flat upon; whence ;
Lettres à feel placqué.whofé féale bangs not by a la-
bell, but is applied on the paper owparchment it felfe,


| Placquer. as Plaquer.


Plafagourde :f. 4 made word, of [ome affinitie with
our Gixie,Callet,Punke,drc. ag
Plage: f, A flat and plaine fhore, or firand, by the fèa-
fides alfo, a large arme of the fea without eter
an open, and {hallow Road; any flat or fhallow, in or
neere tbe fea ; alfo,a Climate, Land, Region, Coaft, or.
of the world.


‘ Plagiatre rm. One that  fleales or takes free people ont of
oi


them. :
| Plagie: & Stealth,or fubornation of mens cBildren,and |


} ”


countrey,& fells them in another for flaues; a flea-

ler, or fuborner of mens children, or feruants, for the

fame, or the like, purpofe; (in which fence wetearme

_ him a Slockfler ; ) aljo,a booke-flealer,or booke-thee fe ;
one that fathers otber mens workes upon bimfelfe.

Plagiaire. Capitaine pl. That preffes, carries, of fleales

away mens children, or ferwants, with a purpofe to fell


feruants with an intent to fell them.


| Plaid. as Pleét,


Plaid :m, Suit, controuerfie, altercation, debate, vari-
__ance,brabbling difference, contention,in law ; alfo,a


aid de l'efpée. High FurifdiGiion, power or autho- | ued,at, . |
 sitie to panifh by the ford, Bip be aa Plaindre fon argent,le n'y plainds point mon ar-
* gent. Ithinke my money wel Eifewed thereon,
Magi ex. | Plaindrefa defpenfe. To pare bis purse.
inf an un- Plaindre fes pas. To bea niggard of bu fleps.
i ae oe of |  Plaindrefapeine. Tofaue labour, not 16 ewer-wor ke
heroanine.) | bimfelfé; 07,10 repine at the paines be takes. — |


d
LH oho, À Cou ou, e |


Simples plaids,ou querelles. Looke Simple.
De petite chofe peu de plaid: Prov, 4 fleight caufe
needeth but final arguing,
En cent livres de plaid n'y pas vne maille d'a-
mour: Prov, The more law the lefeloue.

Plaidafferie:f. wrangling, pettifogging ; litigious, or
paultrie pleading.

Plaidé :m.ée : f Pleaded argued, opened ; alfo,implea-
ded before a Fudge.

Plaide-page, as Gage-plege.

Plaider. 70 plead,argue,or open,a caufe before a Fudge;
alfo,to fue,contend,goe to law,fer,or againft.
Jamais ne gaigne, qui plaide à fon Seigneur: Pro.
He neuer thriues, who’ gainfl bis Maifler ftriues.

Plaidereau : m. A litigious, or contentious brangler ; a
continual Suitor ; one that will goe to Law fir enerie
ed ; ome that is neuer out of Law.

Plaiderefque : com. Lawyer-like.

Plaiderie: f. Pleading, argwing,prattifes alfo, Suit in


. Law,

Plaideur: m, 4 Langer, ArguerPleader ; alfo,as Plai-
dereau ; whence; ;
“Aplaideur plaideur & demi: Prov, Said of a
knaue well matcht with a worfe then bimfelfe.
Homme plaideur menteur: Prov. 4 Pleader, a


er Cty v

Plaidoier. as Plaidoyé,

Plaidoirie : £, Aplea,an argument ; the pleading, or o-
pening of a caufe,


‘| Plaidoyable : com, Pleadable,arguable.


Tours plaidoyables, Court-dayes,Hall-dayes.

Plaïdoyé : m, 4 plea,pleading, argument.

Plaidoyé de Quarefine prenant.A bawdie,laftixi-
044, 01 wanton argument.

Plaidoyer: m, as Plaidoyé,

Plaidoyer. To fue,turne Client,goe to Law,

II plaidoye bien quiplaidoye fans partie: Prov.
He pleads’ full well that pleads againft none (or bath
none to plead againft) but bimfelfe.

Plaidoycur: m. 4 Pleader ; à Lawyer ; alfo,a Suitor,
Efchars plaidoyeur eft hardi perdeur : Prov. The
paring Liens’ willing 10 be fiild,

Plaic. Looke Playe.

Plaignant :m.ante: f. Plaining, bemoaning, complai-

“_ ing of; accufing blaming, finding fault,with,

Plain: m. 4 plaine; a plaine peece of ground, without
boufè,or tree upon it. :


‘Le Bois acquiert le plain. The Lord of a forreft may |


take in a neighbour-gronnd, which hath lyenvntilled,
or onufed by the pace of 30,0r 20yeares, if it be not di.
uided from the forrefi by ditches, meres, bounds, or
other markes. :
Plain:m.aine:f. Plaine, flat, euen, fmootb, without
wrinkles without rubs ; alfoyas Plaint.
De plan Prt simmediateyout of band vithon
any finther proceeding in Law, 3
_ Ine fe core p:
©" Chemi


£ pas qui va plain chemin : Prov. Looke
1
Partie To plaine, bewaile, bemosne, or make moane
5


Ronan find ee with, come
i


for; to
 plaine of; to grudge, repine, or find bimfelfe aggrie-


Ul


PLA


ll fe plaind de faine tefte. Hevcomplaines wwisbolh
cause or he is troubled with 100 much eafe.
-: ‘Aflez demande qui fe plaind Prov. Yaaugh de-
| 2 amannds he who of want complainess À @n > «
» Chafcune vicille fon duieil plaind + Pro, Each bel
dame of het pritate ericfe complaines,»
| : Femme fe plaind,femme fe déult, femme eft ais
bi er" uand elle veun: Prov. Looke Femme, :
eleit plein quifeplaind : Prov. ‘Some bow fil fi-
enc? they be ave neuer contented, :
Tel fe plaind qui n'a point de mal : Prov, Sime
complaine that féele no paine; e fome, though bo
feele no hurt, unquict are.
Plaine :f. A plaine ; a fpacions peece. of (lenelt) groan,
\ without either trée,or boufe,- upon ite > ><
fo se f. Thefuperficies ; the plaine, tue, oft
ground of. f
Plaine :m.te sf Plained,bemailed bemoaned empl
ned of, found fault wit th, srepined at,
Plainte :m, Aplaintife,complainantsaccufer,


ic ]


Plainte :£ A pain comglant;moane, lamentation ce


: cafation,expo/fulation,
Plaintif: m. 4 plaimife, complainant -appeacher, ac-
cufer.
 Plaintif: m. iue:f Lamenting, moa nefill,dolefill or
romfull,
| Plaire. To pleafe,delight; fatisfie,content ; like, allow sor
thinke well,of, fecme good unto,

‘A Dieu ne plaife, que. God forbid,that,
S'ilplaift à Dieu. If God will, if God fay amen.
Ils a ont d'ün pleuft à are ng not all they
would baue,they haue not their full defire

+ Marchandife quiplaifteftà heise vendué: Prov.
_Ware that doth pleafe , or that’s in requelt, is alreadie
balfe fold.
Plaifamment. Pleafanth, merrily portfidlly, if,
delightfèmely.
Plaifance : f. Mirth , port, pleafiure, delight; game, iol.
litie, blitheneffe, filliuitie,reiopéing.
Plaifant: m. ante: f, Pleafant, merrie, iocond, blithe,
ioyfitll, buxome , delightfull , gamefome, recreatine,
per us; alfo, ieafling , bourdine » {coffing , flow:


Piaifane homme. (u/ed verie ofien Ironically, or in
‘enill part) A goodlie fellow fure.

Plaife ifanter. To gibe, ieajt, flowt, (coffe, quip merrily, be
pleafant with; to play the Feafter,

Plaifanterie: f. eafting, merriment, flowting, fcoffing,
(currilitie; wittie(but knanifh)conce:ts. — .

Plaifantenr: Bad Sein Buffoone;Parafite, pleafant


E aifir: m. Pleafuures delight , mirth, ie) , glee ; pa/~
‘time, game, [ports recreation; comfort, folace; delec-
- + tation, contentment, fenfualitie; alfo, a pleasure, sf
HouY; hindnefe, good turne, friendlie office done; alfo,
oes appetite, Luft or a full fasisfattion of them


‘Amon aif. 7 te becke, or commannd; as
1 lift mp fe
Pour monp aie Farm minds fike ; to pleafe, or
fatisfie my Pumor wit
De pa sm ak: Prov. For a fort
» pleafure lous repentance, |
Fy de plaifirs, Et qui de vertuma le
: threfor : Prov. Loake
Qui plaifir fair pater a an
à: PM lookes ke iy one gd surne dé
another. : EUR


es gle


Plait: m, Suit,controuerfie, alteration, debate; aa
“pleasor pleading,
Faire du plaît. To babble, prattle, tattle, kecpe a fil
thie coyle make a fcuruie adoes. *
q me tientplait.Hebolds me tacke,or with a tale; be
“findsmechat ynough,
Plameufes fi A cuffe,box,or whirret with the fr
Plats m, 4 Planc; mafc, afo, the ground plat of a


Plan gr: 27 we Pleinements qGatc,

Planare. 4 Plane ireei

Planchagc : mA planking, or boording; alfo, a floore
of plankes sorany thing made of plankes,

Planchayé :.m: 6e: f. Prat boorded ; floor tds

Platichayerstoplanke,boor ds floore,


| Planche: € A planke, or thicke boord; efpecially one


thats layeël over.a ditch, brooke,or moat, oe; in flead
of a bridge ; alfo,a bed, or border, in a garden alfo,a

pitfills aif’; the Till of à à Printers Prepe, or the fhelfe
that compalfeth the Hofe ; and generally any fhelfe.
C'eft la premiere planche pour parvenir à vn
grand lieu. This is the fr Hepsrtadie courfe;néereff
way,unto great preferment. ©"

: Faireplanche a. To make way for ; to begiane, or
breake th'ice,unto ; to lay à ground for, or foundation
vato 3 alfo,to fran, firbérshe ee if
En pont,en planche,& en Riviere, vallet devanr,
maiftre derriere : Prov. Looke Maiftre.

Planché : mée: f. Planked , boorded; floored with
plankes ; clofèdsorfècled, with boords ; alfe grounded,
fixed, tled,or fet faft.

Planchéer. Te planke; to floore with plankes ; 10 feele,
or clofe,with baords,:

Plancher: m.A(boorded)floore; alfo,a fee ling of boords;


and fometimes (high | agra improperly) à flore,


or bedsof plaifier,
Plancher de vaches, The ground,the earth,
Plancher. To planke ; to fau with plankes; to es
clofé,with boords,
Plancheter.as Plancher, :
Planchette : £ A womans flirrup ; alfo, ihe Si,
or bottome of a ftirrup whereon the foot refieth sa


Plancheyé mc : fPlanked a Flancliayés
Plancheyer. as Planchayer.
PlanchierswsPlancher. : >,

Plancon. as Planfon ; ; or Planton.

Plane :m. The great Maple ; ordinarily(but erronionfh)


called,thé Sicamiortree, : Der SP


Pr: :f, A( (Joneses (lisa la} or: Bake:
ie
ve KT Fra ne à to make Sivoo, Or enen, with a


Pleas alfa, to raft, d > blot, or put ont; alfo
to plane, as a bird that es , or bowers, without mo-
uing ber wings. > 1m <<


Planetaite: com,Plaaetarie, ofr belonging the Pla-
nets,

Heures planetaires, Twelue boures for the day, and
as many for the night,

Planette :f.. A Planet; whereof hereon find)
beaving the name of feuten {euerall Dieties ; becaufè
they baue fome power ouer earthlie bodies ; “they
bee alfo called ; Wandering fiarres, becaufe they ne-
wer keepe one "certaine place; or [lation in the fir-
mament,

Plani: m.ie :f. Planed, plained, or made ie; fins
thedlekelled,eucted. pa fr


| Planier: mere:f, as Plain; whence; |. ea
Cyr Court |


'
fa
~

a

=


AT


=:


“PAL:A


Courtplaniere, honfe. :
Planier. Fe peg doth bisbides. -
ae To meslewell,euen, finootb,maké plaine.
Planifphere: f. 4m Afrolabe. |
Plan{on:1m, 4 Fac rage fuckersa young tree.
Plant: m.as Plan;al/a, the foundation,or ground-worke
of a building ;alfosa planting ; or,a quantitie of young
trees handfomely ranked together.
Plantage : m. A De ftsing,
Plantail: m, 4 Plantal
| Plantain: m, Plantcine, way-bred.
Plantain aquatic, water Plantaines:
Plantain grand. Broad-leaued Plantaine.
Plantain de marais: water Plantaine.
Plantain de mer. SeaPlantaine, flowring fea Plans
taine,
. Plantain moyen, Middle Plantaine, hoarie Plan-
taine.
à Plantain petit. Ribwort, Ribwort Plantaine, Dogs-
‘rib, Lambes-tongue,
Long plantain. the fame.
Plantaire. The leaft of the fix binder muskles oftheleg,
ending in the [le of the foot.
Plantal: ih. A plant, or Sets the fcience of ia tree,or flip
pe: ‘an hearbe, fet or planted,
Plantars : m. willow plants; or great branches, or
ee of water-trees lopped off, and referued 10 bee


Risers mb, #5 Plantement ; alfo a place to plant, of
Sagres ims alfo, as Plantat; or the Plurall there


1 Plantar: m. A plant; and particularly, the branch of a
Willow,or other water tree, fit to be planted,

Plante: f. 4 plant, or fet ;the fcience ef a tree,or flip of
anhearbe, fetor fitte be fet; alfo,a vine fet of a {ci-
ence,or flip (called fo till it be cometo it full growth; )
alfa, the fole of the foot.

Planté :f.P lentie, lore, abundance,

Arbre trop fouvent tranfplanté ne porte pas fruié
à planté : Prov. The oner-oft:remoued plants not


plentifill, |
Planté: m.ée:f Planted, fet, fetled,

 Planté fur le pied gauche. Setled on the wrong fide;

ill Ph per affettion ; or, that bath undertaken an

uniuft,or euill caufe. .

Tey ay bien planté mes feaux. 1 hawe made a deepe
; moh into it, bhaue fet my marke verie Saft upon

it 3 Lhaue déne it furely, foundly throughly,

Planteau : m. 4 young plant; or,as Plantal.
Plontemnalats m. A Caltrop,
Plantement : m, À plantin fatings fetling.
Planter. To ps — fet sJeu fetile, fx,ground; all, to a
fiom, gine the tae ont of the


nie
: ay Looke Barre.
£ eo: ta là pour reverdir. He left bim there to


is fingers, to D pt awes or hs gs to fhift 76


RCA


mec, or fiocke tranfplented, and
raced Plenteoufy, abundant sargelyo-
prie meuf: Pleneons sande ren


| Plaq ué: mee? f, Pargetted, rougb-caf; alfyclapped,


Plaquement : m


PLA
sx, of. A plaine alarge,open, and euen peece of


nd. ap
Plaguard: m. 4 Placard, or lnfcription fet vp; 4Ta-
ble wherein Lawes,Orders cr csare wiitten,and bung
1 up ; alfa Bil, Sigquis or Libell flucke vpon a pellere ;
pieces oie after Ba of walls.
A flat Lingot, or barre of mettall; alfo, a
Bey pant peece of Mar arble, or free flone; alfo, «plate
to wae agaiaft awall,and to fet \acandle in; aplate-
candlefticke.
«Plaques, Flatpeeces of Gold(mithes worke, refem-
bling little flowers, ec 3alfo,parget rougb-caf.
_ Plaque de plomb en vn miroir, The foyle, or fleele
‘ofa looking-glaffe.


el, flat or flucke upon: layed flat on.

+ A pargetting , a rough-cafling ;
“also, a clapping, 5 eting, or flicking on; a laying flat
upon.

gis Soar To parget,, or to rougb-caf; alfo, to clap,

, icke, or pajtons to lay flat upon ; whence;
laquer du paffement fur vahabit, ‘To lacey or fes
lace upon a garment. ;

Plaques. Looke Plaque.

ateur : m, 4 Potter; or a maker of earthenl-
mages, dc.
lafination :f Potters pertes or the making of Ima-
$65,076, 0f | es a earth.

Se Plane; The\great Maple.

aflage: miApitpiped, i in fome tovenes by Marchants
om Tradefinen, for the {hewing of their commodities
inthe Market-place,or/publicke fireets.

pr m. Rubbifh ; clods, or peeces of old, and drie

plaifier.

Plaftre:m. Plaifler morter,

Plaftrer. To plaifler..

Plaftrier: m. 4 Plaiflerer ; a Dawber.

Plaftron: m. A breaft-plate:; Armour for the fomack’,

or bellie ; alfo,as Plaftre,:
Plaftronné: m. ée: f mee plated; armed mith a
breall-plates "1

Plat: m. A Platter; or great Difh ; alfo, a Difh of | .
meat,
Plat de patifsier. A round,and flat footle(fe Panne of
tinne,wherin pies are kept watme at the ouens mouth,
‘after they be fully baked. *
Platrenvoyé. 4 walking meale; wherein one di if

arte the table, enerie gueft is bis ovne

car’


d plat. ACbarg et.

Vngra some To before vidiualls.
Pefcher au plat. Locke Pefcher,
“à per du bas oe Be fe vuide:

rov, The lowmo ba t emptie ;
(for commonly the beft trencher-men fit lowe.) 4
Qui eft loing du plat eft. prez de fon padi.
Prov.Wefay(more he man thats sis from bis
good is neere bis harme..
res eftat , & rien au plat : Prov. Looke Ef


Plat: m. Flatneffe, 07, the flat part of a thing flatied;
whenc@; Baïller du plat de la langue. To foot, flat-
ae ue with; £ metaphor from a dogs licking;


duplat d’ fpée. Te tli
Paps dapat nee. doter fal
Plat: m. ate i A fa cae el

with the ground; alfo, (ha Pi
at


| P LE


“RP iL da


Plat bordisee Bora” haute 1,419} 4
Plat pais. The countrey; alfo, a vale, side
plains region,low countrey.
Labeface, ou bourfe plate. An emptie wallet, or
purfe. ©
Maifon plate. ( Oppofed unto Chafteau ) a houfe
which hath neither tower: sr moat ; à plaine. built,or
plaine countrey, boufe,
’ Pied plat. L4 (play foot.
‘A plate coufture, Rudely, plainly, i er the homelief}
fafhion;, alfa, flatly, fully vtterly,tbronugbly ; jas besa i
Coufture,
Diane: :f, The right Plane tree’ (a firanger in En
land.)
Plateau: ml. Flat and tbiune flones flakes of. ones,


“ar mées en plateaux Flat grattiching fesmi, fhing(or
ag )of «a Deere” ©

Pigeon, : €. A platforme,plot, modell, or draught of

_ abnilding ; alfo; the foundation thereof’ alfo, aplat-

[°° forme, or fquare bulwarke;alfoa certaine thicket wird

| tit the prow of a fhip, 4

| Platelée:f. 24 platterfisll or difh-full of. ar i i

| Platcfcuelle:£ A deepe difh,or platter.

Plat-fond : m. The plaine ground of or under, pau)
ov any bigh-vaifed worke.

Platin : m. 4 flat; a flat ftrand, low ‘oaf., or low i peecé
of ground, aeere unto the fea,
Platin de fer: A cart-clowt ofyron.

Platine: if, A flat, orthinne peece of wood, or wiethuitl
and bence,a [pring-pinnes or @thinne plate of yon, put
_betweene the end gan yron Pinite,and a frame té keep


Lit the fafler ; alfosas Patine.
Cautere à platine. The platescautérs See Caüte


Pleger l'emende. To acknowledge bis fault, and pray
the fauour of the Court before pif sss thereby
yl? elfen bis penaltie,or puifhmeni.
Plegerie if, Suretifhip; an undertaking, or anfwering


p eur: m, 4 Plaintife in an Aion.
Pléiade? f One of the fb flarves,
Pleige:m; ‘APledge , a Suretie; one that undertakes,
or anfwers, for another,
Pleigement: m.4 pledgin undertaking,or anfwering,
Sule weeenplenit preferred,fuit commenced, or Ac-
tion brought, vpon an impeachment, or difturbance,of
effion,
Pleigen Te be\a Pledge,or Suretie, to undertake, or an-
Swer, for ; Looke Pleger,
€paÿe: Prov. A Suretie’s fure to pay.
Plein: m, <4 Plaine; Looke Plain
Plein: meine :£ Fal: ; whole compleat,ab, olute,large,
sm le, folide ; ae orged, purs cpleni. ed,well fir-
ad; loved, ‘Raub with,

Pleing, (Femining) The fame; 3 aff, “fie bellied bagd,
or great with Joung ; (a word onely for beafts.)
Pleines armes. Armes, or a Coat, without difference;
belongs'to the chie fe, or eldeft, of a Houfe.

Pleine Cour, 4 Court Leet, or Baron, wheretoa fief
* ficient aimber of Pairs Alfflants , or Hommes de
fief, be fuitors,

Plein fief Looke Ficf,

Pleine nui&. Darke-ni ih, hair: the fècond
watch of the night; Enpleine nui@, when all was

its , when euerie one afleepe. . .

ine puiiffance. “Abfolute, Monarchall, or Soue-
vaig ne ower,


Dé Plein relief Seeke Relief. .


ir


Platis: m. 4 flat, fhelfesor ii tema plain pied. Of an euen ground ; or with a leuell
Platte:f. A Bleake(fifh.) LE doté,"

| Platteaux. Looke Plateaux: © 11914 . Messed plein) pied Torafe; to lay ewer, À or ‘lenell
Plattebande: f:4 flat band,or binds» rat with

| Plattefornie. 4 Plateforme. " 1; va ; Mettrefur le ph ein pied: To fer fill upon tbe es to
Plattiz. Looke'Phatis, LEE + fettle,pr gine fure fooring onto.

| Plarufert. en ee ; ) qLangued. | Sain,& ein ae in health, and like to line.
Plauw:m. The South vw, vhs Tout plein d'autres chofes,. Many other, or, 4 great
Plauder. seeke tales LD esl pire fate other things.


Me leplein& lerond AUTO per feat confiimmmmate i
Ti eft apse fe plaind: : Pro. The wealshie churle


| On lie bien le fac grade ot foit ae
se Ac Jake will ie é tied; Sty PL


Plautoni: mi; A clue,or bottomes 09 8

Playe: f A wound, bloudwipe, Lorean, uh, into,
ert 5 alfayas: Plage.
| © Playe fire à luftice. Zyremnie, ‘or iniuptices cur-

[ne hinéotonerraling iuflice.
DebonnsreMreiepaye ua rape Prev. Rs yn


piers pe. : vip fo playe: Prov À Plein à Fa
À  pitifal Chin makes 4 pi €. cinemen >
play m. ée: founded ; fore cation burt. 90°! |< tbron ss ac tty coi ame ru
| Player. To wound, cut gab, gine a’ étend” Plein. cf Looke Fief,
| Playt. as Plait (an old word.) : Plein foncé: mike :E so, ie side à
| Plect, & cheval de-fervice? ‘Due in fome placer, and ca PI wees hg te, fee feopesyno
i eintithe.


és. the vaff2ilto the Lord feudal (as under Ser-
er is alfo,in the chfiomes of. Britaiie, NP
fioprim P

Pré À demiorcenbain,’ s so: fr Mafure de dare, |

an unto Landlords{in diuers paris of Poiétou)ät the

Piece or me their tenants,

Bee! mi bs en. ate chere jr

a e:m, es ed Ca vadertaker de da
pm dd Le Pie Rat ah Ta 2 pÉnié caine fie Pha? birar


+ Torundert DANS com Jarvis J (Camelot plenier. Ymwater Chamler, * 72:
ees To pris. regle je Plenitude: i; Plenitude, Gt diy,


nu” RAS NA TEL | thicnefegrogenege. « 2 ics.


= q ÿ |


Go gle


Pleintifle:£ The a op "A
Pleion : :m, Long {traw fofiened in water thereby to bee
liantjand fit for the binding of vines,oe,

P ps refi A pledging ; firetifbip; wndertaking, or an-
fer


Home de pl plejure. ‘A'Pledge , or’ ‘Surelie s ora}
velar re nes Ple ce, or Suretie for bis


oo a a


PyL iE


PLI


Plenté : £ Plentie, flore, abundance, fulneffe, yaough.
Pleonafinique : com, Superfluons,redundant,
| Pleflé : m.ée : f. Plafhed,as young boughes.
| Plefler. To plafh ; 10 bow, fold, or plait young branches
| one within another; alfo,to thickena hedge, or couer a
| __ walke,by plafbing.
! Plefsis : m. The plafhing of trees; the plaiting, er foul-
| ding of their tender branches , one within the otber ;
| alfa,a hedge, or walke of plafhed trees,erc.
Plet. as Plaid; or,as Pleë. |
Plethore:f. Fullnefe,or abundance of good bumors in
the bodie; alfo, bead-ache by whe fuperfluitie there-


of.
| Plethorique: com. Fat, groffe, corpulent, ower-full of
good humors.
Plevi:m.ie: f. warranted, affured whofe goodnele, or
Juffictencte is undertaken for,
Fille plevie. Promifed in mariage ; affianced.
| Plevine. as Pleuvine.
| Pleviner. To pleuine, warrant, be furetie, gine pledges,
| undertake,or promife, for.
| Plevir. The fame; &, Plevit l'emende; as Pleger l'e-
| _ mende,
| Pleut : m. 4 teare; a trickle; alfo, weeping,or lamenta-


tion,
M ur Lamentable ; fit to be wept, or wai-
€ .
| Pleurant: vante: £ weeping, whining, crying, fhed-
ding teares ; wailing lamenting,
Verre pleurant. Which being ouer-fill runnes ouer.
Pleurard : m. 4 weeper,crier whiner ywailer.
Pleüre: f..4 thinne,and /mooth skinne wherewith th'in-
4 fide of the ribs is coueved,
; Pleuré:m.éc:f. wept; whined, cried for; deplored,
bewailed, bemoaned.
Pleurement : m. 4 weeping; a crying, whining, fhed-
ding of teaves; a lamenting,wailing bowling.
Pleure-pain: m. A niggardlie wretch; a puling micher
or mifèr ; a miferable houfe-keeper ; one whom it
grieues to beflow any meat on bimfelfe, or but a mite
on others,


ment,waile bowle,

Affez peut pleurer qui n'a nul qui l'appaife : Prov.

= ‘may weepe bis eyes out that bath nene to appease
a

Autantpleure mal batu que bien batu, 45 much the

ill,as. the well, beaten crieth; (whence ;). ;

Mal batu longuement pleure: Pro


=
-
=
|


a wofüll heart. errr
Bien courroucé de peu pleure : Prov. He thats an-
gred agood can hardly weepe, —

veut : Prov. Looke Femme,


Prov. The dame


we,


man) bow be may be forie.
Pleurchet afl D


>|
t


don


Pleureur : m.4 ae


Go. gle


Pleurer. To weepe,crie, whine, fhed teares; tomoane,la- :


‘A coeur dolent l'oeil pleure: Prov, A weeping eye,


Femme rit quand elle peut, & pleure quandelle


La mere du timide ne {gait que ceft de pleurer:
who fines a PS feldome


_ Les belles robbes pleurent fur des efpaules indig-
-nes: Prov. Faire garments weepe vpon cnwortbie
> ~ . Telau matin rit qui au foir pleure : Prov. No glad
Pleuretique: com,Sicke efor fubiedl unto,c Pleuri 4
Membrane us Pletire, se ”


weeper,a ie . , - | J d.
Pleurcux : mu :f Euer weeping, Aa ears, y | Pliffer.


Pleuft à Dieu, 1 would to God ; Looke Plaire.
Pleuvi:m. ie: f. « Plevi; aff, quit, abjiined,velea-


Pleuyine: f. 4 warrant, warrantie, affurance,vnder-
taking for the goodnefse,or fufficiencie of.
Pleuviner. as Pleviner; a/fd,æ Plouviner,
Pleuvir. To warrant, afure, undertake, pofe bis pro-
mife,gine bis word, for.
Pleuvir vne fille.To affiance a maiden, to promife ber
in mariage : Pic,
voir. To raine; Seeke Plouvoir, |


Pli:m, A plait, fuld,lay ; bougbt ; wrinkle, crumple;


alfo,a babit or imprcfion,

LE du mitan. The clofing of the middle of a Canon-
Ila prins fon pli. (Said of an obdurate, and incor- |
rigible difpofition; or of one in whom a humor whatfo -
one is turned to a babit ;) be will neuer be other the

ei,
Les Parlemens prindrent diversplis fous tels,
tels Rois ; viz, Tooke diners firmes andcr,get fandri
courfès of proceeding from, fuch and fuch Kings.

Plisbie : com, Pliable; fit, or eafie, to be foulded,bow-


bent.
Pliage: m, A fowlding, plying, plaiting, bending, bow-


ing.

Rien : fie Dr ne RE
icature : f, À foulding,plaiting,bowing,bendin,

Plie:f, 4 Plaice (fifh, efpecially, a great one.) -

Plié:m.ée:f. Foulded, plaited ; plied; wried , bent,
bowed; wrapped, or put up ; alfo, wrinkled, er crum-


le .

Pllement : m. À fonlding, plaiting; phing, bending,
bowing ;1urning wrying.

Plier, To (ould, plait; ple bend, bow ; tarne ,wrie; wrap
up; alfo,to wrinkle.
Plier fes cartes, To put up bis cards,
Plier le coude. To keepe bis elbow in continual aëti-
on ; to lift tbe pot often to his bead; See Coude.
Plier le gantelet, To yeeld,or fubmit bimfelf.
Mieux vaut plier que rompre : Prov. Beiter bow
then breake ; viz. Better toyeeld unto good aduice,or
the violent fway of the time, then by fillowing bis own
opinion,or bumor, 10 draw on himfelfe a certaine def:
truélion : And of an obflinate, and incorrigible crea-
ture they fay, N ompera pluftoft qu'il ne pliera;
and yet fometimes it 5 applied untoa conflant loafer,
or baxardor, of bis life, in defence of a religious, and


_knowne, truth.
Plieur: m. 4 foulder.plaiter ; plier, bender; bower al-
0,0 wrapper, foulder er futter vp of.

Plieur. (Adicéhinely) Foulding, plaiting; plying, bowing,
bending ; whence ;
Mofcles plicurs Two muskles (a great, anda little
one) whereby the toes are bowed,

Plieure. as Pliement, ï

Plieufe : £ A woman that fiulds,plaits ; bends bowes,


| Plinthe :£ 4 Pliath,or <j a flat, and fquarepeece


of Mafonrie, ec, placed femetimes aboue,fometimes
clos te eget (but exer the firft of the Bafis) of a
ier, oc.
Pp ion: m. A kind of fliffe Oxier ; See Burret.
PURE Fr, wrinkle, cumple. fiumple, vuffie, difer-
ler mumble. ,
Plis. as Pelis ; alfo,the Plural unto Pl.
é m.ée:f. Plaited, fiulded, lapped vp; alfo,plefi-
a tree, dc. =
To plait, fould , lap vp, or one within ano-
: ther ;


LI


Lei


si ¥ Ô à va
dr vines Bost sf Sie Br roniezl T


neffe of worke by a plumbe-rule. pe
Plomb : m. Lead; an Car nLexs, nl J

4 La l ,] 1 seth} ti J L
NT OR Si per ds fy


* ‘dé pface, > *
Plombà chaas. 4


Mafons doe gouerne, and indee of, the ffraighine[[e

~“ prenennelf? of thei? worke, à Hapa”
Plomb de mine, Blacke lead. Mine de plomb: as

jaMine, ON ans ANUS LES
Ploinb noir. Ordimarielead, © 14
Plomb Arieulle,ou à ruyle. À Mafons plomb-rule.


La muraille eft bien à plomb. The wall is verie
Straight, or ands boule vpright; &, "A plomb für.
Direël,or downeright dpon. ©":
® “pied deplomb. Slowly, dully, beauily, with lea-
den heeles. -
7PA pied de plomb, & de pompe: The fame; and,
“lately, maicflically, with a Spanifh grauitie ; Rado-
mont-like. ow
I adaplomnb eh tefte, He bath 2fad,aduifed,or dif.
| “ereer'pate of hisowne, °°. >
Mis à plomb,& au fin, Throughly fined,or tried, ex-
attly purified, °° eT te
* Dans vne gaine d’or vn coufteau deplotnb.(4ppl-
able to the faire outfide of a foule infide ; or to a prans


\® (heath of gold,


the vebemence of the fire + ‘This is th artificial Plom-


‘+


mettalls ; ) There is alfo a natural, or minerall Plom-
bagine, which (as Mathiolus thinketh)is no other then
™ filuer mingled with lead. ftone,or oare. ;
~~ bléakewanne. ~ |
Plombature:f. Solder of lead,or tinne.
lead; alfo, leaden, or leadie ; dull, beanie, fad; alfo,
lead-coloured, or blache and blew after firipes alfa,
| founded with a leaden plummet ; alfo,marked,or flam:
= ped,with lead, es
Plombeau : mA plummet; or weight of lead; whence,


MC:
* Leplombeati d'un’efpéc. The pommel.
Plombée: f 1,0r pellet of lead.
Plombelé. bé; alfo,bearing lead.
Plombetnent: m. .A leading, or tinning ; alfo, a foul
dering ; alfo, a marking of wares, with lead; alfo,a
founding with a plummet,
leadzaifo,to marke wares with lead,or fet leaden feals,
or Havaps on them ; alfe, tofound 1be depth of a place
‘with a plummet. Rs 5 |
~~ Plomber de coups de boulets: To led,or tutne in-
tolcad, with multitude of foot; to beflow more fhot on


ther’ (7 Ee rah Pade ie Op tds oa, NN" 0e
Pliflure-f" 4yoalding, à ite Es plait, “Se'plomber le {ein. To thump,or beat bis own breaft.


t ia A leading; or the leads of a Church,
cs teenie


Ploier. Seeke Ployer. . à |! Plot
Irene nts Seana One RAA | rade fed
oo i i td (RE || ra


| Plomb bave rine o ain bere w#Efaim | Plotmbier:miere:f. Leadi, lead lke oftead.


kind Pipers or infitu- ‘
“Sent RTE ER the plowib-rate) | Plomeau: m. A plummet,or little ball of lead.


“VA plomb: Perpendicularly, dewne-right ; whence; |


__ hed coxcombe, or faire foole;) a leaden whittle in a Plongeons, (The Plural of Plongeon; alfajrickes, or
Plombagine:f. Pure lead turned almof into afles by Plonger. To plunge, dine, ducke; runne ouer head and


bagine,and comes of lead put into a furnace with gold, | Plonget.asP
or filuer oare,to make thera melt the fooner; (by which Plongeur: m. A plunger,ducker,diuer,
imploymeat it gaines fome part in the worth of thofe | Plorer. See Pleurer.


Plombafle: com. Lead-like, lead-coloured, fallow, | Ploton:m. 4 clue, or bottore of; al/o, alow Buffet


Plombé : m. ée:f. Leaded, or tinned foldered with | Plourement :m. A weeping,


Le poids à ploinbeau. ‘The Roman beame or Stel. | Plouftrer.Toleuel! ground,or breake clods with a Row-


el, 4
Plomber.To lead,or tinme; alfo,to foulder,er colour with | Plouvoir. Toraine, fhowre ; powre downe wet.


a Plombée; alfo, the plomb-line, or plomb-
Architeéls, Pa: : pis
eure : F a Plombement ; whence; Agraphes
de fer àplombeure. Iron bookes fallened, o7 foulde-
ved reget ber Sold lead. *: raid ai
Plombier: m..4 Plummer, .


Pietreplombiere. Lead oare, or lead-flone before it
ph Hi ia aus


 Plomer. Toplumme; a Mafon to trie, or iudge of, the

flraightneffe of bis worke by bis plomb-rule.

Plominée: fas Plombée; or,2 weight of lead,
Traineau à plominée. Looke Traineau, ~

Plommer. 45 Plomer ; 07,45 Plomber.

Plonpé : mee: Plunged; ducked dined ; thruft farre
into,ouer bead and eares in.

Plongeant. Plunging, dining, ducking; alfo, tbrufting

re into. ,

Plongement: m. 4 plunging dining,or ducking ; alfo,
a thrufling farre into,

Plongeon: m, The water-fowle called a Duckers o7.a
generallname for water-fowle which vfe to duc he of-
ten,or on their weake legs(which they lamely traile af.
ter them)can goe but a little,

: Plongeon de mer, À Puffin,
Plongeon de riviere. A certaine frefh-water fwle,
that vefembles the Puffin.
Grand plongeon. A Cormorant,
“Petit plongeon. 4 Dydopper, or Arfefoot.
A plongeons, Ducking,plunging; or, by plunges.


ackes of corne.


md hh imto,
ongeon; or particularly, the Dydopper.


Plot : m, 4 blocke : Bourbon.
| Plote.aæ Pelote; 4 ball. :
Joter. ai Peloter: |"?


floole. :
Plotte. 2s Pelotte.
Plourer. See Pleurer, © al
Plouftre: m, 4 Rowler ; alfo,(but fomewhat improperly)
a Harrow, F
Plouftrement: m. A leuelling of ground, or break
of clods with a Rowler. RE frie


ler.
Plouftreur:m. 4 clod-breaker ; or, one that finoothes
gvound,or breaks clods witha Rowler.


Ploutroer: m. 4 Rowler;he rowling lnfirument where.


with ground is leuelled and clods broken.
Plouvier: m. 4 Plouer,
Plouviner. To mixzle,to bedew,


En hyver par tout pleut , en Efté là où Dieu
veut: Prov. Raine falls in Winter euerie where, in
Summer onely by fauour; (fèmewbat like whereun-
tois;) .

Là ou Dieu veutil pleut: Prov.
aa ÿÿ


Tant |


sie À


a ae ste Be ee
oh uit LU - 3 À
j ar}
3


Date nt © CA) > LC ré SR,


Pr W:


Tant tonne qu'il pleut: Prov. Of big: words come
bloudwipes ; after much confultation rour neue.
Ployable : com. Pliable, bowable,be RQ
Ployant. Plying,bowing, bending; arching ng nin
Ploye:f. 4 bend, bought ;vaultsarch ; a heu
bowing; vaultingarching. |

Ployé: m. é¢:f Bowed,bent, plied ; foulded sarcheds
vaulted.

Ployer. To pli ic bow,bend ; alfo,to arch,or vault ; 3 alfo,to
uid; ; Looke PJ rs =
Ployer l'amende. Celuy oit tn ui en
lavant lepan defa iy plo : -
teh + , & difoit, ie Ie vous amende : qRa-


pou: in, The South wind,
Plucquoter, To picke nicely.


Plumaceau : m. 45 Plumart ; 4/0, foft féld of innen |


laid ext aboue the plaifier,on a wound,
Plumage: m.Feathers; 07,48 Plumare; al/6,a pluming,
Plumail: m, À Goofé wing, or dufter o rats ea
plume of feathers ; alfo,birds,or feathered fow
rom art: m. À plume,or bunch of feathers; as as Plu-;


PhumaGicrsm A feather-maker.


Plume: f 4 feather(ejpecially,a foft, or fier one ;) 4


, ; enr ld French)a plume :
" i Gi ea is ap of such


“Alun de as pitching p ;abard


white yey or Allum-like fimple , wbich id well |!


pounded, and fleeped in’ ater may be fp [punne to a
© kindof thread, and matches or candlemeekes made of
“it; and they , once fired , will not out as long as they
haue any matter to worke on,
Relief de plume(&, Rene de plume, ) Arent Ca-
pon,Henne,or Chicken, paid for a Reliefe.
Faict au poil, & à la plume. Made vnto all kind of
port, practifed in all kind of trades, fit for any implay-
ment, good at any game,
Icéter laplume au vent: & mettre fa plume au
vent.To grow,defberate,retchle[t,carelefé; or,as vn-
‘der Teéter ; or under Vent.
Paffer la plume par la bec à. Looke Paffer.
Vanner les plumes au: vent. To play the foole, to
loofe time,
“A dure enclume marteau de plume: or. Sceke
Enclume,or Marteau,

Plumé :m. ée : £ Plumed,plucked, fleeced.

Plumement:m. 4 pluming, or plucking she featbers
from; hence alfo,a fleecing,

: Plumer. To plume, or bitte the feathers of; thence al-
fir it fleece; toreb,denude, or bare of; 10 fhake out
of,a
Plumer vne chaftaigne, To pill, or unbuske,a che(t-

mut ; to turne, or take,it out the: rough coat wherein
He: bred; which becaufe few can doe cafily , or with
unprickt fingers, they fay of a man to whom a thing is
ge cofilie, or painefüll, 11 en plumera la


“pl clo e fans la faire crier: Proy, The
com Pt ee fas kt, soa


| a Log im, À Scribe, ans RM


. ner, Penfler; es that getteth his liming by bis penne,
| Plumetis : Se pales or fhort relation of tbe fab Si
fneer ace À pre pa unto !


ae


you corte, faifoit amen-


BLY ;


, Plumette : litle aber final pen mul ita

‘Blamenr: ae eer ane che: À ect. Pilg
ull of pennes,or feathers.

| Pluralité : £ tial 20% morenieffe ; more iat


of.
| | Res d'une mn The tabs bai ft rama fa 14


“vault

Plus. More, se vats sol
Aplus aoe little... ie
Au plus. Ai tbe moj; Au plus prés. 4 ae

_ fible can be; Au plus! toit, At the soonest, .

Le moins de mon plus. The mofi1 can, the leaf


Ron plus. (ls n auront qu'un.non pls.) de


Qui ail plus 2 What is bebind? what ourplus re-
mines tbere ss © nas ata i

Tant &plus.Exceeding miuch,or,, as 5 much as may matte.

Quiplus vit plus a à foufttir : Prov. The rar fe
‘the more sftdion,


Pluferois : m. The nae orbit nea ‘fi
defroving engine, + ra
.Plufieur : m.as Pluferois, ‘ag
Pluficurs, Many,a great number,a great fort. :
Pluftoft. Rather, fooner ; aifo, moreouer, or, % which is
more ; alfa, fafler;with more (peed. ‘Bes
_Au pluftoft. 4 the moft; pS Aup luftoft que faire
“fe FN Reb Hh, with thefoonefl; with as much
eed as may be
Plus-valeur : £ An ouer-value; a pat
—— or a thing thats ouer and aboue the value


talus d’eftat, Looke Eftat.

Pluvial: male :f. Hainie, of raine ; like to raine ; wa-
teri

Pluvers :m. A Plouer.

Phuvieus: m. cule: f Rainie, much raining, fil of


Pluvine: fA Salamander, or Deafe-worme; a
Pleuvine.
Pluvir. Looke Pleuvir.
Ruye: f, Raine ; alfoya Plaice.
a pluye des mois. 4 womans months flux ; or the

pa fall thereof.
La pluyel’a prins, He 1 wet through ; he hath taken
his liquor throughly.
Pluye de Fevrier vaut efgour de fumier : Prov. Fe.
bruarie raine is th’busbandmans gaine.

Pluyr. as Plouvoir.

Ply. Looke Pli.


Ge if, APlaice.

Oacre:f. À kind of {cab pus the mie ot muxxle of a

Jheepe, gotten by feeding too early in. the deawie fal-

lowes and a verie pendant ber feeding, -
Poacre : com. Looke Poiiacr 7
Poale : m, 4 floue,or bot-bouft + alas Poille, -
gr Ke as Paelle ; 4 fiying-panne ; ; alfo, a little


Poallier : m, The braffe wherein the flock of a bel refis,
_ OT turnes,
Poalon : m. 4 Skillet
‘oche :f. A pocket,pouch,or poke; alfo, a meale-facke,
or corne-facke ; alfo,a purfenet; alfo,the fivele called ,a
arenes ler salfo,tbe crop,or craw of a bird; alfo, oi “
narrew and long omagns she backe
cs mr French eng 5 or
| ER en nel, ma TA
teach their Scholler
Vax...


_, Achererchat en poche. (Like ow. t0 buy a Pigina


Ia bien rempli fesb es. He hath filed is bags,
or fluffed bis budgets, vp to the top; be bath legood |


- PoiGtrinal: male: £.Belongis tothe bre or flomack;

à Ya, flomacall,breaft-co aoe ca : :
oictrinalier : m. One that férues with, or vfes to foot
a Great and beauie Petronell. - nen


uft of bis time, Ÿ wartantyous >. sy - | oictrine: £. The breaf,bofème, lomackesalfoya breaf-
Lapoche Ce ae l'harenc:Prov, Corrupted late or armour for the breaf. ;
once,we are tainted. euey ; once get ablor,y'are flained oiétrine empefchée, Objtruétion of the fomacke;


+ alwayes. qzunlne men br vd
| Poché: m, ée: f. Poched; thruft or digged out with the


or a drie, and foft Cough (which we call a Sheepes
Cough) proceeding thereof.


» fingers ; alfo,blurred. Pia is oiétrinette: f. A little breaft prettie bofome,
se poché, A blacke, or bloud-fhot eye (by a blow, | Poistrineux: m.eule: € as Poiétrinal; alfo,as Poic- |)
oc.) steel Hbnio 14 } creux, \4
Oeufpoché, A patched egge. Poiétron: m. The arfé, nockandroe, findament,


| Pocheculier: m. 4 Shoueler,
Pochée: f,.4 c-full, fack-fall of.
Pocher. To thruft,or dig out with the fingers. Lay
» Pochet le labeur. d'aurruy,Te poche intoor incroach
upon, another mans imployment, practife,or trade,
Cet encre poche. This Inke blurres. 31
Pochette: f. 4 little pocket ; a poke,or little facke ; alfo,
a purfe-net, # ;
| Poçon. Looke Poffon, ¢
Podagre: £. The Gowt {in thelegsan feet
Podagre de lin. The weed Dodder; See Lin.
Odagre: com, Gowtie-legd... >
|| Podagreux: m. eufe : £. Full of the Gowt.
Podetatte, for Pederafte, A Sodomite,boy-louer,or boy-
buggerer.
Podimetric : £. Foot-meafure , meafuring by the
Joot, à
pds :m. À Stoue,or Hot-boufe, se
Poéme:.m.A Poeme ; a compofition,or worke in Ver{e.
pese : À Poefie, Poetrie.
e: m. AStoue;or Hot-boufe.
Poefle: £ «5 Paelle.
{ Pocflier: m; 4 Tinker,Brafier,Skellet-maker.
Poeflon; m. 4 Skellet,or Pofnet; alfo, a little Frying-
panne. ‘ :
Poefte, Hommedepoclte. 4 yeoman’, Roturier, un-
- noble fubieËt, val[aller tenant,
Poétaftre: m. Aniguorant Poet.
Poéte: m, 4 Poet, Maker Verfifier.
| . Bon poéte mauvais homme; Prov. A good Poet an
: ee


im, A peife, or weight ; alfa, peife, weight ; alfo,
fubflance,or foundneffe. + a y
Poids de Marc. Half a pound, or eight ounces ;


“Locke Marc. …

Poids Marchand. The weight vfed by Marchants,
\. and Tradefiniensis in fome( few) places after fourteene,
» mothers after cighteene,but in the mofi after fixteene,

ounces to the pound,

Poids medecinal The weight vfed by Phifitions,&rc,

ë after tipelue ounces to the pound.

Poids de Midy. One of the Pyrrbexian mountaines,

called fo, becaufe euer about noone the Sunne Shines

on it,

‘Poids de neuf heures. Another, called fo becaufe
the Sunne is euer on it about nine a clocke in the mor-
ning,

Poids du Roy, Js after fixteene ounces tothe pound,
eight ounces to the Marc, and eight Gros to the ounce.
Gros poids. Is after 26 ounces 10 the pound.

Petit poids. Troy weight ; twelue ounces to the


no pound,
Poifaiét: m:Sloath negligence idleneffe. Breton.
Poifaifant: m. 4 negligent, thfull, or careleffe fit.
low; one thats ener bebind-band with bis bufinefe;
Breton.
Poignalade : £ 4 flab,or thruf with a Poniard,
oignalarder. To flab,or thruftinto with a Poniard.
Poignant: m. ante: £ Pricking,fiinging; alfo,peeping,
or peering out, |
Poignard: m. A Poinadoe,or Poniard.
Poignardés mé: £, Ponsarded, flabbed with a Poni:
ard,
Poignarder. To poniard, to flab with a Poniard, —


man.
Poéterie: f. Poetrie ; (an old word.)
Poëtiqueinent. Poetically,Poet-like.


pese To poetixe a to make Verfes. Le goatires a ries ae fea-Dragon.
oûtride: £. À Poeteffe. oignée: f, A band ful, or gripe of: alfo,the bans
Poétrie: f. Poetrie, dieof a fiword,or dagger, A ee


Poëtrons: m.(Ordinarie) yellow P lummes.
Poevrette. 4s Poivrette. ‘
Poge,ou Pogge:f. The fheat,or cable which faftens the
maine yard,on the right band of a Ship;whence, A po-
es.atsor onthe right band: :
WNayiger à poge, &àourfe. To bold an uncertaine
courfe at fea,by reafon of contrarie winds, laying tacke


Poignet: m. The wrift; the ioint thats betweene the
hand and the arme ;alfo,a À LE =
Poignet de la chemife, The wriff-band, or gathering |
atthe. :

Ia bien foncé le poignet, He bath gained foundly,
be bath gotten | » be hath licked his fingers
througbly; (4 Phrafé often vfèd in difgrace of the par-


aboord fometimes.on the right, and fometimes on the tic it us applyed ato, and taxing bim of no leffe then
left fide of the Ship... | theeuerie,or groffe coufenage.)
ognard:m, asPoignard, . Poil:m, 4baire. 10)


Poictevine: € 4 woman of Poiétou ; 4/6, a French
fasthin po ar hag Sa sde


Poil de chat, À running fore, or tettar, which we
alfà tearme, a (ats haire; alfo,a Whitlow in the fia-


Poictrail: m. À for a horfe ; alfo, the beame, or er.
f'ammer whereby.re tioifis areu oil foler. A young moffie beard ; alfo,the firft downe,
Poiétreux: m.eufe . Wbence, Piece poictreufe. A or foft feathers of a young bird: :
peece of coyne thatrifes, bulches, or beares out in the Couleur de poil de fouris. 4 Moufe-colour , or


|. middle,aad is flat or thinmeyabout the edge. Moufe-dunne.

[Poictrinal: m. A great, an d'heanie Petronel ; barter, Fente en poil. 4 cleft in a bone, fo little, as it wal

|, but of a wider boresthen a Muskets : {3 mof inufble. ; : :
eut :


Velours


se … | col


— Bas depoil, Lowlie, or bearing a low fayle; À prs


"Fait au poil;&r à Ja plume. .4 Generalifiyone thats


Poilant. Piling, paring,barking taking the rinde,coat,


Poile: m. as Poilleyal/o,as Poale.

Poile:f. A fiying-panne; whence;
: Sauter de la
_ From ill to worfe x out of the frying-panne into the


_ fire. |
pale: im. ée:f, Rewed, unenenly dyeds:alfo, pilled, pa-


x
2
2


Poiler. To pill ee,as Peler; alfo,to rew; to dy or colour
Poille: m. The Square Canopie thats borne ouer the Sa-


ee m.cufe: f. Pricking,as abodkin, ‘+ ‘ |
oinét: m, A point ; a pricke ; a centre; a serrer |


PS D 2 2
:Vélouirs deux poils. Tivo-pile P'eluét. > °
Velours a long poil: Shag, plufh ; or (moft properly)


wenfhorne Veluet.


meanes,of fmallauthoritie, that can doe but little any
way. SNOUT ju
Efchaiuffer le poil à, To irritate arprouoke vatolan-

er; alfa, to beflow a painefüll heating on, to bang or
Pe a the skinne-coat of. ne
Faire changer de poil. To reforme by cudgelling, or
by feuere courfes; (froma Groome,who currjing a yong
borfe throughly, makes the colour of bis coat to’ al-
ter.) onthe


fit for, or can make one in, any imployment, or {port ;
“(from dogs which are good at all kind of Game.) :


Monter fur vn cheval à poil. To get on abbrfesbare |.‘


backe, :
NE à tout le poil (le Diable l'a chiéen volant} 4
monfirous Cuter, a terrible Gallant, a horrible braue


mai.
Prendre du poil dela befte: Looke Befte. © ‘:
Des paroles ilsviennent au poil. From words they
fall to worke, from taunting toknocking. = © "1
Nous préndrons cenomau poil plus court. e will
catechins it more firittly , or in a necier fences or
in a fence againft which leaf} may be fayed.
Vn poil fait ombre: Pro. The listle baire a fhadow
calls; the leaft things bane their ufé one way, or o-
ther, L..vaks va
ne vn poil Martin perdit fon Afne: Pro. Looke
Afne, -

En maigre poil a morfure: Pro, Looke Morfure.

Le Loup alla à Rome, & y laiffa de fon poil, & rien
defes couftumes: Pro. A knaue will returne a knane
from the belt place in the world; or as under Loup.


or upmoft cruft of.


ile, & fe icéter dedans les Haifeti


red, barked, vnrinded.
vneuenly,


crament, or a Soueraigne Prince, in folemne Proce/fi-
ons,or Paffages of State; Hence alfo,a Hearfe,Hear{e-
cloth,or rich clotb,layed oner the Beere of a dead per-
Son's alfosa cloth {pred,in the Church, oner a new-mar-
ried couple; alfo,an Vmbrello,orgreat weather-fanne;
alfo,as Poale, :


: Poillu: m, uë: £ Hairie; rugged , or vough by much |


baire. :


Poilon: m. A Skellet; orsas Poeflon. L
Poincon: m, A bodkin;a punchion;Looke Poinfons —_ |
inconner. as Poinfonner. F PEU |


+0. A little bodkin; or punchion. I


. point; a minute, inflant, or moment of time ; a dram,
jot,crum, aslittle as may be of any thing ; alfo, a flitch
fowing ; alfiya Stitch in the fide; alfo, the dawning,


in fowi
or breake of ad ; alfo,the point, principal
| head, maine, L ent; the flate,
ef ace theres me ar, ih,


ay Go. gle


°° mament which is direétly oner our beads,
* nence,or of a bigh pitch.
“clot,


: “Apoindt. Aptly, fith,conueniently,to purpoft,in good


Poinéte: f A bodkin,or nawle ; alfo,a pricke, a goad; a


Prendre fon


“En bon poinét; ou, bien en poinét. Haxdjime,


PORE


health, eftare,cafe, taking, one is in; alfo, the length, or |
mea) A np Perret 2 ss

I oré. A flitching vp of incifions, or wounds
with golden thread. ah aes ae?
Le poinét des pieds, as Nadaïr,


Le poinét vertical. ‘The Zenith, or point of the Fir-


Haut poinét. Honneur au haut p. Honour in emi-
ue poinét. Au petit point. Throughly, foundly,


Defpefcher au petit poinét, Looke Defpefcher,
Poinét à poinét. Erougéty ; alfo, sty, ini, de-
cently,bandsomely,in good order. .


time,in due Lg fe whence; .
poinét. To take bis fittef'oportümitie

for; to make bis beft aduantage of.

Prendre quelqu’ un à fon mala point. ‘To takeone

unprouided. à it

Venir tout à poinét, To come in an excellent feafon,

in pudding time, in the niche. :

‘A poingt nommé, Fitly,feafonably, at the time pre-

fixed ; iuft at the time, or at the verie fame time; alfo,

expreffelpor of fet purpofe. wa

Donner à poinct nommé. To bit point-blanke, to

Strike the marke be fhoots at. pri

Detour poinct. Quite and cleane,

En poinét. fa order, in café,in fafbion in array.

Se mettre en poinct. To prepare bimfèlfé; to fet bim-

felfe in a readinefie. :


faire, fat, well liking,in good taking,

Sur if inét de: Nue about to.

Sur le poinét que, Then,iuft when.

C’eft yn poinét qui trop me poind. This point too
pr À pointeth at me ; by this pricke 1 am ouer-deepely
pierced. :

Ils le chauffent à moins de pass que. They make
bis foot or fhoe, of alee fixe then. |
Pour vn poinét Martin perdit fon Afne : Proy.
(This Martin being Abbot of a Cloifier called Afellus,
and (ètting ouer the Gate thereof, Porta patens efto |.
nulli claudaris honefto, was deprined, of bis Place
for putting a Comma ge the word nulli.)

Tout vient à ponét qui peut attendre: Prov, He
that is patient any thing may compalfe.
Tout vient à point quitient mefnage: Prov, He
that keepes houfe makes ufe of euerie thing.


Sting; alfo, the point of a weapon, or toole ; alfo, quick-
neffe, fharpenefe, fubtiltie; an edge; alfo, vebemence,
eagernelfe, earnefineBe , the ff (violent) brunt of
things ; alfo, the middle-fixed wax-candle vfèd in
Churches (the biggeft being tearmed Cierge, and the À
leafi Bougie.) : ‘

Poinétes de houfeaux. Sparres.
Poinéte des morceaux. La premiere p. The firft


' cour(e,as Sallades, ec.


La Poinéte du nez. The tip,or end of the nofe.

La ea tan The fight of the eyes or the

piercin sor caft of alinelie eye. * ;

La Pointe dun tocher. The point,or fharpe top,of

a Roches.

Chaufles en poinéte. Looke Chaufle. j

Cul fi polfiee. V pfide downe, topfie turnie, top o-

wer tale.

Chatouilleux à la poincte. Quicke on ae
that


THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSIT


E POI:


that readily anfwers the Spurre; hence alfo,titchie that
will not indure to be touched. - bi
Combarre a poinéte, & à fendant. To fight againfi
with point, and edge; viz. in all extremitie | by any
burtfull meanes,or way. :
Pourfuivre fa poinéte. To follow bus thruft (in fen-
cing;) to purfue bis aduantage; alfo, to profecute bis
former defignes,or courfes.

Poinété: m. ée: £ Pointed, fharpened at the point;
alfo, flitched ; alfo,quilted,
Rofe poinétée de, Bearded. (Blafon.)

Poincteler. To prickle, pricke, or point often; alfo; ta
bud. or fhoot out.

Poinéter. as Pointer.

Poinétille. Seeke Pointille.

Poinctiller, To prickle,or pricke often.

Poindtu: m. ué: f Posted, fharpe-topped ; alfo,keene,
or (hrrpe at the point, ;

Poindre.To prickey ting; nettle ; bite vex,frets fpurre,
flare jacite; alfi,to peepe, or peere out (as a morning
Sunne ouer the top of a bill;) whence,
res que le iour poindra. By breake of

ay...
Gelinequipoind,& ne pond pas, Looke Pondre, .
Charité oingt,& peché poind: Prov. Charitie com.
forteth, finne afflitteth; charitie fupples the beart, finne
wounds the foule.
Oignez vilain il vous poindra: Pro. (Applyable to
the bafe ingratitude of a bafe chuffe,or churle.)
Qui contre efguillon recule deux fois fe poind:
Prov. He doubly burts bimfelfé that kickes againft a
pricke.

Poinezraclé. C'eft vnp. raclé. Tis à on
or concluded on a matter filly determined of,

|: Poing: m. The ff.
k | Poing garni. See Garni.


© Faire de fon poing vn maïller.Tomake bard fhift;or,
10 be ignorant of be right ufe of | boners or, fottifbl to
ouertoyle,or take too much of bimfelfe.

Fol eft qui de fon poing fait coing: Prov, See
Coing,

Poinrée: f 4 Peare tree.@Norm,

Poinfon: m. A bodkin; alfo,a puncheon ; alfo,a Rampe,
marke, print,or feale ; alfo, aWine-veffell, containing,
in moft placesj216 Parifien Pints,

Poinfon d'Ay, & de Champagne. Containeth 192
Pavifien Pints.


Poinfon d'une Tour. ‘The ball, or middle of the top, |


of a round Tower;that part whereat all the rafters doe


is ufually planted


Poinfonnade:f, 4 pricke, or hole made with abod- ||
kin; alfo,a (lampe, or marke [et on witha puncheon, |


or, 7 . : =.
Poinfonner. To pricke, ar pierce with a bodkin
| flampesor marke, with a puncheon,erc. Î

oint:m.Laoke Poin&. 3 F
| Point. (4a Seances! iote,by no meanes,in no


Pointade: € À pricke,tbrufts Ritch; or fing

: Pointade:t. ch; or Jing.
‘Pointe. a Poinéte. » ES À

Pointeler. SeekePoin@eler. =.

- | Pointer, To point sion. at the point ; or leffen to-,

wards the point; alfo,to pricke,or fling; alfo, to

fitch guilt,or co ÿ t q


Pointer yn canon. To leuell it, or bring it unto the
marke. i Ba lat
Pointille: & 4 pricesor prickles atl nice point; the


vo)


» Go gle


meetin point; that part whereon 4 weathercocke, orc,


le BK ets, CE


Poin
Pointure : £. 4 pricke ; alfô,a prickling,or pricking; alfo,


Poipre: £ The
Poiraifine:£
Poiré: m, Perrie ; drinke made of Peares.


| nor Gourd Peare.


PRET PR id
‘ Ney : 4 à = +
Zz O1
fire Sleightet matter that may be,
Intiler. To prickle,or pricke often; alfo, to cut, quip,


tax,or take exceptions unto.
. 45 Poindu, :


4 footing (as of paine in the bodie;) alfo, the Gowt in
the joints.
Purples. Looke Pourpre,


Rofin,


Oire: £4 Peare.

Poire d'angoifle, A choake-Peare ; or,a wild foure

care.
Poire d'amior. A yellow, and bard-skind Peare,
whereof excellent Perrie is made,
Oire de beurée. The butter Peare ; a tender,and de-

licate fruit, ;

Poire de bon Chreftien (called by fome the Eufebian
Peare;) a great,and delicate winter Peare, fomewhat
refembling the baftard warden.

Poire de campane,. as Poire de Serteau.

Poire chat. The Cat-Peare; a bolefome, fweet-finel.
ling,and fharpe-tafting fruit. ;

Poire de chevalier, The Knight-Peare.

Poire coing. The great Quince called, the Peare-
Quince,or Quince Peare.

Poire de conillart. 4 fôft, and delicate kind of
Peare,

Poire dorée. The golden Peare; is reafonable big,
almoft round,and tbe mof} delicate of Summer Peares.
Poire d'eau rofe. The Rofè-Peare.

Poire de l'efcuyer. The Efquire Peare ; whereof ex-
cellent Perrie is made.

Poire d'efpine, The thorne-Peare ; (ripe in Au.
Poire sett guillon. A choake-P.

Foire d'eftranguillon, eare,

Poire defin or. The golden Peare.

Poire de garde, 4 Warden,or Winter Peare; a Peare
which may be kept verie long.

Poire dehaftiveau. A Hafting,or baflie Peare.
Poire laide bonne, A certaineill-looking, but well.
tafling,Peare.

Poire de livre The pound-Peare ; a verie great
Peare. . \
Poire à main. A ki at Peare which weighes
almoft « pound je ds se


Poire de mollare: À certaine tender, and delicate |
Peare, iar ANR ES

Poire mufquette. The MuskePeare, 7
Poire de noftre Dame. The Marie Peare;or our La- ||
dies Pearé; a reafènable good fruit. = "1 ||
Poire de parmhain. The Permaine Peur. tus ti
Poire de rateau; A certaine Pearé thats as big as a
mans ff, Oo ane à nS
Poire de . A certaine tender, and delicate
Peare. < BT Vem, : —— , =
Poire de rofetre: A foftand verié delicate Peare. 1 |
Poire de roufeau. Another ; whereof good Perrie |


may be made.
gueule, A kind of final, and foone-


tent


Poires fept en
ripe Muske-Peares.

Poire de Serteau. The Alablafier Peare,Bell Peare,
Poire fuperbe. The Muske-Peare; or water Peare,
Poire 2 deux teftes. The two-beaded Peare; a yel:!
low , and folide Peare, whereof excellent Perrieis | -


- made. Ù ]
Poire de verdelet. The Greening ; « ne


Fi
4
4

=


i Viiite bh TEE 78 4


~ a ee eee .


PO!


delicate Peare.
Mords à poire: The Peare-bit; a bitt whofe mouth,or
upfet is fafhioned like two Peares clofed at the finaller
ends.
li ne le menace pointde oires molles, ‘Tis wo tri-
fes no fleight mifchieue, no eafie matterswherewith be
threatens bim.
Apres la poire levitiyou le preftre: Prov; After 4
(cold) Peare Wine,or the Prieh.
Qui avec fon feigneur mange poires il ne choifte
as des meilleures: Pro. He that eates Peares with

Kis Lord picks noneof the beft; (Therefore let bin that
will eat well eat with bis equall,

Poire-coing, The great Quince, called the Peare-
Quince, or OD uince-Peare.

Poiteau: m.A Warts alfè,as Porreau,

Poirée: f, Beets; Looke Porrée,

Poirier: m. A Peare-tree.

Pois: m. A Peafe,or Peafon; alfo,as Poids.


great wild Tare, called Péafe euerlafting,


Peafe ; Looke Chiches.
Pois cornu. SeeCornu.
Pois degrefle.:Ahaile-flone.


Pois de te Rat Heart-Peafe,blacke Winter Cher-
vies, Indian Hearts:

_ Pois ramez, Rounciualls, great Peafe, garden Peafé,
branche Peafon, baflie Peale, French Peafè, Romane
Peafe.

Pois ramiers, The fame.

Poisavifage. Fafells, long Peafon, Sperage Beancs,
French Beanes Roman Beanes,Kidney Beanes. «

Petis ois. Field Peafe,ordinarie Peafe.. ‘
Lard à pois de carefme. The Baconslike fib A a

+ Porpofe.

Avalleurs de pois gris. Good trencher-men, bun:
guts, ee hey to. whom: eerie nef
Seemes good,or no merfell comes amiffes sn 1:
Efleus, & choifis comme beaux pois fur le: +


au out; ( Jronically.)
ag


| playeft the hypocrite exceeding well, sasy
_ Apresla felte & léieuylés poiscam fis Proc |
4 ~séofilie Eeafis éd Grames xreendtll fiable ||
|Poiferment sine tt, AR EST esib
! Poïfamment. Héauily,weig:  lsrshen fé: cod
| Bi Fr Apéifingsoñweighing 5 or m5: o's 3110!
|Pobenent: LA A peifing, or weighing: alfo, weight; or
‘Polfllonssm, kind mal Peale Pal.»
oililions: aca ma) or Pullen
: Poifle: fa skellets or or Fryinée-pammes So =
| = Le chauderonmachure la poifle: Seeke Machurér


2 x bo) . 134 LE.
Poiflé ber colowed, foccred heeched,begryme

with foote,or with the touch of a footie S, lier
Poifler. 7 ge coy pee ee.
poifliers i: ae CET
“preffe. Wath; MN Et sais 5b fo


‘


ees gle


Pois cerre. The great Chichling;or flat Peafe; or, the
Pois chiches. «Ciches; garden Ciches; sept à ich |


Poise M we? ir (Hipage. In endef Séfeli |


Choice; or daintie peeces; eee eas SOE re :
) fait manger des pois Yedsauvesu, Lbike
: = Mon Dieu quetufaisibien lepoiivereus. Th |


. TRS poifle, eos ‘That-loo- *


P Ol


_ Poiflure : £4 collowing; finutting, Sinacringsbe{ooting,


ae m. Pa. AS

oifonneux: m. eufe: £, Poifènous, full of poifon.
Poiflage: m. A pitching,or oie, fl a
Poiffard : m. A filcher, nimmer, purloyner, pilfèrers one

-wbofe fingers areas good as fo many lyme-twigs.
Poiffard: marde: f Pitebie,bepitcbed.
Poiflé: m. ée: f. Pitched bepitched.

Feux poiflez: wildfires. + <>
Poiffement: m, 4 pitching ; or. bepitching,
Poifler. To pitch,or bepitch,

Poifleux: m. eufe : £ Pitchie, full of pitch.
Poiffillon: m. A little,or young, fifh.
Poiflon: m. 4 fifh; alo, fh.

Poiffon d’Avril. A Mackerell; alfosa yuu awd «

Page turnedPandar.

Poiffon luif. The (ouglie, and unit Mallet fl

called fo,becaufe headed like a bammer,

Poiflon de mefnage. as Belennes

Poiffon S. Pierre. The Dorce; called alfo by by foe of

our Fifhermen S.Peters fifb.

Poiffon royal, The white Cabot; ya délicate fe

Poiffon facré. Looke Sacré.

Muet comme va poiffon. As dumbe as a fib. :

I fe retira avec‘tela qu’ il avoit de poiflon prins.
o-He got bim away with the fhame be bad gotten, or

with a flea in bis eare.

La fauce ne .vait pas mieux que le poiffon. The
fawce is no better then the fifh.

: Se faire marchand de poiffon la vieille de Paf-

© ques. Looke Marchand,

Poiflon, gorret, & cochin,vie en l'eau,& mort en
win: Pro, Wefay, fifh muft ener fivimme twice.

Le poifion commence à fentir toufiours. par la

tefte: Pro. The head of a fifhis ener tainted firft.

Les gros poiffons mangent les petis: Pro. Fufily
.vapplped to the uniuft world, wherein the rich deuoure
ithe poore , the flrong the “weake 3 the mightie the }

meane.
‘En petite riviere ne fe Mars a iffon: Pro, In
poore families, or pettie Townes, great apes mtn will |.
aa be had,much profit cannot be made,
“Ieune chair, & vieil poiffon: Prov... Old fieSbsand
young fill (is fit for the Pa)
Il faut hafarder yn petit paillon pour prendre yn
- grand: Pro,Haxard a little to gaine much.
is ne hess apprendre aux x poiflons anager: Prov.


Nager.
ts “Thette Sle poiffon paf trois iours puent : Pro.


 Aguefizand fishat three dayes end grow muflie..
Qui envoye chetif à Ja mern’en rapporte ne
Sfon,ne fel: gag qu ur a ee to fire te
Hoiionnntes € rhe Fike ke |
oiionnerie: The Fi TrKele ayy
Poiflorinet sms Lise saña
ae : meufe: fies AA of or abounding
in,


Bei fe fait Neen couler le ve vie dePafgues, Tao late
be under lt that courfe,or ation.
Poiffonnier: m. ere: £. Fes ahnnding in,or ‘belon-


ging unto, fifh.
Poiffonnicre:& Fifi or a woman sha fl ff
D mp ar ip hihin, uy!
OL . CDI bepitching, oo tes
tr ems cone little a 3 ar. a


En


_ | Poivre. Pep,


POL


Poitrir. Looke Peftrir.
Poitron: m. The tayle, arfe, bumme; alfi,a kind of
Horfe-P lume,
3 Looke Poyvre.
Gith Gi Nas ep mt Swet fur,
S. Cather


Poix: might iy A Poids,

Poix: f, Pitch.
Poix spa daira Burgundie Pitch; “
Poix G


yore


Poix te c a Cordouannier. white dns: |


Wax,

Poix fondué. Tarre.

Poix Grecque, Greeke Pitch; a light-yellow Pitch,
much vfed in plaifiers,

Poix liquide. Tae


~ Poix navale, Ship-Pitch; 1 | féraped from Ships, and |


then mingled with wax, and Bay Salt ( for Phif-
call ufes;) alfo, ordinarie Pitch is by fome called
Pix navalis,

Poix picatoire. 4 kind of Pitch.compounded of Rofen
and Puch,

Poix refine.Rofen.

Poix feiche. Stone Pitch, ordinarie Pitch, I

Poixement: m. À pitching,or bepirching.

Poixer. To pitch,to bepitcb.

Poix-refine: f. Rofén.

Poizage. Droiét dep. 4 fee due, in fome places, to the
King for the weighing of commodities with a publike
Balance, or Beame.

Poizer. Looke Pefer,


‘Pol: m. Paule.


Grace de S. Pol. See Grace.
Pierre de S:Pol: Acertaine medecinable fione found
in a Maltean caue, wherein (they (ay) S. Panleprea-
ched; fomealfo call the Samien earth fo,
Defcouvrir S. Pierre pour couvrir S, Pol. To build;
« Or invich one Church with the ruines, or-veuennes of 4:
nother.
Pol: m. 4 Pole; the énd,or paint of one of the sie,
«whereon (fay Aftronomers) the beauens mone,
Pol Antartique, The Aatarticke, or South Poles A
¢ not fèene in our Hemifphere.
ol Artique. The North Pole, the North Starve.
Paine. The furniture of a Peece (confifling of diners
peeces) of timber inthe prow of a Ship, called,L Fle:
; alfo,as Poulaine. .
Polaire: com. Ofor belonging to,the Poles.
Eftoille polaire, .4 ftarre which maketh the tayle of
Vrfa minor ; called conn} it is the neereft of all o-
thers unto the North Pole,
Poles Ee The Se called, a Dogs-tongue, or kind


Die. m, Spattling Poppie, frothie Poppieswbit
Ben; alfo,the fhrubbie Trefoile called, Make-bate.
Polls im. ie: f. Rees finoothed, burnifhed, flecked ;


neat; fpruce, polite,
Polican:En es
| Police: f. Policies e regiment ciuill germes
| oras a French Lawyer it, C’eftle r >t
de la Cité; or as another, C’eft la forme, & a
ment eftably aux chofes macfaires à la vie. “
maine; whences CR
Droi& de pol ice: particular Orders
for the Sd Meme + Dhabiens hs a Towne,
> or Territorie;this, Power( li wnto-thiee
_ thingsviz.finall commodities(as vid re 08
or Occupations ; and pus me 3.) thaugh:


Go gle


often challenged by the officers of the King(tombom all
Senerall policie without queflion belongs) yet is (or
Should be) enioyed by euerie Lord in France, from ibe
“Chattelain upwards,

Policé: Em éc:f, Ordered, gouerned, ruled, aduifedly


Polices order, gouerne, rule aduifedly, difpofe of
wifey,

Policier: m.ere: f. Belonging or looking to , taking u0-
tice or care of, bauing by office,or in charge ,the gouern-
ment,and ordering of, particular matters in a Towne,
or Territorie.

mi «reg Smoothly, fleckely,brigbt}y,cleancly,neatly,


Polieul: m. Pellamountaine,or Pollie,an bearbe.
Poms vf Poligamie; the bauing of many wines,or


thenone,
Poligarchie: fA EUR divided into fundrie
parts; or fucha.dini,
Poligone:f. 4 Seomtrcal! figure that hath many cor-
ners,


| Poliment: m. Smootinefe, fleekene(fe, a gloffe, a poii-


Shed lire:
Lem See Rockies
olipragmon: m.4 Polipra éme, bu, bedi
Polipus. Locke Farah - É
Polit. To polifh; to fmooth, eke sburnifh,brighten,beau-
tifie; 10 fcoure,cleanfe, furbifh, trim vp,make neat, fet
a gloffe on, gine a lufire unto.
Poliffable : com, Polifhable,burnifhable, firbifbable,
Poliffenent: m. 4 peifiia y burnifbing, brightening,
finoothing > flecking king ; a fier bifhing, ov trimming up
Poliffeurs mi iA polifuersburaifber yree iter


poire fiat Poliffüre,

olifloir: m. À polifhe In b i

a Bie fame, dr gn union Pa.
olifiure oliffure, bi ent, thnefe, L
ne er mac ke
Polifyllable: com. Of many filables.

Politeffe : f. Politenefse ; spaces 3 finoothnefe,
oe 5 meatnef[e, cleanlinefe; trimneffe; briske-
nee.

Politric. See Polytric.

Politure. as Poliflure, : -

Polles. Certaine forbidden zngine or Nets, wheres
Sif may be caught.

Pollifyllabe: com: Of many

us oe Be Poleds ile, diftained; conrap-
ted,aijbon sabi

Polluer. Tapeh ; fone fe, defies compte


Pole : £, The pulpe; the Seaman? ‘flefh, or flesbie part
of the bodie; the fabien or hard pith f anything.
onnets: m. Two buttons with bookes at their ends,
paffing through the branch, and em the ‘water
chayne,of a Bitt,
Poltron:m. A knaue, rafcall,varlet, feowndrell; al,
ase coward; fluggard, laxie-backe, bafe idle
low,


Poltronefque: com. Knauish,rafcallie,ba/e- bumored;


cowardlie, ave -bearted, cullion-like ; laxie, belle,


sluggish, idl
Poleronelquemenc. gi bf coward,
cullion-li


Poltronie : £. Kaauerie, , cilenelfy bafènefe ; comar-
pr daftardie ; flaggishneffe , laxinefe ; mwortbi-


Pok


=


5 tbe eee


L


&


à
r Ne
‘
à
x
an
*


DT read
CSS RN 0288 TR


ac Cie
wren nt,


Le +
Vt 7 27/0


nae i SF


CARE Lund. td
VE ap


7


+


:
aur
“4


Poltronifer. To pultronize it; to play voe Knaie; eoren-

drell; coward; tolaxe,loll,or flug ite "1

Polyyamie: f. as Poligamie. '

Polygone: m, Knoe-graff,Birds tongue, Swines-tr aff

S.Fnnocents hearbe.

Polygone femelle. Female Knot-grape ; ; a water

sus , (eldomie found,and of leffevertue then;
gone mafle, Common Knot-graffe.

Deis gone petit. Rapturewort, Herniaria, Burfl-


Polyg hie: £. A diuers manner of writings

Polymixe. 4 candle bauing many weekes,

Polype. as Polypus. ‘ :

Polypeux: m. cates f. That bath a Noli: me tangere
in the nofe.

Polyphilie : £. Affection dinidedjovie unto many.

Polypode. EA 4 aa
. two laft names belongunto two feuerall,yet neerelp-re-
fembling, hearbes, called otherwifé, ‘Polipodieof the
Oake,and Polipodicof the wall.) ©

Polypus: m. The fifh Appice called alfoyMany-
cer.
Polypus chancreux. The po diféafe of the
nofe commonly called Noli me tan

Polytric,& Polytrich:Blacké Venus baive true’ Venus
nie Maidens haire,our Ladies baire, z

olyttic doré. Pélytrichen,Gouldilocks,golden Mai

den Te olden afghans Maple sie
Polytric des Officines. wail Aa haire.
while Maiden haires - a7 J

Polytrichon,& Polytricon. as Polytr

Pomardiere: £ 4 Farme,or brie

Pomcitade: f Balme gentle, bearbe Bale.

Pomelée: f Bearefoot,Setterwort Settergraffe.


Sosthe Pommada.a tricke in vaulting.

Pomme: m. Cyder ; drinke made of ee

Pomme: fi 42 apple.
Pomme d'Adam. Looké Adam.
Pomme d'amours, Theraging,or mad, apple ; alé,
the amorous apple,apple of Loue, golden apple, "0"!
Pomme d'anis. À certaine delicate


uinse both in fmell, and tearmed thus
D lex Lomme Claudius, who bn ought the kind AG it
efus vito Rome. ‘
joe Athenes An Apricocke. :
Pomme de boisjoi de bofquets:4 Sang
- alfosthe frnit of the Arbute,or Strawbertietree.
Pomme de capendu, See Capendis 95
Pomme de chien. The Mandrake a
Pommede claguet. 4 firme, à il cloned,
and taft-pleafing apple,
Pomine deroing, A Quinees
Pommede courptndu. The Short. fart, or Short:


| nes nee pe bas à

oinme de Cunoet. À rain peer ee
LE Loir age 3 Low apple,
Fake pen hile t nade. 7 :


cs Golden apples, amorous apples, ape
ae ci thermes ap,
an. ile fem Thenane of bail,


“ff à rrsseA 4 : sinon
: scowl : fine iat |


: Pomme de Grenade..4 Pomegranet. :


Pommade: f. Pomatum, or Pématd (anoyntment;) al:


‘Pomme Appic, ou d'A Aone An sip tae a.


-Pommelusm. ue: f.
Pomrmelure:£ Plumpenele, roundnefe ; alfo, daple- |.


: Pommeraye: f 4a Orchard,an Apple-yard.


‘| Pommette: f. A Gitile apple; ;alfa,tbe ball ofthe cheeke,


! Pommetté: EL ENS tearme of B


Pompe: £ Pompe, ate, folemnitie, susie, fimp


PIO M


Pomme d'Heroet. A kind of yellow,and fweet le
whereof good Cyder a, ak a a ,
Pomme de 5, lean. S. Johns apple; a kind of fon
c'wipe Sweeting.
Pomme de maligre,ou malingre. The Maligar #-
pe a art fruit. à
e merveilles, The wale Balfam a lea

orme Ferufalem,Baulme apple. mi op y


‘comme nonnette. A fmall apple thats “ripe Sooner


then any other. .
Pomme d'or. The golden apple, amorous apple,apple
ga met the Quince hath alfobeene called, Pomme


Pomme : Paradis. Looke Paradis.

omune de Peru, The apple of Peru; the ei

: 4 thorne-apple. ee

omine poire. A Peare-apple; alittlery 14 le; 4
and (as yey hold) a pret tog of ia :
Pomme rellet. The name of a foure apple,
Pomme de renette. See Renette.
Pomme de Rengelet. A certaine yellow sweeti
Pomme de rougelet. A kind of foure apple.
— derouveau, A‘Redding, or Summer: ue
im À

< Paume de favon. A wafbing Ball,
Pomme fauvage. A Crab,or Wilding. :
‘Pomme defenteurs, 4 Pimandersr feet Ball ‘
Pomme terreftre. The Mandrake apple.
Chou à pommes. 4 (abbidge. Rab,

Pommé: m. ée: f. Growne round,or like anapple,

Pommeau: m. The pommell of a fivord ge.
Pommeau de la jambe. ‘The caulfe of the leg.
Pommeau d'une tour. The ball of à tower, the cen-
tre,or middle of the top thereof, that part whereon the
weather-fane,or weather-cock is planted.

Pommelaye: £, as Pomelée,

Pommelé: m.ée: £ Daple, or dapled ; alfa, rod, or
plumpe as an apple.

. Temps pommmelé, 4 curdled feafon,or skie, wherein
the apenbled vapours appeare in pe and round


» flakes.

Pommelée, as Pomelée.

pr grow round or plumpe like an apples,
to daple;

Pomnthelette: :£ A little ap, apples alfo,a Daple.

Pommelle : £ The ar of afword,erc.

. Phumpe,or round jas an apple.


neffe.
Pominer. To prow round ,or apple-like.


La pommette du nez. The tip,or end of the nofe. :
Piece à pommette. Adtile Pleafant rowle in the.
mouth of a Bitt. oct er


Pommeture: f. Pommeture ; or the being Pommetie..
Pommeux: m.ewfe: f Full of apples. ‘2%
Pate ant ;
Pommier e. À Ee tree.
Pomon.
pape ce, oftentation 3 alfo >>
ed de plais & de with a pm
ret as Fra Bomb
‘Pompes: |


t


-


P
| Pompes: f Armour called Pullie-peeces,for the knees;
AYO BOR RS oO
Pompette : À A pumple, or pimple on the nofe, or
chinne. * ¥ AR cp
__Pompette d'imprimeur. pee antes 5:70
“the ball wherewith be beates, or layes Fake on, t
FR. À CO clin alas antl
Pompeufe ment. Pompoufly, magnificently, foleinnely,
~ fumptuonflj, gorgioufly. : oe
Pompeux: m.eufe:f. Pompousmagnificent, flatelie,
+" maicflical; famptuous, gor gious, glorious. 4
Pompholige: f "Nil; the light’ oare, or foÿle of
|’ Brajfé. . d Le ja 4
Pompile. 4 kind of Pourcontrell fifh that fwimmeth
~~ “with ber bellie vpwards ; alfo, that kind of Tupnie
© which followetk {hips while they are in the Mayne,
_leaues them when they draw towards the fore. |
Pompon: m. 4Pumpion,or Melon "0
Pompon d'hyver, Our ordinarie winter Pumpione..
_ Pompon fuccrin. 4 Muske Melon. cite
© Pompon Tarquin. 4 kind of darke-greene Melon."
Pomponne:£ ‘The longefl,and fnootheft kind of Pum-
pion. + bu
-} Ponant: m, The Welle M
} Ponce.Pierre ponce. 4 Pameifé lone, es à
Ponceau: m. 4 litile bridge; alfo, Corne-rofe, red Pop:
f° pie, fhadow Poppie. à
} Poncel: m. 4 litle bridge. Ea
Poncer. To finootb, polifh, rub oucr, with a Pumeife


A floae, 2 ; =
| Ponceute: €. Afmoothing, polifhing, rubbing ouer with


a Pumeife ft


te one, . :
| Poncille: f. The Affiriaa Citron ; a fruit as big as two


À  frcet,or wallowifh tafte,
Poncire : £ A Pome-Citron. ;
Pongon: m. Half a Tuane; or as Poinfon. Re
Ponctuel:m, elle: £ Punéluall, diflind, direët, ex


at.
| Ponétuellement. Punttually, diftinitly, point after
point; direttly,exaélly, throughly. . :
Ponderanment. Ponderoufly weightily beauily.
Pondereux: m.cufe: f. Ponderous, beauie, weightie,


burthenfome ; maffiue , fubflantiall ; of great confe-


quence. ; :
| Ponderofité: f. Ponderofitie, or ponderoufneRe, beani-
neffeyweishtinefe,mafiuencfe. :
| Pondre, Tolay(egges.) Maur
| Elle y peut bien pondre, mais elle n'y couvera
pas. She may foiourne there for awhile, but he fall
not continue long. -|
= Geline qui poind, & ne pond ‘pas. (Said of) an
' idle, unprofitable, barren, curft, or [colding wife,
Il fait accroire que les lievres pondent , & font
des oeufs ; (Applyable to a molt notorious lyer;) Seeke
Li =L>4 Ÿ ‘ I ss


| Ponda: m. ue: f Layed,as anegge.
| Poncau:m, Aclofefioole. è
Ponent: m, The.Weft ; alfo,the arf, tayle,bumme,
Poñeropole, The Towne of the wicked. qRab,
Poneneor. as Piqueur; (am old word.) x
: Poe APE En SLR
onnercfle. Gelinepon, A laying Henne,
Ponneufe. as Penne De NFIQNE
| Pont: m. A Bridge "n 22130
Pont aux afnes, C’ eft aux afnes.: (Ap.
À © plfable when fich as are of the trie?
| fon, or caufe of things, impute them to witchcraft, for-


big Leymons ; and of a uerie good finell but of a faint:


1


=n P
+ ONS


oc


; “he &t,) a pitt, euafion, helpe at a pinch, for a
uuce, 1
| Pont aux afnes de Logique, The c ?
Le qRab. ost | onuerfion of Pro-
Pont de corde. The netting, ot clofé fight,of a Ship of


Fac ;

Pont de Gournay. Sce Gournay.
Ponitlevis. a draw-bridge.
Confcience 4 pont levis. A verie large confti-
ence. \ ,

Soulierd pont levis. 4 fhove baning a Poloni

R hha sx Jr 2 & Polonia, or
Pont volant. The ladder of a fhip; the bridge, or lad-
der whereby men et aboord ber. ; asa Sty
Foros en planche, & en riviere, vallet devant,
m


tre derriere: Prov. Ove waters deepe and brid-


« ges weake orbollow, thé man muft lead the way, 1
mailer fllom. fee
Leremps renverfe les ponts : Pro. fn time are brid.
ges (all ries) ouerthrowne.

Va fol déflis vn pont eft yn tambour en la riviere,
€! foole on a bridge 1 adrumme in a riner;Looke Tam-
ur. en ahs

Pontage: m, Bridge-worke, Bridge-making ; alfo,Pon-
tage,ur Bridge-toll.

ine nt m. 4s Pont volant.
ontanage: m. Portage; the toll taken for pala
wer 4 Bridge. fs ten Pr paie

Ponte: f. 4 Laying of egges.

Ponté: m.ée: f, Bridged; that hath a Bridge oner it, or
belonging toit. |

Pontenage. zs Pontanage,

Ponthieu, 42 Larledome in France,called thus becaufe
there be many Bridges in it.

Pontif}& Pontife: m. A (chie/2) Bifhop,or Prelate.al-
{a Pontificall fellow, | ;

Pontifical: mi. ale: € Pontificall,Prelate-like ; lordlie,
fatelie, fumptuons.

Bry ge Pontifically, lordlily, flately, fump-
tuoufly. ~~ 4
Pontificat! m. 4 Prelatefbip, ot Prelacie ; a chief Bi-
Phopricke; the eftate, finttion, or dignitie of à (chief)

Bifbop,ar Prelate. . :

Pontille:£ A pricke,or Little point,

Pontique. Ponticall, or of Pontus, a part of Afa; }
bent LES
Noix Pontique, Theréd Filbera.

Pontis: m, A little Bridge, “D. see

Ponton: m. 4 wherrie or Ferrie-boat ; alfa,a Stilling,
or Gauntrie for Caske to fland on, ee

Pontonnier: m. 4 M rt NT ‘het by

Ponts. The name of a Towne in Saintonge, called fo of
the many Bridges aboutit ASS

Pontueux: m. eufe: f Bridgie, fill of Bridges,

Popelin: m. A little finicall darling, © -
PE ‘Soft cakes made of fine flower , knea-
ded with milke, [weet butter, and yolkes of epges ;
pe fafhioned, and buttered, like our Welfb Barrapy-
cli IS, a Pa el) ; Ë

Popin: m. ine: f. Spruce, meat, brisé, trimmes fine ;
guaint nice,daintie, prettie. : 27

Se Popiner. Yotrimme,or tricke up bimfelfe.

Popisine:f The poppine,or finacking fouid wherewith
Riders incourage or cherifh,their horfes. i

Poplitéc.æ Poplitique, :

P “A large veine in the middle of the thigbsal:
50,4 finew neere to the gartering place, and LUE
turne the leg inwards. Ul ogee


aile!


Rrr 7 Po. |


HÉUES EUR


Populace : f The raftall people, bafe rt meaner
* sort of the vulgar,


Populaire: m, The common rl
Populaire: com, Popular; people-fan ve: Biss.
Fish people-vwouing ; 3 alr, gto the peo-


Pise Popularly.
Populeon. Popilion,or Pamplin;
blacke Poplar buds,
Populeux: m.eufe : £ Populous, full of people. .
Populo: m. A Roll, or Lift of the fees, or augmentation
of fees, accruing to the King by the Chauncerie Seale ;
made,and kept monthly, by one of the 54 SAP er |
Clarkes of tnt Court ; aljo,a prettie plump-faced, and
cherrie-checkt boy ; or a reprefentation, or pitture of
© füch a one, whereupon demaunding how a mans chil-
a dy fay, Comment fe portentyos petis po- |


pulofté: f, Populofiticyabundance of people. *

Populotier: m. The Clar ‘of the Chauncerie, who, in
his turne, is to make,and keepe the Populo

Popyle. The fifo P ourcontvell. Rab.

Pore: m. A Porke,Hog,Swyne ; alfo, Porke, or Swynes
fafa dy a 4 bard-saled feat refembling a Gur-
nard; alfo
Pores de’ Dieu ees Abbots, and wee ge
sheet ces,

sie +" Pape See Porc-elpi.
Pores d u Roy. Fcc sue me
Du porc falé, Bakon,or Lard.


7
.


der-blade ; alfo,the bearbe Dandelion,Priefis Crowne,

Piff-abed.

Homme de porc, & de bœuf, 4 clowne,boore,churle,

carle ; an vnmannerlie, groffe-beaded » ill-nurtured
ade,

ett yn porc à l’auge, He feeds like a Hog, or fo ex-

ceffinely as he is readie to bur{t withall.

S'efcoutant parler. comme yn porc 3a de (Fa

derifion of a fe À lfe-affetting Fop;) sn arler,

Le porc a tout bon en foy fors que la merde: Pro.


(Yet is the du Le Hog an excellent remedie for
bloud-fpitting ; i ma firft be eaten, re with
{weet PAT fome of ‘the bloudie fpittle.)


Porcaufou, Sow/ed Hogs flefh. Rab,
Porceau: m. 4 Hog, Porke,Swyne ; Looke php
at pe £ se od a
orcelet: m. 4 Pig- Hn£
Porceletde S. fans à A Sells 07 Woo
Porcelet farci. 4 Pig roafled,or bowled with a vu
dings in bis bellie.
Porcelette:f.4/bell-ffh,called otherwife Porcelaine;
alfo,a ind of little Sturgeon.
Pore i: Pace the é
orc-efpi de mer a 6 § a certaine |
round fifh gamed RG Re (THEN
(pores £. A Porch,
ot of Pource; (an old word).
: m. Aféa-Hog. @Rab.
ie: f ABO 0


COT GIG wn of
ss sdt swat


| Poreau: m. A wart; alfa, as Cal; jor any corne, or bard
{sn ald eas of P


poi
! Porfile: £. The verie middle, or


: Porofité: f. Porinelfe,the being full of pores.
| Porofitez. Pores,
Groing de porc. The head,or upper part of the fooul- | Po:


Porrée The hearbe called Blite,or Blits; al,
pang red. ne Roman Bet : :


Pain forcing The hearbe Fr, ,Smynes-bread 4
“Hogs-bread. |

Porcorau: m. The molftor moe era Liuer-
wort.

Pore: m. 4 pore; Looke Pores.


; skinne,comming by or on the bands,or feet.
orée: f. as Porrée, Beetes; alfo, pot-bearbes ; and
puni alfo, portage ‘made of Beetes, or with other


es.
Femme ‘techereffe ne fera ja porée efpaifle: Prov.
. Alickorous boufwi i een makes thicke pottage.
~ On ne fait pas derien grafle porée: Prov. Fat
broth cannot be made of nothing.
Pores: m. Pores ; the [imall, and inuifible boles in the
pe ro which the Sweat,and vapours paffe out
the
Poreux: m. eufe:£ Porie, full of pores; af, feare- |


. as Pourfil, ,
middle line of a mans
face, confidered from top to bottome ; that part whereat
a Hag dinifion may be made thereof.
pole à Side-wayes; &, Face reprefentée en
ce. A halfe-faced, or Side faced, picture.
orfiler. as Pourfiler.

BR m. The wild Bulbus, wild Dia, Corne-Lecke,

wild Leeke,Bulbiné, Starve of Béthlem.


orphire. as Porphyre.

Porphirion: m. Dies red-beaked, and long-legd |
bird, wbich in drinking feemes to bite the water.

Porphyre. Porphirie ; a darke-red marble potted
mb white ; alfo, an Eaft-Fndian, tootblepe, white-
beaded, and purple-bodied Serpent, whofe vomit is
moft venomous.

Porque: f. 4 Sow.

Porque: com, Hoggifh; or, Sow-like.

Rosguet m. À Porket , or fhote Pig ; alfo, young

or
Porquette: f. AP igor young Porke.
Porracé: m.ée: f. Greene as a Leekesof a Leeke;made .


like a Leeke.
Porreau: m. A Leche alfo,a Wart.
Porreaude chien. Dogs Leeke, wild Lecke, French


Leeke,Lecke of the Vine.

Porreau feétil, ou tondu. The cut Lecke, maidens -
Leeke blade Leeke,unfet Lecke.

Porreau teftu. The beaded or knobbed Leeke, fet
Leeke,uncut Leeke.

Porreau de vigne.The Leeke of the Vint dogs Leeke,
French Lecke.

. Petit porreau. as Porreau fe&il
Bourseliée avec fucilles poreux 4 pure thats
readie,or eafie,to be opene

Pore f. The bearbe Peed Beet, or Beetes; alfo, as
Porée.
Porrée blanche, The common white Beet.
Porrée de chien. as Porreau de chien.
Porrée noire. The blacke Beet ; an hearbe,whofé boy-
aie root cures all m per of itches ; and is good againfh


de ii HearbePyrole,pwhter: green,


;


Saidens Le laded Leeke,umfet Leeke.
2f, paler mene


P
econ portette. as orreau de 4


POR


Porreux: m. eufe: f. Porie, fill of pores.
Porriere: f, A bed of Leekes. vee
Porrion, 4 Porion.

Port: m. A<Port, Hauèn, or Harbour for Ships; al/o,
carriage, bearing, or bringing; allo, cuftome, fraight,
or a fare payed for carriage ; alfo, the carriage, be-
bauior, or demeanour of a man; alfo, bis port, or
flate; or, the fauour, or good opinion which be bath in
the world.


Porte-brandons. Fierie, faming light; whence;


Ciel por. The flarrie welkia,the cleere Sky.


Porte-chappe: m. 4 Cope-wearer; a Prieft, or. one


that by bis place doth often weare a Cope ; allo, a feaft-
fürnifher ; one that hires out all manner of. naperie and


~ veffell,& all other prouifion whatfoguer (cxcept vittu-


als) fit for the fetting out of a feaft,


Porte-ciel. Heauen-bearing, Sky-vpholding; (An Epi-


thete for Atlas.)


Maiftre des Ports, Zone Maiftre. Porte-colle, as Protecole,
Par port d'armes. Violently, im hoftile manner, by Portée :f. The burthen, or fruit of a romans wombe;
force of armes,or by maine force. the brood or litter of a beaf;alfd,tbe breeding bearing,
Nul vent ne fait pour celuy qui n’a point de port or bringing forth of young; alfo, wit, capacitie, under-
deftiné: Prov. No wind fèrues bin that hath no cer- flandine; alfo,the flate,qualitie, condition, or abilitie,
taine hanen. of an eflate,bodie, exc; alfo, power, or abilitie to re-
Portache. as Procace. quite; alfo, a certaine land-meafure comprehending
Portage : m. Portage, carviage, or a carrying; alfojthe | -° 12 cords (of 30 feet to the cord) and vfed moft in Bur-
cuflome, toll, aight, As er for carriage. gundie,
Portail: m. 4 Portall for a dore: 1023 La portée d'un Arquebufe, The reach thereof; or yas
Portant: m. ante: f. ‘Carrying, bearing ; alfa, weai | farre as it will fhoot ; whence;
ring, : F | Sous la portée de ! Arquebufe. within Caleeuer
Le fort portant Je foible, One with another,or one te
helping the.other ; good and bad, weake and firong, |" Cela eft caufe de plus grande portée. That caufeth
altogether, 4 greater increafe of fruits, oc.
L'un portant l'autre. The fame. Il n’a plus de fçavoir acquis que ce qu'il en faut
pre :m, ive: € Portatiue ; alfo,wieldie,or linelic of ~~ fa portée. He bath got no more skill then he
\ bodie. needs,
Jardin portatif. 4 frmitfull garden, ‘ Portées. Theboughes which a Deere brufeth,or béareth
Livre portatif. A pocket-booke. q downe,with bis head in trauer fing of thickets.
Portatisse. Portatine,portable,carryable, : Courir vncerf fur les portées. To purfue a Deere
Port’-aubans: m. Chaine-waless peeces of wood #ay- mecs aloft.
led on both the outfides of a Ship, to keepe them fiom | Porte-efcritoire:m. A Notaries boy; one that Serues
being worne,or galled by the Sbrowdes. q but to carrie his pen and inkborne afier bim.


\


À Porte: f. A Portor Gate ; a great, or outward, doore 3 Port’ ‘fA Sword-bearer ; one that carries a


any entranceor way to enter at; al{oya hauther,or eye; |  fovord before,or after,anotber; alfo, a Bawdricke, or
alfo,the port of a fword-hilt. f Hanger, for a fiword,
La porte des champs. The backe-doore, or field- Porte-faix: m. A Porter; Pedler ; Burthen-beaver,
doore, of a cosintiey boufe. 1 | Porte-flambeaux. Ciel port. The flarrie, flaming,or
Droiét de porte. Gate-money ; a dutie payed by bright Sky, :
the {cbollers of Paris at their admifiion into a Col. | Porte-fleurs, Flourifhing, hower-bearings whence;
~ ledge. wah Element porte-fleurs. The earth,
Fauffe porte. An inner gate,or doore; alfoya poflerne | Porte-fraise: m. A‘Rebato, or füpporter for a Ruffe ;
gate,or backe doore. j0S ER wroupht,or imbrodered,and cut intodiuers panes.
Veine porte. Looke Veine, Ae Porte-guidon:m An Enfigne-bearer unto a troope of
~ Donner de Ja porte fur lenez à; To exclude, fhut @ | :: men of Armes, ©
doore againft, or fhut out of doores. ‘ox | Porte-harnois:m. 4 Croffe; the croffe-like Pearch
Tout cela eft frappé à la porte d'un trefpaflé, AU | — whereon an Armor is vfially banged, . |
thats but loffè of time,or labour loft, «| Porte-haubant. 4s Port’-aubans, vatus
Hardiment heurte à la porte qui bonne nouvelle | Porte-manteau:'m. 4 Port:mantue; Cloake-big,
x Vans Pro. Hetbat good tidings beares full boldly |. : Male; alfo, the carrier of a Cloake, or a Cloake-bag-
nocketh. à Carrier, SRY TENE 0
Les derniers venus fermentiles 2 Prov. The: | © Porte-manteau du Roy, The Kings Cloake-bag-
| def commer a M an F ct |; bearers tats a8 py Pert
rop toft vient à la porte qui mauvaife nouvelle | Portement: m. A carrying,bearing; wearing ; fuppor-
4 “apporte: Doors Te de riee te thatill tidings| | ting,vpholding; alfo,bealth,or liking. +
ath, ;


Ha


EP thie? 9). JS


__ hath Seay, | Porte-mors: m. The checke-péecejor checke-band of a
Porté: mi genficstried,bornesconneyed; upheld fiflai~ | Bridle, trs SE

ned; indureds alfosworne; alfo,bit; whence ; ‘1| Portente: m. A prodigious jor mon|lrous thing, :
Ce coup n'a pas porté, This blow hath fayled, or | Portenteux: m.eufe: f. Predigions, monflrous,marue.
sewiped.. SANS MARR TS 20-17: : £ © ous, aftonifhing; range. ' :

‘A pied tout porté, pour, Forward, readie, on bis Porte-panier+ nu A basket-carrier ; alfo,a Ped- | ~

eft ex t : e is expreffe orte-parole, Amefige-carrier betweene partie and

morbide ' tan or aleonh. Fo eg Way Monel : q

ly meant,or fienified,that, — aye iu Port-peine : com. -Laborious , painefull, paines-ta-
Tout cela s’eftoir fort bien porte, iufqucs. Was | king. — 00970" OF

paire wel bandled,or managed; went verie eet Porte-piece:: f:° A Shoomakers Punch, or Pumcbi-!
“vatil. ass 407), UTE area + H:5d0T ||. Sd io fonodt (10/60 & ity eae
Met | Rrt jj . Porte-


i.


"
PAST Re + NE ee


| POR


Porte-poche. 4 bag-bearer,poutch-bearer,or poke-bea-
ver; be that carries the ferip, or wallet for a companie
of beggers. ;

Porte-poulet. A bamde,or carrier of loue-me[fages.

Porte-queué, 4 Trayne-bearer to a Prince.

Porter. To carrie,or beare ; alfo,to weare;al/o,to breed,

or bring forth; alfo,to fuffer,sbide, indure; alfo,to fi:

taine, fupport,vpbald;alfo (at once) toraifè,maintaine, |
and put forward, a doing borfe; aif (at Tennis) a ball
torife.

Se porter bien. To.be in good bealth. f

Se porter bien en yn aftaire. To bebaue, or beflirre

himfelfe well in a bufineBe.

Porter fon bois. Elle porte bien fon bois. Looke

Bois.

Porter vne chemife blanche à. To give a mornings

camifado, or a cold pie fora breakfap, unto; to rowfe

with a pox,raife out of bed witha vengeance. —

Porter coup. Tobit bame,to attaine unto that it was

diretted to,or meant for.

Porter coup à lafoy. To falfifie a promife, or faith,

giuen.

Porter droit contre, Direélly to ayme at, or flye a~

gainfl; to dircét it felfesor goe leuell vuto,

Porter à deux efpaules. Facomfantly to follow fome-

times one, fomelimes bis enemie ; or to be of botb fides,

but true vnto neither. :

Porter fur {es efpaules. Looke Efpaule.

Porter l'efpongefur, Ta deface, blot, putout.

_ Porter faux. Ce leu porte faux. This Tenmis-court
is fall of falfe bounds,

Porter le flambeau. Seeke Flambeau,

« Porter la foy. To doe fealtie. ws
Porter des fueillesau bois. Tobeflow any poy.

them that need it not ; or of whom (therefore) be

haue no thanks for it. . oN

Porter gré à, To acknowledge a beboldingnelfe un


to,
Porter Tour, To be tranfparent. |
Porter la marotte de. To be the authorsor commamt-
der of. non 1230081
Porter ombre. To gine, yeeld, or cafi a fhadow: «|
Porter fon pacquet. See Pacquets. » + +
Porter la pafte aufour. I en porta la pafte au |
four. He bore the blame,or burthen of it; twas be that
ped or fmarted, for it, ons €
orter vertu. Tobe of anexcellent mature,or proper-
tie; to haue much vertweinite … guédusc met ||
Ils n’en dirent plus que leurs inftruétions s'en por
_toyent They fayed na more of it shen their infractions |
gaue them warrant for. - si
Ih.n’eft pas fi fol-qu'il en ported'habit. He is not
“fo fond as one would take bim for, as outwardly be
_feemes, or as one would shinke him to be by bis outs
fide. “iss


4 \
SUR ‘


. Qui-tien ne porterien chet; Prov. He that!
pce cen ee chet:


POR


true Galoche (fayes Nicot) bath no leather belonging

to it, eee ;

Porteftrieux. The plate of a flirrup.

Porte-tablettes. 4 Pedlar ; or one that carries Table.
bookes coc ,to fell. 0

orteur : m. A carrier, bearer ; bringer, wearer.
Porteurs dechoefne. Looke Choefne,

Porteur de Rogatons. Oxe that carries the Popes
Pardons up and downe a countrey; alfo,a wandering,
and unlearned Preacher , who bearing about with
bim fome three or foure Sermons in bis pocket, and
preaching them at fenerall places, gaincib an opinion
of great learning among the vulgar.

Croyez ce porteur. (The contents,or conclufion of a
letter of credit ; but vfed fometimes in # contrarie |

Sence for) beleene the lyer. :

Porteure d'une femme. 4 womans burthen, or child-
earing.
Doser ei A Porter. !
Portier: m. ere: £ Carrying,bearing; whence, Brebis
portiere. 4 bearing Ewe. .

Ortiere: £. A Portereffe, or woman Porter; alfa, the
boot of a Coach, crc ; alfd, a peece of Tapiftrie, ec,
hung before a doore; alfo, the female Salmon ; Looke
Bortiere, i

Portinal: m. 4 Portal. : :

Portion: Fe portion, fhare, part,parcell, peece,deale,
vate; meafure quantitie, proportion.

Portionifte: m. pp ar vos Cathedral Church.

Portionné:m.ée: f. Apportioned,rated, fhared; mea-
füred out; alfo, flinted, or whofe portion is layed out, or
deliuered,

Portionner.To apportion, part, fhare, deale meafure,

- dinide, rate out,

Portique: m, 4a open Porch:, P ortall,or walking place
before a houf, couered ouer bead by a roofe borne up

~ ‘with pillars.

Portiuncule: £ An Fadulgence obtained (as fome 1e-

« port) by $.Francis,of the Virgin Mary, for the remi [fi-
on of all the finnes of thofé, who (en payant) came in
at one,and went out at another ,doore of a Church dedi-

scated unto ber in Angiers.


| Le Portoir des vignes. The braunchthat beares the


grapes.

Portoire: f. Anÿ thing that belpestocarty another thing;
as a Voyder,Skep,Scuttlewheelebarrow,cc,and par-
ticularly, arveffell fomewbatrefembling a balfe Tub,
wherein grapes be carried onborfebacke fiom a remote

- Vineyards 33
3 ps d'unecoche. The (pace of the dooreofia
oach, :


 Portoüoite. Ahend-barrow or as Portoire.


Portüeux: m. eufe: f. Full of Ports; belonging vnto
a Hauen. jhe

Portugaife: f 4 Portegue; a golden coyne worth about
iij 1, xs, flert. |


Portugalle,&


ife. as Portugaife,


im. Alittle, or lee. gate adioyning vntoa’| P : fs Avarrying,bearing ; wearing, ;
tan mures alfa, ay nen Laposnireldans brebis, he Gite shone; or filme,
te, or kind of fluice whereby the courfé of a Riner.is wherein a Lambe comes wrapped out of the Eves
t Sbeented into a gut, onthe ne ide bereefeut outfit | nbedie, soa dyer: 9 07: wontent À
= theturningof fome Mill,ére; alfo,the name of a feet | Pofade: f = co Da of birds ; a laying dove of
in the Su yee tic 1smehod| | 13 a Bt Din Ye ftvagor a Bia plates al
Porte-roolle: m. A prompterof ED yah | ~a flop à capes me: bis foreparts
ai eo: tot-t40 twice, or thrice. A omit’
+ Pipree faces ae a “fe àlapofäde. opens rep bin
Porte: leather. of a. filly or fit fi: poohdbr Visaps getty"
we now calla » though improperly ; Pol 4pambinermifio peeing caline
tot FU = | En. of:
- Original fron
Go gle THE OHIO-STATE-UNIVERSITY


POS


Pofé: m. ée: f. Put, fet,laycd, pight, placed, fixed plan-
ted, fcited, feated, fituate ; alfo, temperate, flayed, or
Sittled in bumor,

Polé le cas, Suppofe,allow, put the cafe,

Pofemént: m, A putting, fetting, pitching, placing, ea-
ting, fettling, planting. .

Pofeinent. Settledly, fayedly.

Pofer. To put, pitch, place; to feat, fettle, plant ; to flay,
or leane on; to fet, or lay downe ; alfo, a borfe to flop,
and aduaunce withall bis fore-parts,

Pofer du paffement. To lay it flat ; Le pofer à bord
Scie To lay it felling, or fo as no edge thereof can
|. be ftene.
Pofition: £ A pofition ; or,as Pofement.
ofque: f. A potion, or drinke made of vineger and


water,

Pofledé: m. ée : £ Poffefed,had held, enioyed,vfèdoc-
cupied,

Poffeder. To poffeffe,haue,hold,vfe,oceupy enioy.

Poflelereffe : £. A pofefferefe; a woman that poffefes,
balds,enioyes.

Poffeffeur: m. 4 pofeffor, bolder, enioyer, vfer, owner,


Oj.

Pofleffeur de bonne foy. One that bolds a thing by
a inf title,as be thinkes.

Pofleflcur de mauvaife foy. A diffeifor ; one that
violently, and wilfully keepes another man from bis


À owne.
Pofleffoufe. as Pofleflereffe. -
Poffeffion: f. Pofeffion,vfé occupation, enioyment of ;
alfo,wealth, (ubflance,or land poffeffed. F

Poffefloire : m. 4 pofeffionor thing poffefed. |

Poffefloire: com.Pofefforie,of poffeffion,by way of pof-


feffion,
Poffibilité : £ Pofibilitie,likelihood.
Poffible: com. Likelie, poffible, that may be,
Faire fon poffible. To doe bis vtmoft indeanor to doe
| as much as he can. ;
Poffon: m. The quarter ofa Chopine; alittle meafure
for milkeyveriuice,and vineger, not altogether fo big as
the quarter of our Pint, -
Pofte: m. 4 Pofte, Currier, fpeedie mefenger ; alfo, a
feruant that goes up and downe about the bufinefes of
ViNunness alfo,a rakebell,or Colledge-fèruans,ibats ener
gadding ov ietting abroad. \
Pofte de mer. A great,and (wift fifh,called in Latin
“Dromas; which name is alfo,by diners Authors, ginen


Bonito,Tunnie,crc. ©

Pofte: £. Poft, pofting, the riding poft ; as alfo, the firni-
ture that belongs unto pofting ; alfa,a poft,or great flake;
alfo,a broad, and thicke pale, hauing a pike in the bot-
tome, dr a hole in the middle for a fhot to play through;
ufed ia approaches vato a breach,
Gens de pofte. Yeomen, Roturiers, vamoble vafalls


orte fe noble perfons. i 2:

‘ E > wilh pi ‘

mr pds 4 Cae purpe with premeditati-
ofte. nto safter my mind according


| ‘would have it,
: M. Aj  beame ca
Petey: ae Pek be PSS


ofteral. See Pofterol. —

Pofteres. The Pofteriorums,or

Pofterieur: m. eure: £ P
fucceeding ; inferi


inder parts.
Sbledes| liter, eg,


ram CO Qle


to all fwifi raunging, and refilefe fifhes, as the Amie,


Bolte To poft, (peed, vide poff make pot baf q


Pofterité: € Poleritiof-rings they thet ave to come _ “pot à plume.


P OS


of, or will come after,us.
Pofterol: m. The red fea-Nettle ; an ouglie and imper-
fect fea-fifh,not much unlike to a mans bung-bote,
= ra baile-fhot for Herons,Geefe and other fuch
great fowle,
Pofteux: m.eufe: f. Hafie, full of hafi,in poft baft.
Pofthume: com, Borne after a fathers death,
Poftidate. 4 Poft-date.
Poftille: £. 4 poftill; gloffe, compendious expofition,
Poftilleux: m.eufe: f. Auch vfing, or louing, to ride


pol.

Poftillon: m, 4 Poftillon,Guide,P oftes boy.
Corrompu comme la fefied’ un poftillon. 4 ful
lad, one that knowes the world throughly ; one that
hath drunke of many waters,runne through many dan-
gers ; one that hath often paffed the pikes.

Poftillonner. To ride poft.

Rosier: To play ibe vagrant Fmpoflor, wandering
Jugler,

Poftiqueries: £ Coufèning fleights, ingling deuifès, im-
pollures tricks of Legerdemaine.

Poftiqueur: m. 4 wandering Impoflor a roguing Fug-
ler; a vagrant coufener cheater deceiuer.

Poftpofé: m. ée : £.Poflpofed ; fet,or lefi,bebind; neg-
leéted,omitied,

Poftpofer. To fet, or leaue bebind ; to efteeme leffe, or
make lefe account of; to neglect in comparifon, omit in
regard,of another.

Poftulation: f. A demaund, fuit requeft, fupplication;
alfo,a complaint or expoftulation,
oftulé : m. ée: £ Demaunded required, fued for;alf?,
admitted elected, adopted ; alfo, ioyned in office, linked
in companie with. é

Poftuler. 10 fue, demaund, require ; alfo, to plead, or
aroue at the Barre; alfo,to (ue,accufe,or complaine of.

Poftules: f wheales, powkes.

Poftulevx: m. eufe: f. Full of wheales,or powkes.

Pofturable: com, Sequefirable,erc ; as in Befte mife
en pofture.

Pofture: f. The poflure, fetting, or fettling of the bodie
in,or before,any altion;and bence,the ward.or manner
of lying or flanding, ufed by fencers; alfo, the place
wherein a horfe carries his bead,or creaft, or the carri-
age of his bead,or creaft.

Befte mife en pofture. Sequefired ; lefi, or beflowed
with one, who undertakes to keepe it [afe, and to pro-
duce,or prefent it in Court whenfocner it all be called


Pot: m. 4 Pot (afwhat fie foeuer) is properly a ge-
nerall name for any fmall ve[ftil wherein Hs bee.
water, dc, readie 10 be drunke is vfually put; (and yet
thé French apply it alfo unto fmall veffels, wherein o-
ther liquors, and fometimes vnliquid things are kept; )
alfo, particularly, one of a certaine fcantling (verte
neere our Gallons) for iuft 400 of them doe make a
Queuë; alfo,a round Caske,or head-peece without any
creait.

> Pot à deux anfes, 47 equinocation;a word,or matier
whereof double conftruétion may be made,
Potd confitures. 4 Comfét-box. ib
Pot aleau, A water-pot ; and (more particularly) a
“ Laacr,or Tewer. ‘
Pot de Lion, 4 Chafer.
Pot à pifier.A Jurdan,chamber-pot,Piffe-pot.
Pot à plume. 4 feather-pot ; an old pot wherein-
tathe French (as we into an old tub) commonly put
feathers; and hence the Pronerbe, Vicil comme vn


C2


Rrr iy Pot


as


;
4
“4
2


| P OT


Pot pourri. A pot porride ; a Spanifh dif of many [e-
nerall meates boyledor [lued together.
Pot aux rofes, A mifferie, fecret, hidden matter ; a
cloake or couer unto many knaueries.
Pot de la tefte. The féalpe,or skull.
Pot au vin. The head. Rab. 1
Pot de vin, A pot-full of Wine ; alfo, a reward given
for good newes brought, loft goods reftored, a bargaine
well drinen, or in x efpect of any other acceptable fer-
nice ; alfo, a portion befiowed with a maid in mar-
riage.
‘A pot,& à feu, At bed and boord,at meat and meale,
as one of the houfe; or,as all of one houfe; and hence ;
Vivre à pot,& à feu avec. To keepe companie baue fo-
cietie, bold corre{pondencie,with.
Aller à 'entour du pot. To ufé many circumflances,to
goe about the bufb, or,by circust of words to infinunte
that which one dares not plainely deliver.
Ils ne font qu'un pot, & vn feu. They line continually
together. |
Deux pots au feu fignifient fefte, & deux femmes
font la tempefte: Prov. Two pots a feat prefage, two
women mickle rage,
Tet pot tel couvercle: Pro. Such pot fuch couer;like
will to like quoth the Diuell to the Collier. |
Ib n'y a rien tel qu'un vieil pot à faire la bonne
foupe: Pro, Looke Vicil.
Potable: com. Potable, drinkable.
Potage: m. Pottage, porridge.
Potage de la bite, Beet porta esalfo fbe oyle of man;
anole which a. woman ‘boa not (unlawfülly) taft
of.
Pour cout potage. when all is done, when all comes
tall; alfo,for all purposes.
C’eft vn vilain pour tout potage. This is a notable
rafcall, a notorious villaine, a verser knauc there lines
not. :
Bon gaignage fait bon potage: Prov. See Gaig:
nage, ,
nait aie viande on ne {Gait faire vn bon pota-
ge: Pro. 7ll fluffe will not affoord good worke.
Potagé: m. ée:f. Made pottage, reduced into pot-
tage.

Potager: m, A by-placein a countreybeufe, in flead of
* qaLarder, for the laying up of raw,or cold mcates ; alfo,
a porridge-bellie,or.a great porridge-eater. ,
Potager: m. ere: f+ Of.or belonging unto, pottage. .

Herbes potageres, Pot-hearbes. 3


Viepotagere. Life fuflained pottage. =
Vis Potage A fa that ae the Larder of
acountrey houfes a


Potager. To make pottage; alfytohauein his power,


ti Ta play. bush ine bimfel
M RE a men
~~ | Potagerie: £ Hearbes, or any atber fluffe whereof pat-


fpattering,or blowing bis nofe ; and bence alfo, ditber,
… daxie, floathfull,idle.. 564s, isto!
Pouallier.«s Poallier, , mn
Pouce. Looke Poulce, x ski hu, mea ef os
| Poucher. 4 Pocher. ges sui,


| Pouciniere. Secke Poulf


Pour, The Pople, Corie, red came.


VOS 0:


be runne at bangeth. ENT UE 4
Potence: m. ée:£ Like, or belonging, to a Gibbet, or
Crutch; Jn Blafon, potencie ; or,as in;
Champaigne potencee. 4 Barre Miere.
Croix potencée. 4 croffe Batune. |
Potentat: m. A Potentate, great Lord, mightie Perfo-.
. nage, powerfull man, in a State. Ber
Potentiel: m. elle: £ Strong, forcible, powerfull in o-
peration. : f \
Cautere potentiel, 4 potential! Cauter any cauftick
_ medicine,or compound, ;
Potentille: wild Tanfie, Siluer weed. CS |
Poterie: £ 4 pot-market ; alfd, a Potters fhep; alfo,a |
place wherein pots are made ; alfo,pot-makimg.
Poterne: f. 4 Pofterne,or pofterne gate; a backe-doore
to a Fort,@c, VES
Potes. 4 kind of fhining fifh made fomewhat like a caps
“ hath eight feet, and being bandled any while, melts
€ 7ce, : £ Tht
Poteltat: m. 4 Poteftat, principal Officer, chiefe Ma-
giftrate, : ;
Potie: f. A knot inwoollen cloth; or, a rotten thread, or
threads end, eadie to fall from cloth. à
Potié. as Poupelé. i | “hat
Potier: m. A Potter,or Pot-maker,
Potier d'eftain, 4 Pewlerer.. hag
Potieux: m. eule: f. Ouer-daintiecurious,queafie-fto-
macked,nice; alfo, peeuifb, froward,waymard, pettifh, |
hard to pleafe, content with motbing that is offered, or
fat before bims | à tete
Potingues. Drinking exploits, &Rab. i
Potion: £ A potion ; a Phificall drinke,or deench,
Potiron: m. 4 Mufbrome,or Toadfioole ; afo,a kind of
© Dalphin-like fifh. : AU
Potonnier, as Pautonnier,, : : ein .
Porttée:f,.4 potfull of; alfo,as Potée. Bot
Pottein: m. Broken peeces of mettall, or of ald veffels,
mingled one withanother. =) hme


di, (7


OREM: ahenss teur 22 di CF
Pottin : m, Solder of mettall; or,as Portein,
Potus: m. Phificall potions.


Pouac. F “Faterieblion vfed when any lie
ing is fhewed,or jayed. aes
Had Teast onthe nofe, or about the


Leofa Sheepe ; Looke Poacxe;alfosa kind of Wood-


. J) Pt) LI TT LL & ,
Poiiacre: com. Srixellie, fnottie, rotten, filthie ; one
> po cos ps prefence, is ener fpitting,


: ape
Poucin: m4


Rey et bi, ear ee ax
f hearbe called ,Baulme. Leta
pechoate Rouliee Poalaroyer.
_ Poudrier: m. AGunpowder-makers alfoya dup-box.
Poveau: m. The panne of aClofe-fleole, 15-11,
Pouée: f. The ridge of a bed in a Vineyard, 4-6
Poitelle:. fA Sioneor Hot-houfé, ake
pt DR sen i Benen
| infin tide, pi ap.
Pouketetigne Te ete c
P Gr Sa ee eric Se.
| onde 62m rire Soh.
: ouille:


“Original from


= HE OMO: STATE UNIVERSITY


POD
Pouille: A part of Naples, whoft inbabitanss are held


A verie dangerous in conuer[ation; whence the Pro-
me _ uerbe; Compere de la Pouille coufte, 8 defpo-
3 ill


i mille, 4), mats
a __ Blanc de Pouille. Cerufé,or white Lead, "à
i Pouiller. To lowje,to picke out lice,to wait,or looke into,
i 4 4 bead, for lice, | te
me Pouilleric : £ Lowfnefe ; afèbeggerie; fluttifhsor nap:
vin fie pouertin x 0: bs SE of]
S Ce n’eft que toute pouillerie. There's no one good,
ips - rh 7 É
à © |. nor faire peece ; there’s nought but trafh, in all bis
ot le fluffe, 3
. © . {-Pouilles:f Lice: Bourg: | : 1
Nae _ Chanter, ou dire pouilles, To raile,reproach, re-
| _ uile,giue moft filthie words. à i
ù *f Pouilleux : meufe +f. Loïvfie; full of lice alfo,begger-
Vai | he, of finall ov noymeanes, 4
ae Herbe aux pouilleux, Lice-bane,Lowfe-wort,Lowfe-
aa powder, Stauefaker. ‘
| Poul; m. 4 low/e; alfo,the Ninmurder,a yeHowifh bird,
hag and the fmallefl of birds,
|. Pouldemer. The fea Lowfe ; a fifh thats no bigger
‘qe 11" then a beane.. . '
PRE Herbe aux poulx. 4 Herbe aux pouilleux,
Pep Poulaille : f. Poultrie ; Hennes, Chickens,
‘ | Poulailler. 4 Henne-houfe,or Henne-rooft,
Poulaillerie:£ Poultrie.
an Poulaillier: m..4 Poulter; alfo,a breeder or keeper of
; À Poultrie.
© | Poulain:m, 4-folesor coul; alfa, the rope wherewith
+ twine is let downe into à feller 3 apullie rope ; alfo, a
botch in the groine, a Winchefler Goofe,
Des: | Pied de poulain. Fole-foot, Coults-foot, Horfé-fiot,
= Hall-foot,(an hearbe.) ' og
_ 2 Sa quepollain F
7 ; ent tant comme il dure: Prov, The tricks 4 cont get-
| teth at bis firft backing ywill while be continueth neuer
= be lacking,
où _ Rien ne vaut poulain s’il ne romiptfon lien: Prov,
© À The coult that breakes not bis balter is not worth a
à balfepenie. nid 10!


| Poulainant. Foling,as a mare. . "se
Poulaine: f whence ; Souliersà poulaine. Old fafhi-
oned fhooes, beld on the feet by fingle latchets run:
3 - dherthwars th'influp, which otherwife were all open
14 5 alfo, thofe that bad a fafbion of long bookes (lickingout
ab th'end of their toes. nt us
Ventre à lapoulaine, 4 gulching, or huge,bellie; a
\- 5 bellie as big asasunne. im salvo”
Z Poulainement sm, 4 foling,. pling
a Poulainer: (4 mare)ie fole, sh, is
+ Poulce : m. The thumbe. | rey
= À »vkepoulce dupied. Thegreattoes 2 © 1:52 tt
x 1. Poulce,& event,ou vent. The breadth of athumbe
x | Swen betweene encric yardinmeafuring. "1
: “A poulce fant, The fame,» | masyy
: as poulces Ala cein@ure, Idlely, flaath filly, care.
}. ond Apr 2 Mabe o1ite? QE
|. Mordre lespoulces. To bite bis thumbes for anger.
Poulcée: fi 4 eo the breadth of
die be RS a.
oulceon :m:Thez4part ofa Chopine; a verie final!
meafure , feldome vféd except it be for the gag of
_ the little Detnifextier, where of is maketh a twélfib
Ss pr Parle 4 MCs HF RENNES à 20 ra. Lo stich
: pos ied : m, The Powres ell, Preke,or many-foo-
uvre D. ion ¥


ERRUON 6 225)


| Poulcier : m, as Poulcée, ‘uns hs wey


LE
[te 1e)


renden dompture, illemainti-


POY


Pouldre : f Powder,duft. 13

-«Pouldre Agrippine. Amyaneat that pronokes,or en=
ables unto luft,

»Pouldre blanche. A powder compounded of Ginger,
Cimnamon,and Nutmegs ; much in vfe among Cooks.

- Pouldre de duc. A powder made of Sugar and Cin-

+ Ramone hauing (Sometimes) other Aromaticall fim-
i added unto them,

ouldre à gripper. Any luxtrious , or lafcinious

meat, 1
Pouldre de Pouflol. À kind of fand gotté at Poufo.
le,hard by Naples; & vfed inthe cutting af Marbles,
Pouldrerouge. Precipitate; fublimed,or calcinated,


uic tés:
Il ietteraad tous les autres la pouldre aux yeux.
He will outfirip all bis competitors, the vidtorie will
without doubt be bis ; (metaphorically, from the fwif-
tef runner in afandie race, who to make bis fellowes
follow aloofé, cafteth dufi with bis beeles intotbeir en-
wows eyes.) eae
Pouldré : m. ée :f. Powdered bedufted.
Pouldrement:m. 4 powdering; a turning into pory=


er.
Pouldrer, To powder ; duft, or beduft ; to mahe,beator
wn into ; to féafon, fprinkle, or dredge with, powder,


. ord
Pouldrette =f. Fine powder, fmall duf,
Temps de pouldrette. The feafou wherein a buf:
bandman breakes the clods of bis plowed land:
Pouldreux »m. eufe :  Duflic, fill of dup.
Avoir le pieds pouldreux. 70 be of a nimble oy ac.
tiue confltution, a fragling or wandcring difpofition,
Said alfo of one who being in further debt thea be hath
will,ot meanes 10 come out of, playes, for the moflipart,
leaf in fight. norte h
Pouldrier: m. 4 dufbag ; ao, a Gunpowder ma.


,
Pouldriere:f. Dafi,or duftineffe. JA
Pouldroyement : m. A puluerifing; or prwdering; a
reducing unto difi,or into powder, so!
Pouldroyer. To puluerixe ; ta. mahe,or turne into pow-
der jan dufle V2 2 à 30
Poule:£4 Henne 0» :*
: ESP Coot,Mooréhcne,F enducke.
oule griefche, A Moorchenne ; the benne of the
emt hs? 20) 2 : De
Poule d'Inde, 4 Turkie benne. DR
Poule Lombarde: :4 Kemiifh benne,agieathenne a
benne of the Game... \ti\ Haies er ty eset €]


a de mer. À fina y “toothed,
© broad-féxted, little-eyed, récke-fifh srt fines bee
tranfpareat and both they, and her whole bodiepery.

dere. ie-coloured


ouer with beanti 4, and: fndiie:colo

5 "Ses toire

les poulfins, the fewen flarres.

Culde poule. The tops af the fingers, anal thumb ioy-

ned,or clofed together ; alfosahard five Ling on hedge
of a Fiflula. AQABA WO ST, front

Doéte:anhicheur de poules:: 42 excellent Cor-


foots.
La


queane, ss tha :

. Courid To forrage ranfacke,or rob county
baw, the cuftome of rauening fouldiers; be
leane hot a Henne wbere: DA à
Faire ee To play the coward,

\. Fairede fes oeufs poules. Loupe Oeuf. : 1!
2 Samaïs mauvaife nele couva, He i ofagen-


por |
vale, or gentlemantie bumout’; be barb no oneiot of ill |
breeding whim? Sony 26, 0e eee ©


:
A
D,
4
.
a
es
;
4
FE

L


yO Y
De poules, & de pauvreté on en eft bien toft en-
gé: Prov. Pullesne, and pouerticare quickly increa-


td.
ee regnard eft pris lafche les poules: Prov. Looke


. Regnard,


Leregnard prefche aux poules : Pro. (Sayed when
a notable Impofter talks unto,or treats with, wf lie and
ignorant people.)

Par trop trotterJapoule, & lafemme fe perdent
facilement? Prov. Women,and bennes that gad ore»
much,are quickly loft.

Qui fuit les poules apprend à grater la terre : Pro,
He that followes a benne foone learnes to fèrape ; imi-
tation 1,m0f} commonty,too good a Scboolemifire(fe.
Tel perd appareil d’vne poule à faute d’achepter
pour vn liard d’efpices: Prov, Some by tbe (paring of of
oe coft, bereaue themfelues of daintie fod , and

ro


Poulemart : m. .4 weapon like a Hanger.


“A fil de poulemart. with Wedge, or dint of the
fword,


Poulener. as Poulainer,
Poulenne. See Poulaine,
Poulet: m, A chickens alfo,a loue-letter, or loue-mef-


fage.


Veau mal eui&,& poulets cruds, font les cimitieres


boflus : Prov. Raw veale, eet wate fwel-


Churchyards,
ee athe f. A pullet,or young benne,


P


oulie : € Apulie, *
oulier : m.A Poulter; alfo,a brood-houfe benne-boufe,
or benne-rooft ; alfo,as Bicoque.


Poulinement : m. A foling.

Pouliner. 4 mare to fl bring forth a conlt.
Poulion: m. A little pullie.

paalibes + Peaniroyall, Pulial royall, pudding-gra(fe,


Lurk

Pothier, ot delardin.Garden Pemniroyall,upright Pes-
tt
Pouliot de montaigne. Puliall mountain, bearbe
Maflicke,Hor(e-time.
Pouliot fauvage. Wild Penniroyall,Corn-mint Corn
calamint, (linking Calamint,


Poires es A Poulier,or keeper of pullaine ; «fo,


4 Poul


Poullarde: ne € The Seacbenne 54 fl; Lake Poule de


Poullart. bledpoul. S Regier crées haat ofa
Poullaze:f. Th er Rauen, . l'as
Poulle:f, Seeke Pou fob

Poullé. Bled Roullé. ? The wall Barbe, ‘called s. Peters


corne,

Poullier.# Poulier. . )

Poullion: m. 4 little pullie. .

Poulmelée: £ wild;or baflard,blacke Hellebore,called


por pe ait spi = Settergrafes
chaque aljo
Poulmon : m. The lig py bid enti’ m4
Ma A certaine round, (bungie, and
Swimming aboue water is the figne of an approa
Sy aoe a eut of the water feemes Lines |:
‘er many peecesythey will irre for twoer three daies


aux poulmons, The barb alld Sate of


Eee


wort sath, [te Lampoon, Dee


| Go gle


POV


Batre à toutpouknon To pant exceedingly,to be al
mofl out of breath,

Une fçait fur quelle fueille de poulmon refpirer.
He knowes not whether 10 addrefie bimfelfe, or howto
ere bimfelfe, be knowes not what in the world 10


Souffler à tous poulmons. To nae with might and
maine ,or with all the force be ba


danger f. The cough, or = infirmitie of the |


paine: mas Poupe : m.al/o,the Poxrcontrell, Preke,
or many-footed fifh.

Poulpe mufqué. 4 kind thereof, whofe bead ycelds a
firong muskie fauor and is therfore much bunted afier
by Lampreyes.

Poulpe : f. Pulpe; or as Polpe.

Poulpeé Seeke Poupelé.

Poulpeux : m. eufe: 3 Pulpie,or full of pulpe ; flefhie,
brawäie, pithie,

re f The bearbe Purflane.

Poulpied : m. The feme,

Pou pitre :m, A Leclerne,(bigb)Deske, or Pulpit; af,
a Preffe for bookes to fland in; alfo, a Stage or part of
a Theater wherein Players act ; ; alfoya roome for Muf-
cians in th’upper part we a Stage aifo,a threfkold, or
ground. fill i oras Marche-pied,

Poulpre. 4 Pourpe

Pouls :m. The pale; the beating, or motion of an Arte-
rie ; or th’ Arterie fo beating,

Mettre au pouls failli, To gine a period unto bis pul-
Ses beating ; to bring to the laft ga(be, or unto the gates
of death,

Poulfe :m, & £ Looke Pouffe: m. &f.

Poulfé: m. ée: f. Pufhed,thruft,infiled joulted ; infor-
ced,compelled, violently put on ; alfo,dviuen,or beaten
in; alfo,turned,as wine,erc,

Le) jeu de dames poulfées, Draugbts.

Es oulfé longuement chancelle : Prou, He that
6 d foundly flaggers long; men after blowes: or

lofts great,are long eve they recouer.

Poulfe-avant:m. 4ny thing that thrufs another for-
ward; and (more particularly) an Ouerfècr, and fr
warder of a werke that requires baft.

Jeu de poulfe-avant. Lecherie.

Poullée: £, as Poulcée; alfo, as Poulfement; or as
Pouflée.

Poulfement :m. 4 pufhing shrufting ; ioulting, violent
putting on; adrining or beating in.

péulfer To pujb, thruft, inforce, compel , or violently
put on; to drine,or beat in,or on ; alfo,to iuflle;or ioulr;
alfede turne,or be troubled, as wine, crc, by ioulting,


Poulfe poulfe. (#ords of incouragement) forward


arden on,


Poulfer du coude.Proudly, to fhoulder,er elbow ene-


rie one thats next bim ; or le attempt the difplacing, or


pointing of others.
Poulfer a toute halcine. Seeke Haleine.
~~ Roulferdefa inefte. Defperately to fet his whole ref,


| éreparent excreftence, o creature of the fea, which - orcaduenture all; refolutely to. imploy bis beft meanes,


| orvimoft indeuor
» Poulfer à la rouë, To firther,or belpe forward,by all
| meanes pee
: Poulferletemps à l'efpaule, To oft délayes ; alfa, to
pis off,or paffe away,the rg) 3or alene
be knowes not or cares

Yn clou fert à poulfer l'autre : Prov. ‘one nol
Sernes to drine ont another: 9.

Panther,


es ee 2


POV


Poulfier,& Poulfiere. as Pouftier,& Poufsiere.

Poulfif: m.iue: & Parfie,(hort-winded breathing with
‘i 3 alfo,broken-winded. 7

Poulsin:m. Acbicken.

La poule,& les poulfins. 2s under Poule,
Poulfiner. Yo batch,breed,or bring fort,chickens,
Poulfiniere: £ The fèenen fiarres.

Poultis : m, À little gate,or doore,which ordinarily, ac-

© companies a great one before, or belonging to, adraw-

bridge,erc. i
Poultre : m. 4 foleor borfe-coult,

Poultre :£. 4 filtieor mare-coult; alfo,abeame ; and
(generally) any peece of timber, thats about a foot, or «
fr and a halfe, fqnare.

Poulx. as Pouls. |

Poumon. SeekePoulmon,

Poupart : m,4n infant,or young child ; alfo,a meacoc
or milkefop; a tender fot that lookes to be alwayes
with pap.

Poupe: m. as Poulpe : m.al/,the cankerous and pain-
fall difeafe of the nofe,called Nolimietangere.

Poupe :f. The teat ofa woman: as alfo tbe dug of a ra:
uenous beaf}; alfo, as Polpe; alfo, as Pouppe.
Poupes de chenilles, Bunches, or clufiers of Cater.

_pillers.

Poupeau : m. 4 little teat,or dug.

Poupée :f. 4 babie ; a puppet,or bable ; alfo,the flax of
4 diflaffe; or a diftaffe-full of flax, érc.

Enteren poupée. To lodge a graffe within a flit

made into the top of a flocke ; and withall to bood ityas

in Enter en poupine ; Looke Poupine.

Poupclé : m.ce: À Pithie, brawnie, rong, fill of pulp;
aljo,plumpe, flefhie,round, fat well fed.

Poupelin : m. 45 Popelin; ai/o,as Poupon, Sn

Poupetier : m. 4 babe-maker,or puppet-maker,

Poupette: f. A little babie ; puppet,bable,


dore :merc:f Of, or belonging to, tbe poope ofa


cr


Vent poupier. 4,fullor whole wind,at fea,
Poupillons : m, Little teats,or dugs.
Poupin: mine :£ # Popin,
Poupine : f, «s Pompon,
Poupinc. whence, Enter en p. as Enter en poupée;
aad to giue ita hood;or covering of raw, :
Poupinement. Neatly, fprucely,briskly,quaintly dain.


ily,
Pouple. A Popler tree; Seeke Peuple. © “t
Rare 1m, Am infant, fuckling; young babie ; ao, as
‘ompon, à
P : € The poope(or binder part)of à fhip.
Poppe de A à west Mid fur.
û Se 13


Os de la pouppe: Looke

Avoir ae. Pp : Toproceed with full fayles ;

<tobaue pro ad ace all affaires.

Pouppée. 4s Poupée. tls

Poupper. To dandle, feddle,cocker ,cherifh much, à

Pour. (Incompofition,ciuing a word the greater energie)

« fianifies, for,as, as for; on upon; becaufe,con, dering,
inre(pect of; as good; or as much as; in fead,in lien;

or in defence, ofs(fometimes ) aifo, againft ; whence;

| sThous ces charmes{e trouverene inutiles pour lay.

|) Rour eftre:Ry beings becaufe it is.

|: Pourle plus. dt themof, ss
Pour vous encore à folz: (iw bargaining) 11e haw

but ta fhillings more of yous or, you (al baue it
two (billings more. © a x hea

| » Certe façon eftoir nouvellepoiirluy,: #6 newin:

| te bim, est an

} acl


Povre: com. Poore,needie, bare, | eggerlie, penuriouss


POV


Pourbondir. To bound, leape, or iumpe ouer ; alfo, to


R poms or praunce a herfé; to make bim leape ; or


Pourbouiller. To parboite throughly,
tee: m. The game called otberwife Triquetrac,
Pource. Becan(e, fir that caufe therefore, f
Pourceati: m. 4 porke, Swine bog,
ourceati de mer. 4 Sea-bog; a Jif that fomething
__ refembles the land bog,and loues to wallow in mud,as
-‘tb'othér in mire, k
*Champignon de pourceau. The bogs Mufbrome, or
{wines Mufbrome; the white, or yellowifh Mufbrome
‘thats good(if any)to be- eaten.
Fenouil de pourceau, Hogs Fennell, fow Fennell,
Sulpberwort, Brimflomwort.
haut Ceau. Hogs bread, fwines bread, fow
tad,
Queuë de pourceau.as Fenouil de pourceau; and
« balled alfi(as it) Horeflrong and Horeftrange.
Vin de pourceau. Looke Vin,
— comme'yn pourceau, As fat as a ( frank-fed)


ig
Semer des rofes aux pourceaux. ‘To, throw pearle
before fivina 10 beftow, or cafl away excellent things,
upon filthie, fottifh,and umwortbie people,
Ourceau gras rompt fa foute : Prov. The well-fed
bog breakes ope bis tie,
On nedoit pas 4 gras pourceau le cul oindre:
© Prov. we fhould not greafe a fat bog in the taile,

* Reliques font bien perdués entre pieds de pour-
ceaux: Prov. Pretious things , in unwortbie bands
are quickly loft; (Others may interpret it other wife.)
Sicruye forfait les pourceaux le fouffrent : Proy,

© Pigs come to lugs for {cathe done by the fo.
ourcelaine :f. The Purple.filh; allo, the fea Snayle,
or Venus fells (a thell-fifh made fomewhut like a
horne ; ) alfosthe bearbe Parflane ; whence;
Pourcelaine cultivée. Garden Purflane 5 tame
Purflane, sua .91 ; 6
Pourcelaine de mer, Sea Purflane,
Pourcelet : ni. À young, or ja hog, a pig-bog ; See
Porcelet.
Pourchaille:f Thebearbe Pur lane, L
Pourchas : m, Eager purfuitsearnefi chace after; dili.
gentfolicitation or vebement following, of a matter.
Pourchaffer, Eagerly 10 purfue, follow, profecute, fali=

“cites inflantly 10 feeke, Purcbafe, procure, compte.
Qui plus defpend qu'il ne pourchaffe il ne Juy
faut point de beface : Prov, He.that (pends more ther.
be gets,needs not a bag,(butabable,)


de feéline, fcantie, wanting, lacking, bauing but little;
ao, wretched mi Ce A A cae adel 6
“A povre cocur'petit foul Pro, An bumble hearse
breedes homelie wifhes, er
“Apovres'gens menue monnoye : Prov. Small mo.
ney fatisfies,or ferues,theneedic.
~ Au povre vn ocufvaut vn boeuf:-Proy. Ag egge’s
as much 10 4 poore man as an Oxe,
Enfans font richefles de povres gens: Prov. Looke
Enfans. * ARE
I eft povre qui de Dieu eft hay: Prov, 1#fetched is
hew nue 4d0f God. Se À ”
JLeft bien povre qui ne voit gourte : Proy, He that,
2 peal nethiat': NE taal ii
Nef grand defpir que de pare orgueilleux:
. i The fpight of a proud begger is vammatcbar-
0] : :


-|p “meneur: Amalher,
pou Beheitle se women thet lke” 2


Din | ot ie LE oe 6 ics LA APE Die ol =e


P © Y


I n’eft orgueil que de povreentichi: Prov, Th'in-
riched beggers pride’s without compare,

* La vache du riche velle fouvent, celléde povre a-
vorte : Pro, Looke Riche.

Leloup emporte le veau du povre: Prov. Poore
men are eafiy oppre[fed,vfually preyed on.

Qui fçauroir les avantures il ne feroit iamais
vre: Pro.(we fay)if a man knew when it would raine,
he would make bay in faire weather.

Tant de povres ne font pas bons À vn huis : Prov.
Many beggers at one doore binder them[elues,c> trou-
ble others,

Povrement. Poorely, needily barely, begeerly ; mifera-
blp, wretchedly ; fimply,

Povret:m.ette: f 4 wretch, poore foule, poore fake;
or fomewhat poore, not too rich, not troubled with a.
bundance,or super fluitie ; that bath but from band to
mouth.

Povreté: f Pouertie,penurie beggeric,barenelfe, need,
necefsitie wnt,

De grafle cuifine povreté s'avoifine : Prov.Power-
tie gets ber aboufe néere prodigalitie; a fat kitchin,
and a leane fli{e grow quickly neighbours.

De poules &'de Lee on en eft bien toft engé :
Prov. Looke Poule,

En grande povreté n'y a pas grande loyaulté:
Prov, In great pouertie tbere's no great loyaltze,

Si jeunefle fçavoit,& vieillefle pouvoir, iamais po-
vreté n’auroit: Prov. If age had firength,and youth
experience, none could for want alledge one iujt, pre-
tence.

Pourfendre. To cleaue through, . |

Pourfendu : m. uë : £ Cleft through,

Pourfier. To affirme boldly afure cofidently maintaine,
or fland in,peremptorily, aloe a

Pourfil d'un homme, 4 mans featnre,proportion, fhape,
outward lineaments, or mofl properly, the verie mid-
dle,or middle line of his face.

Lepourfil d'âne pierre precieufe. The furface or fu-
perficies thereof,

En pourfil. Sidewayes ; whence ; vifage en pourhil:
asunder Porfie. ;

Pourfiler d'or. To purfle, tinfell, or ouercaft mith gold


thread,erc. : :


| Pourfileure, & Pourfilure :f. Purfling; « purfling


lace,or worke ; baudkin-worke ; tinfell:
Pourfit. see Profi, * tes


Profiterolle,


 Pourfiterolle: £.4 cake baked under hot imbers; Looke


| Pourmener. To walke,to flirre up and downe.
“Tele pe wil fad Ria ade es ik or keepe bim


i


|
j


7
}
hi


:1581d'abinion


Faw


Pourject. Looke Project,
Pourjecter. as Proje&er.
Pourmenade :f. Awalke.
Pourmené. walked.


pare:
At",


| Pourmenée: f. À wake,or walking...


Pourmenement: mh. Awalking,


| ffrring ; 1 will find bum warke, or


ing him trouble,
_ Jnong NST wo} 0 M


Pourmenoir :m, 4 walke,or walking place,» |:
ourneant. In vaine, for notbing,tono purpofe, …. ,
CAR: as Ponrper a vidal!
ourparlement: m. A treating ; a conferring,
Dies andi of diference


#,
a
A


q
i


tal-
307 che


bad about an agreement to bemade , or thing to bee


one. ‘

Pourparler. To treat conferrescommune,or talke about
st ae tobe pane ea omay x Sy:

Pourpe:m, The fifh Pourcontrell,Preke, or Many.

et,

Pourpens: m. Great thought,care, fludie ; férious co-

p pag” by
0 é:m, €e:f. Throughly confidered, fériou
ah of, exattly digefled, reuolued, perpended, pe |
mined.

Pourpenfer. To bethinke bimfelfe; throughly 1otbinke,
or confider of ; ferioufly to weigh, perpend,or digeft, in
the thoughts; exactly to recount,caflexamine,renolue,
Que mind. :

ui bien veut parler bien doit pourpenfer: Prov,
Seeke Parler. 1e

Pourpied; ou Poupier. The bearbe Purflane,

Pourplanté : m. ée:f. Planted throughout, fet all o-
uer, 2

Pourplantement: m. A planting,or fetting allouer.

Pourplanter. To plant,or fet, all ower, througbout,eue-
rie where,

Pourpoint:m. Adublet,
Pourpoint d’efcaille.  Corflet made of plates re-
fembling (cales.

Courir les champs en pourpoint. To play the mad-


man, *
_ Doubler le moule du pourpoint. To feed exce/:


_ finely.

11 y laiffa le moule du pourpoint. See Moule.
Misenpourpoint. Turnd into bis dublet , made
not worth a groat; vobd or depriued of, defpoyled or
Jfript out ofall be hath,

Pourpointerie: f. 4 Dublet-makers fhop; Dablet-
makers row, the fireet wherein Dublet-makers dwell.
Dovenoinner , ms A Dublet-maker,

Ourpre: m.Purple,purple colours alfo,the Purple fhell-
Sif alfo,as Pourpe; alfo,the Purples , or a et ra
Ague which raifès on the bodie certaine red, or purple
Pots ; alfo, the Tokens; the blew [pots appearing on a
“sa thats mortally infected with, or dead of, the

ARUEL
~ Lepourpre au foc, mort d’egal poix balance: Pro,
Death kills, or makes alike, the rich and poore,
Pourpré: m.ée: f Of Purple attired in Purple,
Pourprendre. Topofé(fe wholly, to containe on euerie
Side or euerie way, to bold,or take up all.
Pourprins : m.infe : £ Fully beld, wholly contained,pof
SR on euerie fide,or euerie way, É
Pourprinfe: f 4 Pourpris.
Pourpris:m. A clofe,or inclofure; or one inclofure of
_ diners voomes;or clofes ; the whole circuit affesor
continent of a ground,boufe,or place confifting acd
pure parcells,rooms,or peeceswithin one inclofure;
WHENLES Di win nr nent :Ÿ ,
Lepourprisd'un manoir. Comprebends all theour:
ay ep) mn Orchards, Parke, wood, or
_ -Warren,lying round about,or neere unto,it ; and being
~ within one hedge,ditch,pale,or wall, à 0
Pourquerre..Tefearch,or fceke bard after ; to falicite,

‘or fue bard for; to procure, purchafe, compaffe , by all |
wayes or meanes, a
ourquines: f, Akind of fmall blacke figs. a

urquis ; :f. Searched,or fought fir throngbly, |
. M AWE 2 \\ En (owt
Pourquey? tat wherefore 2: wbtreof, or for what


= Dire


" x


TOUR,


P POV


’


n _{  Direpourquoy: To yeeld a reafon, or fhewa cafe, | __ father, he refembles bis father verieneere. ,
4 for, Met à ue mie. | Pourvende:€ 4 Prebéndrie, the place of a Prebend ;
_ | Pourreau.æPorreau. poles 4 | Sfétaldword) . :
ca Pourri: m, ie: ..Rotten,putrified; corrupted ; tainted. Poutveoir. Looke Prouvoir, 1.
=. | PorpourilækePon << | Pourveu:m. A patent,eift, grant; alfo, a Patentee,or


reatefi man’s the fooneft rotten; (perbaps becaufe the
È ch cafe, and ill diet, whereto he ganebimfelfé, bad
BEA bis badie with corruption.) à


le icrre en puis h'eft paspOurrie : Proy, Looke vn-


Le plus grand eft AS pr pourri. : Prov. The ca al  prouided (by Patent @rc;)ofa Bilbopricke,or


Pourveu: m.ué 3 f, P: tiniledged s@03 as Prouveu.:


"OUryeu que, Sa that,on condition that,
OUrVoy : m, A prouifion belperemedie, (v.m.)


der Pierre. (des
Pourrir. To rot, putrifie corrupt,


bloud into bealing,


ten,


Short-tailed Serpent,Seps; no bigger then a little Vi-
| pers and called thus, becaufe. whatfoeucr part of the
F bodice is flung by ber. prefently rots. | :

t | Pourriffure. as Pourriture, ' :

fe Pourriture: f Rottennefe,putrifaltion,corruption.

if Pourfaillir. To leape out of,to bound ouer.

ie : Pourfemé: mi. ée: f. Sowed throughout,or all oner.
aan Pourfemé de rougeole, Full of, (potted or powde-

| red allouer with,the Meafells, <

— | Pourfemer. To for throughout,or all ouer. |
| Pourfüir. + Pourfüivre, 3 os

La" Pourfüitte :f Purfuit,profecution, eavneft following,

“SS eager chafe after; al(o,afuit.or proceeding,in Law.

+” | Pourfuivable: com. Parfiable: eo :
= Pourluivant: m. 4 purfuer, fuitor, fuer; the flower

iar of a caufé ; aifo,a Wooer ; (In auncient time a Maifter

|i ape of Requefis was alfo tearmed fo.) r

. |. Pourfüivant d'armes. 4 Herauld extraordinarie,


one thats like to be chofen when a place falls.
Pourfuivant :m. ante: f. Purfuing, profecuting, fol.
lowing, chafing after; fuing for.
ee, Pourfuivi: m. ie: £Purfued ; fallowed,or chafed bard;
Ta Sued, profecuted, perfecuted. :
- Sans eftre pourfuivi le mefchant prend la fuite :
ri 2 Prov. The wicked flies though no man follow bim,
ie Pourfüivir, To folow ; alfo,to walke, or wander from
‘ countrey to countrey; (anold word.)
ee Pourfuivre. To purfie, profecute; perfecute; eagerly
| ER oo pga earnefily to proceed in, or goe on
eae with, pi
Ex |  Pourfüivreà cor, & à cry. To fallow bard, or bate-
RSS es Bs purfue with all extremitie; 10 make bue and
VF crie after.
—. f . Pourfinivre fa poin&e. To follow bis thru, Looke
| | Ponte. |
‘i ; Pourfityr.s Pourluivir; or Pourfuiyre; (an old word. )
|. Sea You ant, Pourfuyvi,&Pourfuyvre. 2s Pour.
a> MU ANES RC. 0: + i
| a oureant: Manipal ji for all that , bowfoe-
=" Her. + :


‘a: Pourtant que. Fer as, becaufé that, fecing

Es that,

| Pourtoir, « Portoir, ;
Pourtraiét : m, 4 pourtrait, image, pidure, counter-

17 fit,or draught of. ss

| Pourtraiéture :£ 4 pourtraiture; ov.as Pourtrai@.

aes To pourtray,dram, delineate, paint, coun-

4 terfeit, | A


+


Pr
[re


Go gle


Pourtis :m, Afuppurations à rotting; a turning out of


Pourriffable: com... Soane rotting, likely to grow rote


the Pourriffeur : m.4 rotters and particularly the [potted,
rs _. broad-beaded , fmalt-necked , fharpe-mouthed, and


or young Herauld,a Batcbler in the Art of Herauldrie; |


IUpourtrait fort bien à fon pere. He is verie like bis | -


oyance :f; Prouidence, forecaft, firefight.
ant. 46 Erouvoyant.
oyeur: m. A Prouidor, or Purueyor.
Oyeule : f. À Pronidereffe,or Purucyereffr.
ec : f. 45 Pofade, tie
Pouflade:£..4 pufhsthruft; iuflle joute,
FOUT HR lade ; whence;
De plein €. At once,at one.pufh, thruft, or ef:
fort; whoky,all at one time,all together, Pate
Poufle :£. Short wind, purfineffe ; alfa, the hinder part


are. aie
Pouffe de bled: The cbaffe of come,
Pouflé: m.ée:£ Looke Poulfé.
Poufle-avant. as Poulfe-avant. :
Pouflée : f, 4 pufhsor thruft forward; a putting or vio-
lent wringing , ins alfo, a ioult | or iuflle ; alfo, as
Poulcée.


: Pouflement :m. Looke Poulfement.


Pouflepied : m, The ffh Pourcontrell, Preke,or Many.


2.07 fetch win
Pouffet de bronze.The féalie duf that ‘falls from braffe
«| after it hath beene melted, or much heated:
ier :m. æsPoufsiere.

Poufsiere : f. Thicke duft,or duftineffe. <

Qui fe laiffe jeëter dela poufsiere dans les yeux.
« Looke leéter,. \ :

D'un fac à charbon ne peut fortir que dela pouffi-
rx penne RE ow bo for ought but coale-duft
om coale-fackes;th’infected beart mul un e
‘belch out, eue . Mound if


et.
Poufler.To plier 1brufi,drc,as Poulfer;alfé ta breath, |


Roufsif mine +f. Purfie,fhort-winded; alfa, broken.
_ winded. es ;
Poufloir :m,4# impulfarie Inffrument,vfed by chiruy


, glans, for the forcing thro a forked arr À
This Inflrument is of two (ede oh par hero
- Poufloir femelle ; sb'otber mafiine, tearmed Pouf
{oir mafle, ou fourd, ; Te
Pouffol. Pouldre de Pouffol. See Pouldre. _::
Pouflouër:m.1hyron pinne wherewith Joyners drine
_ out woodden pegs, 2 i


Pouftaignade :£A brood, peafi,or laying of egges; as |


many as ahenne ufes to fet onat once : GLangued,

Poufteau : m. 2s Pofteau.

Pouftelé. as Poupelé,

Poutie,& Poutieux. Locke Potie,& Potieux,

Poutraiges: m, Bcames ; pofles. "

Poutre:f A beame; alfo,a fillie,or young mare,
Poutre dentelée, 4 harrow, - '

Pouvoir:m. Power, flrength, abilitie,might, force, ‘
Lepouvoirdelaverge. The Libertie , or Precinét:
wherein a Sergeant may diftraine,or arre/, :

Pouvoir. To may,or can ; to be able ; to hawe power,
free, might, firength. Meo nées}

e n’en puis mais. I cannot belp it,1 cannot dot with
all,1 amnocaufe of it,it is not long of me.» Lex :


of a fowes bellie or that part whereon her binder teats |


1


POY.
a


= Hn'en peut plas. He hath fot bis frie, pent bis pow. |


© derjdone be-morfPor moflhe can,
Ainf va qui mieux ne peut : Prov, He muft dec thys
who can no better doe, - Stag or
: Contre fortune nul ne peut: Pro. Looke Fortune.
* Qui mieux ne peut fa vieille retourne: Prowben
On is er mee bomelie. * 4 are
ui quid il peutine veut;quand il veurilne :
Prov He bee will noe res may when be me
Shall baite nays a
Tel faitle mieux qu'il peut quine fait chofe qui
vaille: Prov. Some though they doe ther beft doe à
thing well; €
Poux. The pulfe; Looke Pouls, à
Pour. (47 Interieftion of loathing; ) fie.
Pouyr. Tour n’ÿfçauroit pouyr. 42 cannot goe into,
all cannot be beld or contamed in,it: €Parilien.
Pouzäranque. À certaine inflrument wherewith wa-
ter 1s drawue ont of garden wells,
Poy..2s Peu; Little; (an old word.)
1 Poyle: & 4 floue,
P oytois. # Putois.
Poÿvrade : f. Afeafoning with, or fauce made of ,Pep-


per,

Poyvre: m. Pepper: Bd
: Poyre aquatique.Calerage, Arfe-finart,water Pep-
~~ per or water Pepperwmort s (am bear be.)


Poyvre blanc, white Pepper ; like the blackein all | P


things but colour; és conimonnefe (for there comes
amie lof it bither) THE aft Indians vufe it in ead of
Salt; SeePoyyreverd. _: :
. Poyvre d'Efpagne: #5 Poyvre d'Inde.
Poyvre Ethiopic. The busked,or codded Pepper, cal.
| ©: led in fhops Amorbum,& vita longa. LH,
. Poyvre Indié,oud’Inde. Indian Pepper, Guinnie
Pepper, Calecut Pepper; a tittle, flat, and elowifh
feed,


as vire long. Long Pepper; ablackifh, and Catki
fonc fui conping of many grains cafe tra to
getber, 10G 14


blacke, and bot-tafting berrie, or graine, of the fhrub
Mezereon,or Spurge- flax. RS in yeah


Poyvre verd.as Poyvre blanc; Some report thatthe


ordinarie Pepper-berrie gathered while tis greene,&r
~waripe,remaines euer white and is that which we cal
__ white Pepper ; yet Gerard feemes to allow it a peculi-
ar plant, Nog ES Ut AS RUE
Poyvré :m.ce sf Peppered; feafomed with Pepper ; al-
sv, tafling like Pepper. >
À Herke poyvrée, Dittander, Dittanie,Pepperwort,
Por 0 peppers tofeafon with Pepper.


Poyvrette. as Poivrette ; Hearbe Gith; fomealfo call


2. fosthe Guinnie Pepper plant,
Poyvrier?m: The Pepper plant, 3
Practic :m.ique:f. Praclicall, praëtifing. js

ja


racticien : m. À praétifer, or


| a Pleader, Counfellor, Aduocate,Atturney, or Problor,


Pratique: f: Pradiife experiences the forme fi
cont of se eat es to sf,


Poyvre de montaigne. Pepper of the endo


‘tetiure) to.contrine, Me

Praétiquer argent fur. To raife,or make money of,
ct eee acticien,at tba days.

raginatique Sanétion. Las hétion, "4
Praëmatizer. To pragtife,argue,plead; fohcite.
Praguerie :f. (The name of) emrecting at Clermont
. béetweene Charles the feuenth,e> bik feane the Dolphin,
"who, togethe? with etbers bis fubicéts, bad rebelled a- |


: gail bim; Hence ,any fuch league, fattion, or ioynt ve-


lion of fubieéis againft their Soucraigne, se
Prain. Full-bagd, fulsbellied, great with young; (a À
_ word applied onelytofome kind of beafls) °° "2.


A l'agneler verra on lefquelles font prains: Prov, pes


Looke Agneler. - MER À

Prairier : mere : £ Ofer belonging to,a medow,or me-
dow ground, + PE
Sergent prairier. À medow-keeper; an Officer that
À unto medowes,and watches the bay growing in
ti EM 7


- Prairie: 4 medow,or medow ground.


Pranchette:f. A womans flirrup, or the plate [be bath
under her foot as (he rides. Pre

Sen Cattell to chaw their cud in tb'afiernone :
qNorm, - 6

Praquerie. as Praguerie,


Prat. as Pré; A medow.


Pratique. as Praëtique ; af/o,a little lace: Blefien.
rattique,& Prattiquer. See Praélique, & Praëi-


Pré :m. 4 medow; a mead,
La faulx paye les prez: Pro. The Sithe giues meads
their due. }

‘- Toutesfois fut le prétondu : Prov, Yet was the me- |
dow mowen ; Secke Toutesfois. D LR

Preage: m. Medowage; or,afreedome to put cattell |
into other mens medowes; whence; Droid de prea-
ge ; Looke under Droid,


Prealable : com. Former, forerumming, before-going, |


fir ft to be done, pil hie thought of, which ought to
proceed,or fore-goe tbe ref. |
alable. as Prealablement.
lablede. After the rate of, i 1
salable. Firf and formoft ; for a begin-
ning , o7 firfi works, before ought elfe be done, or tal-
. À y /


ked of.
Pralbiemes Fifi, formof}, fir ft and formofl, fore
merly, before all things, ere ought ele be difcuffed, or


done,
Preallable, & Preallablement. as Prealables &
Prealablement,


‘Preallegud: m.ée : € Before alledged,


Preambule :m, 4 Preamble,Preface Prologue. ©
Preau : m. Alitile medows and (more particxlarby) à:
pleafant greene, greenc clofe, or medow, lying neevea
boufe and ferui Pr ret as for other v=
fess ea fe ati at under an arbor,
Preaux. The name of a certaine white, [mall,andfiveet
— 4 , LA 6
Fi abt :f, APrebendrie. ee
Prebenderen vn tripor. To bandie at Tennis,
Prebftre. Looke Preftre. ;
Precaire. par prec. as Precairement. + -
Precaire Byintreatie,requuf, or defre; alfo, at
another mans will and pleafüre; or,onely fir ambile.


Precaution :fi 4 precaution; a fivefeeing, bewari:
or proniding for beforeband’ alfo, a er dy or
warning; alfo, the preuenting of a difeafe before it

= come,or the curing o cat frf comming, war >
‘. ‘


LL:


73 Precedé :mi. ée:£ Preceded; oxtftripped, gone or got. |


ten before, mare

_ | Precedemment. Precedently, formerly, fe
| Precedence: Precedence or precedencie; @ forego-
_ À Precedent. ‘Precedent, foregoing,


; ing; place before another. |
al ; out pa fing, outfirip-
|| ping, in ranke before another.
| Preceder. To precede, furmount, furpaffe,excellgoe be.


ore, ‘
Precellence:f. Precellencie; an excelling, exceeding,
À frmonnting, furpaffing. \. .
Preccller. To excell,evceed, fürmount, furpape.:
Precepte: m..4 preceptycommaundement ; lore, docu-
ment ,leffon,inftruction ; warning, admonition, aduife-
ment, rary : :
recepteur : m, A Teacher,Inflructor, Tutor, Maifter,
Gouernour, : :


Der: Preception. as Precepte.


Preceptorizer. Toteach,inftrud,tutorizeit ; gouerne.
Prcceptrice.Teacbing, ialtrndling, leffoning, admonifh-


ng.
| Preceffeur :m, 4 foregoer ; or,asPredecefteur.
| Prechanter. To prechaunt it ; 10 fing before the reff; or,
À: to begin a fong.
Precieux. Looke Pretieux.
Precipitamment. Headlong,all on a bead or with the
bead before haftily rafbly,unaduifedly,
Precipitation: f. Precipitation; beadlong rafbnefe,
"defferate haftine(fe.
Precipité : m. Precipitate ; the red, poifonous,or corro-
. ding powder of burned Quicksiluer,
Precipite : m, A daungerous cliffe, a fleepe and vnflea-
die place 10 goe on; a fleepe downefall, a downe-right
pich,or fall. : ;


aa dr joe m.ée: f. Precipitated, caf beadlong; ajo,


rafb, beadie,unaduifed.
4 Argent vifprecipité.Reduced into Precipitate,burnt
| into red powder. :
| Precipiter. To precipitate ; to throw, tumble, burle, or
\ caf dovne,beadlong; alfo,to déale ralbly proceed baf-
»_, tily, goe unaduifedly to worke,
- | Precipitcux: meule:f. Headlong, foole-bardie, in-
À conjiderate, barebraind, furious, violent, unaduifed,
> baflie, rafh.
Preciput : m, Right of birth,elderfhip,the priniledge be-
_ longiag to the eldeft, ,
Precis: m.ife :f. Strid, precife,curious,exaé?,
| Precifément. Precifely, firittly,exaéHy,curion fy,
Preclare: com, Moft goadlie right noble,verie fingular,
_ paffing,excellent,
Preclofture : £. 4 clofe,or inclofed ground, lying before’
_ Amaniion bonfe; or as Pourpris ; all the ground lying
p about a boufe, # hinke of b
_Precogiter. To precogitate,premeditate, 1 en


: À A precognition; fore-knowledge,pre.
inner notice, of.
ince :f. The fame,

cognoiftre, | To foreknow'; know beforeband, get

| former Mg ru 70 of.
Preconter. Toabate, or defaulke part of a fumme due
|: Upona former reckoning, ‘=...
 Precordial : male: € Belonging to the midriffe ; neere


midriffe ; alfo, the beart-flrings

, the sb oré

pof the bellie vader the
mumbles,


PRE
Predeceffeur: m, A predecelfer,auncéftorsforcfather ;


one that bath gone,or beene beforevs. ” es
Predeftination :£ Predeftinction,fore-appointmert,

Fedeftiné : m. ée: f. Predefined, prede mated or
— dained;or appointed beforeband, unto. werk
Predeftinée fatale, Fatal deflfnie ; th’ unalterable def

fimationsardinance, decree, prouidence, or purpofe of


: Gode.

psn :male: f.Con/ifling of growing in,belonging vn-
lomedowes, ==

Predicant. as Predicateur ; fa meane Preacher,

Predicateur 7m.A Preacher, Teacher, Sermon. maker;

= reporter, publifher ; denouncer of things to come.

Predication :£, 4 Sermon, Preaching ; publicke decla.
ration,or denunciation, a

Prediétion: f. 4 prediétion, foretelling,prefaging, fore-


Predire. To foretell, fore/ay, prefage, dinine,propbefie,
Predifeur: m. A foreteller, prefager, diuine, prophe-


fier. |
Predivination:f. Dinination, prefaging, foregbe fing,
forefeeing. Er
Predivincr. To diuine,prefage, forefce, foreknow, ghee
at beforehand,
Préc :f. A medow.
Préeminence : f Preheminence,prerogatine,
Préer. Tomakemedow , lay to medow, turne intome-
dowes,
Préeflu :muë:f Preeletted, fore-chofen,
Preface: f. A Preface, Preamble,Prologue, fore» fpeech,
nee > me A Prefelt, Prefident, Principal, or princi-
pall Officer,
Preferable: com,Preferrable fit to be eftcemed,er ad.
uanced, before others.
ce:f, Preférment, aduancement; account be-
fère,place aboue,others,
referer. To preferre ; like better, eficeme aboue, place
before make more account of.
Prefigé: mée: £. Prefixed'sfaflened, fat, or fluche be
Sore ; appointed befor eband. Fe
Prefiger. To prefix ; to faltem, fet,or flicke before sal,
10 appoint beforehand.
refini: m. ie: f Determined, appointed, limited be-
forehand, .
Prefinir, To determine, appoint, limit beforeband.
FR prefix; to limit,affigne, preferibe appoint be»
oveband,
Prefix. Prefixed ; limited, affigned, prefevibed jappoin-
ted beforeband. re
—— : fi. À prefixion ; fore-appointment , pre-
criptiom — .- ; :
Pregnamanent. Pregnantly ;pitbily, forcibly, Arongty,
yy. « As CE + é
Pregnant: m.ante: £ Pregnant, pithie,ripe,liuelie, for.
cible, flrong.  : : Jus
Raifons pregnantes, Plaine apparent important, or
preffingreafons.
Pregutte : com. A Tafter,or Foreftaller ; one that takes
th'effay of meats. 2
Prehaster. To precipitate; to baften extreamely, oro.
uer-much,
Preignant. as Pregnant,
Preigne: £ Bagd, il, with young with child,
Preignement. as Pregnamment,
Frejgneur if, A being fill-bagd, great with child, or
with young. : Tae TE
Preir. To make Medowing of; to turne inte Me- |


Sif


€ 0


+ Tu 3: AY:
> 2
CN : ;


: ° INC Fes AA, ie - ne li ee a ui Ce ré ty 4
Pah By PRE.


Prejudice :m, .4 preiudices a (, fisture) dammage;hurt,
binderance; alfo, as Prejugé. i
Prejudiciable :com, Preiudiciall, dammageous, burt-
fall bindeving, Mey,
Prejudicier. To preiudice jourt,barme,binder.
Prejugé : m. A preiudication,or fore-indgement.
Prejugé : m.ée: £.Prejudicated, fore-iudged.
Prejugement :m, A fore-iudgement, or former indge-
ment; a cafe ruled in Law ; 4 preindication, or burt
done 10 a caufe bya Precedent. c
Prejuger.To preiudigae, preiudge,or foreiudge; to rule,
À ordireéithe opinion of Judges by a former mdgement.
Prelalfer. To carrie humfelfe grauely, portly, pompoufly,
magnificently ; to firout , or fquare it bike a Pre-
late.
Prelat:in. 4 Prelate, t
port de Prelat. 4 bountiful, or well. fiurnifhed
boord.
Iliure comme vn Prelat. (4 Huguenels compari-


Jon.)
Prelation : £ Preférment before others in purcbafing.
Prelature :f. A Prelature or Prelatefbip.
Prele:f.swal! Horfe-taile,Tadpipes naked Shaue-grafie,
oo ant:m. A boafling a[fe, proud coxcombe, flate-
ie gull.
Prelude:m. APreludium, Preface, Preamble ; a flon-
‘ite fre the matter sand in Muficke, voluntarie be-
ore a leffon,ére. - ;
Prematurité : £ Prematuritie ; baftie vapene (fe, quicke
ripening, forward or timelie grawth.
Premeditation : £. Premeditation , feretheugbt , or
foretbinking,
Premedité: m. ée:f Premeditated, forethought of,
Premediter. To premeditate, /oretbinke of or thinke of
beforehand,
Prémeffe. Looke Prefmeffe.
Premices : m. The fir/l fraits of.
Premic: m. Arecompence guerdonsrewerd.
Premier: mere: £ Prime, fir, formofts principall,
chiefe,beft.
In'eft que les premieres amours: Proy, The firft


.* Tone is the faftell, or faithfiulleft, no loue’s like to the


pie. (Adverb.) Firft, at fir, the firfttimes alfo,

befère;or abone others,
… Premier que. Rather then,before,or ere, that.

Au pretnier.Firft and formo in or at the beginnin

Tout premier. Firft and formofis ovat th cory fk

Qui preimier arrive au moulin , | ier doit
_mouldre : Pro.He that fir (t comes auf fr be ferued,

Qui premier prend ne s’en repent; Prov. He that
stakes firlt bis baft repents aot. {
Prémierement. Firft; fir]! and, formoft , with the firft,
|. at the verie beginning, a :

_ Toutpremierement. At the verie firft, beforeall
| . other things, pat ee

| Premile: €. 4 foreplacing,a fetting before. ;
| Premonitré. freres dela prem. «48 Order of Friers
_ | which weare white habites. ;

rer ré 1m, Ges €.Premonfirated,por tended,fore-

wed,told,or pointed at beforehand. à

Premourant :m.ante:£ Dying firf/,or before another.
Prenant:mantes € Takings putting s apprebiending;
. ret accra peel imbracing ; vnderta-
Tenir par prenant. Looke Part-prenant,
Prendre. Tosa is omte, apprebend, fnateb ats
| receie,accept of; tt ace undertake ; al/o,te cleawe,


_ +0 be beforeband with,


~ Prendre expedition. To renew a caufe banging, or


© “all aduife.
Prendre de gallico. See Gallico,,


…… Prendre langue. Te game, or fearchfor,inteliigences
to fsb A the world goetb, y


icke,adhere, bold fi unto; al/o,to put,or put on.
pue barre für. hase rte flart of;


Prendre de bec l'un l'autre, To be at it,by the chaps,
‘or with bitter words.

Prendre bien.11 leur print bien que. 14 was well
for them or they bad gaod fortune, that.

Prendre vn boeuf par les cornes, Looke Bocuf,or


Corne.

Brendrcletoones To palfe Maifler of Art. |
rendre au bric. To take at aduantage ; or, to wre

a baflie word unto a confeffion.

Prendre le cas. pren le cas que. Admit, fuppofe,

allow we you, that.

Prendre la Caftille pour autruy.To vadertakeano-

ge mere uarell, A fu |
rendre chair. To battle,get flefh,growfat. : …

Prendre la chevre. To sie in pte hp fauffe ; t0

take the pet,or pepper in the noft.” '

Prendre la clef des champs. To gave, or take liber-

tie gine it [elfe roome, flie or get out.

Prendre conclufions, as under Conclufon,

Prendre le dueil, To put on mouraing apparell,


Fac. yea @ a Court ; fe bin 9 procure a Reuimor
wth an efpecial requefsor claufe,far ediedifpatch,
Prendre le frein aux dents. To red pr a
flubborne iade bis rider; obftinately to proceed againft


Prendre la gatite. To flie, runne away, flip or take
into a lurking bole, |
Free de hergne,\4 tree to be bred.or grow up,of
a fucker. ;
Prendre vnhomme ras par les cheveux. Cruelly to
exatt,or foolifhly to expedt, from a man more then be
is able to yeeld.
Prendre honneur d'un efcholier.To'get credit win
are mie Scholler. : ue

rendre iour pour faire. To affigne, appoint, or fet
downe a day for the doing of. : té


Prendre langucentreux. To commune or conférre
togetber.
Prendre lettres. 1s (at a certaine Card-play) to aske
leaue to gine oucr an undertaken game.
Prendre le lievre au Tabourin, See Lievre,
Prendre les lions par les jubes, To act great mat-
ters and greatly hazard bimfel, If in th acting.
Prendre la Lune à belles dents, To performe iv
o ffibilities. .

Prendre Ja main. Looke Main, . | ’

_. Prendre Mars pour Marthe; And, prendre Mar-


tin pour regnard, To miflake (things that are fome- |


what alike)one for another,

Prendre du pain beniftdeS. Cy, To fill upflore

of liquor; &r fometimes(more generally)to drink wine.

Prendre Paris pour Corbeil, Foolifhly to mifiake

moft valike things one for another ; or greedily totake
. Gin feeming to miflake) a greater fora ee Gj

Prendre parti.To deliberate, panftsa ife,or betbink


Prendre à partie. To fue, implead,or call in quefiion;
ta bend, fetsx expel? bimfelfe againft. - a
rope \odenwel. enum
ner ÿ ed not well 1 am ci tof
beare the blame,or finartsef it Pa


mes perils. At}


a


RE


PRE


PRE


Prendre à perte de finance, To take vp money on
great interelt, for the paiment of a debt for which leffe
1 due; Or,to take vp commodities at abighrate, and
(for the making of prefent money) fell them againe dog
cheape. ang f
Prendre pied À. To reckon, or eflceme, of; build, or

_ ground upon, beed,or gine credit unto; alfo, to be ag-
grieued or difcontented at ; or take exceptions unto.
Prendre au pied levé, To fuap at; or take fhort, in
words; to trip on a fudden,or at vnawares ; to worke
on all aduantages,or make the worft of things.
Prendre fon à poin&. Look à poinét;under Poind,
Prendre vn rat par laqueuë. Tocut a purfe. '
Prendre à fa rifque. le le prens a ma rifque. At my

erill, with my danger be it.
rendre d’un fac deux mouftures.Looke Moufture,
Prendre fon fel. Tofiill, quaffe, caroofe; to take in
© his lading,or bis liquor to the full. :
Prendre 4 foy. To affume,or attribute-unto bimfèlfe.
Prendre terre. To goe forward, rid ground,get on a-
pace; a'fo,to land,or get afore. à 2
Prendre le vent, To goe up the wind, to make that
way which the wind comes ; alfo,to wind; or follow bp
the wind, fent,or finell. ;
Prendre fans verd, Tofurprife, take napping, or at
unawares.
Seprendre à. To brawle, quarell, fall out, fight, or

“contend with.

Seprendre à, de. To accufe,blame, lay the fault, caf?


| th'impütation of, vpon.


: Se prendre de bon biais.IIne s’y print pas de bon
biais. He tooke not a right courfe in the matter. °
Se prendre au nez. To acknowledge a fault, ec;
Looke Nez. ici
Seprendre au bout du nez. vous vous pourrez
prendre au bout du nez. You may take your felfe by
the nofé end;viz.yon are of the number; you are as guil:
tie, faultie,or farre in, as the rest, i \
Je n’en prendrois pas 10 efcus, 1 would not take xd
Crownes for it; alfo,1 am as glad of it as if one had gi.
uen me 10 (rownes. :
Iluy eaprend comme à, Itfareth , or falleth out,
. with bim as with ; (The like is)
: I n’en prend pas de ¢es.Jt fareth,or isnot with thefe,
-Iin'yprend ne n’y met. 1245 not his; or for him; bis
= partis leaft init,be bath notbing to doe with it; alfo,bè
deales not in,or meddles not withyit.
om ' le preudra.He will be well whitled,bis cap
“will be fet, “Ga ’
~ Celt folie de fe prendre aux fémes,& aux beftes ?
Pro. Tea madnes to meddle with women, and beafis.
~ Quia apprins à prendre fçair tard que c'eft de ré:
-* dre: Pro. The more cunning, e forward one is to take,
the more vnapt, & backward be is to refiore; or, they
tbat are api toiake arc unwillingto reflore,


| Quid'autruy prend fubied fe rend: Prov. He that


> receimesa{ Sells bis libertie.


{ * Qui par tout va par toueprend : Prov. Hethat goes


through gaines throughly ; or, he that goeth euerie way
= getteth eneriewayes 0)
Qui Papa hi He that
takes firft bath the bef; or (being a chufer) cannot re-
spent han hat ea, He {
Qui peu eme peu prend : Prov, He that fowes little
rebelle LL 1, TR ASSSR TEE


Go gle


| receiuer accepter s undertaker imbracer of.
Preneur de pigeons. cheater,confencr conitateber


Prenoncé :m. ée: f. Forefhewed, foretold, or declared


_ beforeband,
ent To forefbew, foretell ; denounce, or declare


P it. cone
renus, Etvbiprenus ? And where wi
Jind them ? & RE. Hater fy
Preoccupation: . A preoccupation anticipation, pre-
uention; an ouerreaching,
Preoccupé: m.ée: f. Preoccupated,onticipated, fire-
Stalled, prenented,or taken by prevention ; (and hence)
ouerraught, —
Preoccuper.Topreoccupate, anticipate, fore(tall, pre.
uent,or take by preuention; and thence,te ouerveach,
Preordonné :m. €e: f. Preordinated,fore-ordained.
Preordonner.7o preordinate,or fèreerdaine; to deter-
mine;enalt,appoint or fet downe beforehand,
Preparatif: m: A preparatine,or preparation.
Preparation: f. 4 preparation, or fore-prouifion ; a
i 3 a making or fetting of things in areadi-
5 Meffeoor 2h à
Preparatoire : m. 4 preparatorie.
reparé: m, éc:f. Prepared, made readie ; prouided,
or ordered beforeband.
Preparement :m. A preparing,or prouiding.
ps To prepare; pronide ; order, dight,make rea-
\ aie .
Prepatour: m. 4 vineyard,or vine-clofe for the beft, or
-< \choiceft plants,
plantement : m. A fore-planting , or former fet-
ting. *
Prepofer. Topreférre; to put.or fet before. ares
Prepofition +f, A Prepofition (in Grammer ;) alfo,a
tling,orfetting before.  : :
Prepostere com, Prepofterousunorderlie, wrong, o-
s. uerthwart,altogether from the purpofé,
Prepofterer, To place or fet prepoflerou(ly; to difarder,
or turnearfiuarfie; to put the cart before the borfe..
Prepuce : m.The foreskin,or skin that coueretbthe bead
of the yard, WH: DORE
Prerogative:f. Aprerogatinespriniledge,prebeminence,
© great aduantage, © jv 2 :
Prés.Neere,by ecre by, fal? by bard by neere vpon nigh
~\ unto, we Oras it Were touching, < ,
Au peu prés. welneere, almof}, in a manner, within
a little,or wanting but verie Little. . sa 12%
~~ Au plus prés. As neere as canbe,
pe au prés. To be prefent | neere, clofe by, at


; ‘Nous pes nr vn denies és: There is |
\ neuer but a pennie winning or loofing betweenevs,
Prefage i my A preface , dinining, fore-gheff gs fires
| fhewing; anorice , token sor argument of things to
come. iH
Persad . *
refagiant :m.ante :f. Prefaging,dinining, fore-ghe/-
fing, efhewing betokening fawre things.
Prefagicr.To prefage,diuine, fore-gheffe, forefhew.füre.
tell ; 10 prophefie of things to come.
Prefagieux. as Prefagiant ; or fil of prefages, -
Presbiteral: m. ale: f. Presbiterall , Prieftlie belong.
ang toa Priefie *. L
Presbitere: im: A Parfonage , Vicarage, or Priefis


Vicil oifeau ne feprend areths:Pro. THoldbirdis | <boufe. à 1

_ noï(eaffp)intrapped, Nr Time rt Presbtre. A Prie(}; Looke Preftre, cs

Preneur: m. A taker; catcher, feifer,apprebender;a | Preiche:f.:4 2 Preaching, +. 2"]

te SfT ÿ Pref-
RER SOS $


x AT der, 1


Es


re, À


PRE


(trudted,cxborted,

l'yayprefché fept ans pourvn carefme, 1 know it
well.or 1 am well knowne ibere,

Il eft cout prefché qui n’a cure de bien faire : Pro,
He's told ynough that meanes not to doe well; or,too
much he’s preached to that cares not tobe faned.


Prefchement : m, 4 preaching; inflructing; exborting, ~


perfuading.


Prefcher. Topreach; to teach, inflrudt; exbort, per-


faade.
Le regnard prefthe aux poules, wee fay, the Fox
preaches beware your Geefe,
Prefcheur : m. 4 Preacher.
De Prefcheur quife recommande en tour remps
bon heur nous defende : Prov. From Preachers who
themfèlues commend,God,and good fortune vs defend.
Prefcience: f. A prefcience,or foreknowledge,
Prefcript :m.ipte: À Prefcribed; era
pointed; alfo,out of date, or fo old, as it can hardly
renewed; whence;
Vn procez peri, & prefcript. 4 uit which bath lien
fo long in the decke,or bung fo long by the wall, asit is
growne paft following,
Prefcription:f, 4 prefcriptions a long poffefion, or
continuance in poffeffion; the courfeor ufé of a thing
for a long time ; alfo,a limitation,appointment, vule,or


Ww,
Prefe ric. To preféribe ; to limit ; affigne ; appoint ; or-
laine. 2
Les procez par efcritreceus ena Courne fe pre-
. {erivent point. May at any time be reuiued, are ne-
ner out of date,or outworne,
Prefeance :£ Precedence, or precedencie ; a firft, or


\. former place, vanke, feat ; a fitting, or going, before o-


thers.

Prefence:f. Prefence ; th'a(pect, fight, or countenance.
En la prefence de, Before, before the fo eyes; in
the verie cye of ; be himfelfe,erc,being by. : i
Droiét de prefence. Looke under Droit.

Prefent :m, À prefent,gifi,offer. +

Prefent : m, ente :f. Prefent; readie; in fight,in view;
at band, bard by; in prefence,in bis owne perfon. -


‘A tous prefents,& à venir, To all that ave and (ball


be; to all aliue and like to be.
Par ces prefentes., By theft prefents, or prefent let-
ters; Par Japrefente, By thinflant. 2
Par le prefent. Now, for this time,at this feafon,
Prefentation: fA preféntation ; a prefenting , fhew-
ing,repre(éenting, fetting forth,
Les prefentations. Th'introduétions, or inrollments
of bills, or of a€is,in a Court,before pleading, … ::
Laprefentation noftre Dame, A boly-day kept by
the Church of Rome on the 2x of Nouember, '
Prefenté:m.ée: fi. Prefented, represented; fhewed,
offered unto view; alfo,offered. - .
Prefentement. Prefeatly quicklyanon,at an infiant,at
= hand,readily, fpeedily, faddentys
| ter. To prefent; reprefent ; (hew, bring into pre-
> (ence, offer unto view ; alfo,to offer. FR
‘craint ce coup de tellefagon qu'il ne s'y prefen-
Æ pas, He neucr offers ie make a firoake
Sick «: MNCL a, polis ons atl
Prefentiment : m. A prouidence,or fore-feeling; a per.
A “ceningor vaderfanding fat ! UT
nes Aprefèruatine, defénfiuc ; counterpoy-
AR ANAM = has aa. 33 2510
[ refervatif: mines f Preferuatine,preferuing, ad


et
4


»Go gle


ot Tape,


Prefsement: m.4
em rs a


PRE


a ———————————————————————2
Prefché: m.ée : f. Preached; alfo, preached vato, in- po a : m, ée: f. Prefèrued, faned, kept, fbielded ,
ea, : 1?


Preserver. To prefèrue, (aue,keepe ; defend, fhield,
Prefidence : f. A Prefidencie; the place, or Office of a


Prefident.


Prefident : m, 4 Prefident; a ludge ina Court of Par-


liament,or bigh Court.
Le Premier Prefident.rhe Lord chiefe lufice of one
of thofé Courts,


Prefider. To prefide; gouerne,rule, fway, commaund o-


wD in indgement on.

Prefidial: m.ale:f. Prefidiall ; belonging to « Prefi-
dent,or to a Prefidiall Court. :
ir prefidiaux. Seats,or Courts of Iuftice(eftabli-


about the yeare 1551 im diners good townes of


France) wherein ciuile caufes (not exceeding 2501,
Tour. in money,or 10 |. Tour. ia rent) arebeard, and
adiudged, Soneraignly, and without Appeales, or by
renitenavtneihendng Appeales.
Prefidialement. Prefidially; witbin prefidiall lurifdic-
tion,or compal]e.
Prefidialité :f. Thelurifdiction of a Prefidiall court,
Prefidiaux: mi. The Offices of a Prefidiall Scat , or


Court.
Prefignifié: m.ée: f, Forefhewed, foretold, fignified


beforeband.
Presle. as Prele.


Prefine :m. Aneere,or next kinfinan by father and mo-


ther,or in a direël line,


Prefine d'Efineraude. A bafe, or courfè Emerauld;


whereof there be diuers kinds, fome tranfparent, as
the greene lafper ; otbers of a thicke, or troubled mal.
low colour.


Prefinefle :f. Neere kindred, the being next of kinne; or


the priniledge of recouerie, or difingaging of land, due
unto the next kinfman. -


Prefomptif : m.iue: f. Likelie, coniecturall ; alfo,pre-


fumpiuous.


Prefomption:f. Prefumption , faucine[le, malapert-


nefe, pe ag bi alfo , a prefumption, fufpition,
ueffe,conieélure, fore-conceit,
refomptions de droid. Prefumptions of right ; or
(as the Latine) preiudicia juris.
Prefomptuéux: m.eufe : f.Prefumptuous; prefuming;
faucie, malapert ouer-bold,


Pres-prenant. Crediteurpr. Am hard, or firiét credi.


tor; one that will be fatisfied toth'vtmoft.

Prefque. welnigh,welncere, almofl, ina manner, and
(with a Negatiue) fcarce,bardly. A%

Preffant : m-ante :f, Prefsing, inforcing, earneft, vr-
gent; importunate,unmannerlie,unreafonable,

Prefle: f.4 preafe, throng,or crowd of peoples alfo,a
Preffe to Print,or preffe things in; alfè,a kind of gree-
nifhjand hard Peach thats long in ripening, and whofe
pulpe(in fome places of av
unto the fione. ;
Vin de grain eft plus doux que n’eft pas vin de

ce: Prov, willing dueties ave more gracious then
such as be extorted.

Preffé: m. ée: f. Preffed; (qacexed, crowded, thruft

bavd,or clofe together; firained, urged ; inforced, con-
frained; oe dlaied to.
Preflé de fon honneur. That muft vatruffe,that muft
immediately goe toit,
C'eft trop prefsé. That is too great extremitie.

PrefSeance sf. Precedence,or precedencie.

e ing,thrufling clofe to-
as


je colour) cleanes hard


2a”
ie


(> ™
el. dei


oon ee Oy on ee


be el,


aes


ae
ma


#
a


Pe


ppt


4
‘


t


‘Preftire: € The rennet wherewith milke,impleyed in


rae OR ee | Nid: TE EL oo
‘


P R'E


arrogate, alfume,er sake on him, a great deale more | Prevariquet. To prenaricate,plead by couin,proceed y


then bis due ; to ouer-value bis owne perfan, er parts ;
alfo,to prefhme,thinke,weene,imagine,comiecinre,fup-
of


pofe.

Prefuppo : m.ée: f. Prefuppofe

Prelhbôfér, To prefuppofe Hg put the cafe that;
imagine, coniechure, weene before-band.

Prefuppofition if. prefuppofitionsor presuppofal an


admitting, a conielture,or weening.


cheefe-making,is curded.
Pretendant: m; (One that flands,or fues, or feekes, for


a place. ;

Pretendant. Pretending ; claiming,challenging; 4y-
ming at, fuing or putting in for ,al/o, meaning, inten-

ding feeming making a fhew of,giuing a colour fer.
Pretendre.To pretend; lay claime to,aime at, fue,fland,
lay or put in, for; alfo,to meane, feeme,intend, make a

shew of, giue a colour for. :
Pretendre vne chofe de fon chef Tu derive bis right

unto a thing fom the fource,or original thereof.

Pretendu : m, 4 thing for which a pretence,or pretext
is made; or whereuntoa claime, or challenge is layd ;
athing pretended vnto,aimed at, flood for ,boped after.
Pretendu: muë+fPretendéd ; fued,or flood for; wber-
unto claime is made ; alfo, intended, feeming, or wher-


fhewis made. -
Pa rf, A pretence ; purpoft, defignement, proiett,


intent, | .
‘Preterit: mite :f Paf, ouerpaft, ouerflipped, gone,de-


parted,expired.


Pretermettre. To pretermit, omit, ouerflip, onerpalfe,


leaue ,baulke,negleét ; forget.


Preterinis: m. ile: f. Pretermitted,omitted,ouerpaffed,


ouer flipped; baulked neglected,

Pretermiffion : f. A pretermiffion,omiffion,ouer paling,
baulking nse led ; forgetting,

Preteur:m, 4 Pretor; a Judge,or Officer of great au-
thoritie among tl’ auncient Romans.

Pretexte:m.A pretext, pretence, concer cloake, foadow,
colour, fhew,excufe, F4

Pretieuseinent Precioufly, fumptuoufly excellently.

Pretieux :m.eufe: £ Precious; of great vale , much
worth, bighprice ; verie fumptuous, excellent, excee-
ding good.

Pretoire: m.The Pauilion,or boufe of a Pretor; alfo,the
Court wherein be gaue audience to Suitors ; alfo, bis
Jur {dittion,or the Precinét within which be might ex-


ercife tl, ‘
Pretrot: m.A little bird fomewbat refembling a Linnet.
Preu. Looke Preux. !
Preyalence :£. 1s th'ouerplus,or that which remaines,of
the price of land fold for the paiment of a debt.
Prevaloir. To preusile, gaine,or be the better by; to res
ceine oo. or fuccour, from ; 1omake ue,
or profit of,
Pi = teur: m. 4 prenaritator, deceiner , double
dealer; a treacherous Atturney,Solicitor,or ro 4 HA


| aeaufe sone that pleads by couin, or collufion’; of
_ prinate intelligence with bim againf? whom he pleads;


£ im all bis proceedings digre[feib from
- truth,reafèn and boneflie.
Pretacation: f. Preuarication ; treacherie, double


cit; couin, collufion, er corruption in plea-


.  dealing;dec
ding; a treacherous continuing of intelligence witb an


1 afin ana bonefie.


3.


Prevage Pre cl ded, rreacheenf fl


Preud’homme. A valiant,bardie, couragiows , alfo, a


PRE |
collufion ; to deceine, deale doubly, or treacheroufly,


with ; to betray a caufe, wherewith be is trufled, umo
pec aduerfarie; to fwarue, or digreffe from truth, and


Preu ar al chaft,bonefi, mode. vertucus(graue,
or be a Matron,
Preudes gents. Valiant, faithfull,boneft perfons.


loyal, faith $ cpl - é
shai bpd pene are (alfo, a mdr man


€
Preud'hommie : f, Courage, valour, proweffe ;loyal-


tie, faithfülnefe ; boneflie, fiaceritie, mtegritie; good |


dealing, true meaning.

Preud'hommier : m.ere : £, Valiant, couragiows ; loy-
all, faithfull; boneft, fincere. Que”
Preveil:m. An ordimarie meeting of Spinflers , and
ToungSlers,at a certaine place, where they worke, and |

make merrie together. |

Beit ig Preventing anticipating outftyipping,fire~

lalling, y

Preyencment: m. A prenenting anticipating outfirip-
ping, foreflalling.

Prevenir. To prenent,outfirip, anticipate, preoccupate,

forefiall ; aifo, to appeach, or call in queflion.

Prevention :f. 4 prewention,anticipation, preoccupati-
on, foreflaliment.

Condamner par prevention: viz, devant quele
procez foic fai&. Before th’Inditiment bedrawne.
Prevenu: m. (Is in Law) a prenenting of whatfocner

may be obielled.

Prevenu : m.ué :f. Preuented, antflripped, preaccupa-
ted anticipated, foreflalled ; alfo, accufed of, charged
with, called in queftion for; whence; Prevenu en
luftice. Publickly appeacbed; calledinto a Court, or
before a Fudge. r

Preveu:m.eué:f. Forefeene, fore-imagined, forecaft,
perceiued er era beforeband, £

Prevoir. To foresee; fore-imagine, forecafl; perceine à
farre off,prouide beforeband; prenent what otberwife
would follow. . |

Prevoft :m. The Prouoft,or Prefident of a Colledge, or
Cathedrall Church ; alfo, a principall Magifirate, or
Fudgeina good towne; alfo,an under Judge of a Pro-
wince; the Fudge of a village; or the Roturiers pro-
per Jud; (for fuch as the Bailli, and Senefchal are
among ( <ntlemen, tbe Prevoit is among Yeomen;

- wbofe wardfhips be difpofeth of; whofe differences be
indgeth of sand on whom (offending) be inflictetb pu-
nifbments,or penalties ; Looke Prevofis des villes ; )
alfo,anvnder Marfhall,or Prouoft Marfhall,
Prevoft des amendes, The Col/eéior of all amercia.
ments, and finall cafuall rights duevnto the Lord of a
Mannor; fliled thus tofet a diffirence betweene bim,


and th’ordinarie Judge of the Mannor, who is called


Prevoft,& Garde de luftice.
Prevoft d'Eglife, is, iz a Cathedral Church, she
Deane; or th’ Officer which deliners out vitiualls unto
the Canons, Gc.

Preveft fermier.4 counirey Prouofl,or Officer,wbo
lenies allamerciaments,tolls & cuflomes and feifes all
waifis & flrayes, within bis lnvifdiblion, either to bis
ern Ufe(as in fome placts)or fur bis Lo.(as in the moft.)
Prevost forain. 1s(by the cufiemes of eel M
warie Judge of the Prowince; & determines of all A&i-
ons reall,or perfonall; and bath under bis Jurifdition
all the Church men,Gentlemen,Bayguers,and otbersre-
fiding,or dvve ling within bis walke,


pain’


Rs 2.


ie pal tp SPIP CERN TE ee


PRE


Prevolt,& garde de Iultice ; Looke in Prevoft des
- amendes ; or-as;
Prevoft en garde, Arwrall Prowoft, or Fudge, that
keepes either the Kings (inferior) Courts, or thofe of a
Lord lulticier; hath no bene fit by any fines,efcheates,or
amerciaments ; and is inferior in all rejpects unto a


Bailli.
Prevolt de l'hoftel: (Caled now adaies, Le grand
Prevoft de l'hoftel du Roy) the ordinarie Fuidge of
the Kings houfthold; fets rates upon vittualls,and [ets
. downe orders for the gouernment of many other things
© (efpecially concerning whores, &c) in all (unpriuiled-
ged) places within fix leagues of the Court.
Prevoft des Marchandsa Paris. The Lord Mayor of
Paris; different from the Prouoft of luflice, who is cal-
led,Le Prevolt de Paris.
Prevoft des Marefchaux. A Prouoft Mar{hall (who
is often both Fnformer, Fudge, and Executioner) puni-
fhes diforderlie Sould:ors, Coyners, Free-booters, high-
way robbers, laxie rogues, or vagabonds, and fuch as
weare forbidden weapons,
Prevolt des Monnoyes, The Prowoft of the Mint;
the ludge of controuer fies arifing by veafon of the Mint,
or among Mintmen. J
Prevoft des Ordres (du Sainé Efprit, & de Sain&
Michel;) The Maifter of the Ceremonics in either of
the Orders of France ; lookes that their Statutes be du-
ly obftrued ; inquires diligently (and prinately) after
their infringers, whom in fier cafes he admonifheth
gently, but if their faults be great, he complaines unto
the Kine; he likewifé makes a certificate of the death
of rie Kuxight,and caufes the Clarke of the Order to
regifler it, ‘
Prevoft de Paris. The ordinarie — of differences
betweene the citixens,and all others that refide within
the inrifdiétion of the Chaftelet of Paris; the Gouer-
nor general of the Police both of that Towne, and of
her feuen daughters (for which looke under the word
Fille;) and of much greater authoritie in bis gouern-
ment then the Prowoft of other Townes, who be inferior
. to the Baylifés and Senefthalls thereof.


Prevoft des Ribaulds;#4s in old time the Lieutenant .


of the Roy des Ribaulds,

-Preyoft vicomtal. The ludge of a Chaftellenie ; or,
as Prevoft en garde.

Prevofts des villes. Rural! Prouofts,or Fudges;are
to be prefent at all Affifes held by the Baillis; are Fud-
ges of the Police,take notice of the incorporate trades;
and looke to the reparations of the Townes whereto
they belong;they likewife receiue the oathes of all Vine-
yard-keepers ; and in Towne-affemblies precede the
Confcillers of that luvifdiftion,and if the Lientenant

of the Prouince be abfent,euer prefide ; yet ave theynot

to meddle with any canfes belonging to the Kings Do-
maine, Fiefs, or Hommages ; and for their negligence
are punifhable by the Baylifes.

Le gee revolt de France. # Prevoft de I’
Hoftel.


€

Prevoftäble: com. Subieët onto the Turifdiétion of a
Prouoft,or unto all law.

Prevottablement, By Marfhall law.


ire: com, of aP. 3 Pro-
a e fae omit Ton of pr ces and,


{tal: m.ale: £ The fame.
Prevofté: m. À se aie the Seat,


"or Court of a Prouo/l,or arfball; alfo, the precintts,
“Gandini iio De alba ef feeb camel


Prevoyance: f. Prouidence, firefight, forecaft. /
Preut. Firfl,or firft of all, ré mM,


Preuve: £4 D ere ve qu tn


Preux. Hardie, dougbtie, valiant, couragious, full of


Preyer:m. A kind of Linnet that hath a long, or Larke-


| Priant, Praying,befeeching, requefling intreating.
Priapifine: m. : lle, ‘ 4
yard.


ra
Prié: m. ée: f. Prayed, befougbt, requefled, intreated,
Priement : m. A praying,befeeching, requefting, intrea-


Prier. To pray, befécch, intreat, requeft,implore,defire,


Price: f A prayer, fupplication,intreatie,requefl bum.


Prieur: m, 4 Prior; the head of aPriorie; ©
Prieuré: £ APrivrie,or Frycrie.
Prieuré: f. APrioreffe; the head of a Priorie of Nunaes,
Prim: m, aPrefme. .

Prim: m, ime: £ Prime, forward, or firft, principal,


Filer prim, To runne thinne,or by little and little.
Ie veux tailler ma plume plus prime. 1 will vf «


PRE


rights, accruing fo a Lord luflicier within bis Ter-
ritories.
Droid de Prevofté. The priuiledge of bauing a Pro-


uoft,or Marfball, for the keeping of Courts; and leuying |


of Waifes, Tolls ,Eltraits,and Amerciaments, tre; be-
longs toa Lord Baron, or Chattelain,that haue iurifdic-
tion; Fn fome places alfo, a Paffage-toll or Through-
toll is tearmed thus.

Les fept filles de 12 Prevofté de Paris. Looke under
the word Fille,

revoftel: m. elle: £, 4s Prevoftaire,

revoftere: com, as Prevoftaire.


En preut,deux,trois,&c; One,two,three dc; or Im-
primis; a word uféd in Inuentories,and Accompts.


alfo, reafon alledged, authoritie fhewed, enidence pro-
duced,or teflimome brought for the proofe,or confirma-
tion of a matter in queftion.

“A preuve de marteau. That will abide the bamme-
rings thats right, found, folide, good.

‘A la preuve l’on efcorche I’ afne: Prov.By prouing,
attempting, of laying the bands to, an Afge 1s flayed;
ar: a difficultie is compafed ; a difference compoun-

ed.


proweffe; al(o,loyall, faithfüll, fincere,boneft,vertuons,
worthie; al/o,difcreet, skilful, readie.

Les neuf preux.The nine worthies.

Au fils de preux. The Voice,or Cry of Heralds in ho-
nor of a young knight ((onne to a valant, and worthie
father) the firft time be prefènts bimfelfé, as an affai-
leant, in the Lifts.


like,heele,


@ extention,or {welling of the


defired.


ting, defiring.


crane or beg of, make humble fuit unto,

riez yilain,moins il fera: Pro. The more yintreat a
clovene the leffe heele doe,
Qui veut apprendre à prier aille fouvent fur la
mer: Proy. Auch danger breedes denotion, feare of
death teaches religion. :


ble fuit or defire, : :

De mains vuides prieres vaines: Pro, Emptie bands
make idle fupplications ; he that giues nought,by prayer
getteth naught.” :


chiefe, or fooneft; alfo, as Prin.
Prime Lune, The firff quarter,or the increafe,of the
Moone. RE
Prim temps, The Spring. |
Marjolaine primé. Marierome gentle, Sweet Mar- |
ierome, fine Marierome ; alfo(but le{fe properly) Time,


more


Go gle


à


PRI


__, more neat, fine, finootb, eloquent file ; my. penne fhall
vanne more glibly along. ae
ritnace: f. Primacie; excellencie; chiefe rule, bighelt
eftate, greatef} authoritie; and particularly,an Ecclefi-
afticall dignitie,or commaund ouer all the Archbifhops
and Bifbops of a Kingdome,or Prouince,

Primat: m, À Primat,or Metropolitan.

Primauté: f. as Primace, à

Prime. Le p. des chevaliers. A prime Kaight,the Para-

_ goa,or flower, of Knights.

Prime: f. Primeroat Cards ; alfo, the firft boure of the
day (in Summer at foure aclocke, in Winter at eight; )
alfo,afinall Goldfinithes weight, whereof 24 make but
one graine. f
Soupes de prime. Monaflicall Broweffe ; cheefe and
bread put into pottage ; or chopped Parfeley flrewed or
layed together with the fat of the Beefe-pot, on the
bread,

Prime: com, ‘Thinne,flender,exile,fmall; alfo,as Prim;
whence; :

Cheveux primes. Smooth,or delicate haire.
Prime. (Adverb.) Primely, chiefly ; forwardly, fooneft,


(1410
‘A prime. #bileare,but now,but euen now.
Retournez vous au prime? Came you backe no foo-
ner ? came you againe but now?
Prime-barbe, The downe, or moffie beard ona young
mans chinme.
À Pritnemenst. chiefély principally expreffely ; alfo,tbinly,
narrowly ; alfo, exactly, curioufly.
Primerain: m. aine: f. Earlie, timelie, forward, that
[pringeth,buddeth,or commeth forth with the firft. .
Primeroge : com, as Primerain; whence ;
Figues primeroges.Starued figges,or the firft figges
that come vpon the tree,which being too forward, com.
monly thriue not.
Primerouge. 2s Primeroge.
À Primes. Or primes. Now at the laft, onely at this time,
not before now,or but enen now.
Pritme-vere: £. The Spring; alfo,the Primero ; alfo, a
ow,


Cowllip. pee
Primeur: f. Smallnefe,thinneffe,exilitie, flendernefe ‘3


alfo, primene (fe, per{2Gion, excellencie; alfo, formar


- ef, - | D
Primices: £ Fir/t fruits; the firft fruits of the pearesthe
_ fieftlings of yearelie fruits, ; ;
à Piimicial : male: £ Ofor ne fr fruits.
Primitif: m, jue: f. Primitinesthe fief, which hath no
- Primogeniture: f. Prime,or fir voy rh
bein Peldel ; the title of the eldeft , or firfi-borne
child, ah BR,
Primordial: m.ale: £ Original of an off-(pring, firf
… rifing, beginning from.
= at a fbi , piercing, hr à
À Prince: m. 4 Princesor Chiefe;a Monarch,Soueraigne,
} great Lord, great Potentate : Some good French Au-
À hors menton fx kinds of Princes; the Pr they file
~~ Simples Princes; #0 better then Magifirates, or OF
cers of Soueraigntie; fuch as were the Patriarchs


és among the Jevves ; the Kings of Lacedemo- |


ent Kiags of France; the firft Kings,and
L apparance) the firft Emperours, of Rome ;
moderne Dukes of Veni oa Stee  opini-


es


PRL


_thegreat Turkes thofe that lide under Prefter ohn; |
the ancient Princes of Italie while they acknowledged, |
and held of the Empire; the ancient Dukes and Earles }
of Fraunce, while they affoorded their Kings no more | .
then a bare bomage,and {ome {mall attendance in the |
warres; the moderne King of Bobemia,and Princes of
the Empire : The third, Princes Scigneurs ; which
haue an abfolute power ouer the perfons,and propertie
in the polfeffions of their fubieéts; as bad the foure firft | —
Monarchs of Affiria, Media, Perfia, and Egypt; and }
as at this day the great Turke, Prefter John, the Muf
couite,and fome otber fuch Tyrants haue : The fourth,

rinces Souverains (more moderate, and commodi-
ous for mankind,then the former) enioy an abfolutesbut
publike Soueraïgatie, not (much) intermedling with
the priuate ; of which kind, the later Empereurs of
Rome, with thofé of Conflantinople, weve, and at this
day the moft of the Kings, Gest hassles à Princes of
Chriftendome,are : The fifi, Princes de race, oudu
fang ; viz. the children, or off-fpring of foueraigne
Princes, who by their birth are capable ofsor may come
vnto,a Crowne; within which branch we may compre-
hend the eldej! fonnes of foueraigne Kings;who not ha-
uing any particular affectation, or accefe, of title by
creation (as our Prince) or by donation (as the eldeft
fonne of France) are tearmed fimply Princes : ‘The
laf, Princes, ou Seigneurs, de Principautez, doe
feeme to deriue their dignitie certaine auncient,
and powerfull vaffalls of the (rowne ; which hauing,in
emulation of the Dukes and Earles of their time, in-
croached on all rights of Soueraigntie within their À
owne dominions,and wanting (what the others bad) a }
Title to diflinguifh them from leffe, or leffe abfolute,
Lords , verie willingly tooke this vpon them: Since
which time the Kings of France reuniting, by feuerall
meanes,the Eflates of the(e Vfurpers unto the (vowne, À.
yet bane beene pleafed to continue the name in fuch of
their fanourites as baue fued for it And at this day
[ome great Lords which defire to be held Princes,are
_ curious to procure one of their Townes to be made a
Principauté,and afterwards be[tow it,or (at leafl) the
. Title of it,on their eldeft fonnes : But thefè are no true
Princes, and therefore in all afemblies they be vanked |
beneath Earles. 3
Jeux des princes, Such Sports as are delightfill, or
pleafing,to thofé that ufe them.
Les princes fe fervent des hommes comme Ie la-
boureur des abeilles: Pro, viz. Firft take their boney
from them,and then fmoother or expell,them.
Les princes tiennent toufours leurs comptes, ils
ne perdent jamais rien: Prov. Princes are excellent
reckoners, for they (eldome loofe ought. À
Les princes ne veulent point de fervitudes limi-
tez: Pro. Princes will not ps fèrned on conditions.
Haine de prince fignifie mort d’homme:Pro, Hee’s
neere his death thats hated by bis Prince.
Princefle: f APrincefe. : - ;
Principal: m. Thé Principall, or Head of a Societie; a
principall,chiefesbead man,or matter; alfo,the fumme,
chiefe knot ynaine point,of a matier;alfo,the principall;
the fumme in que|tion,or let out unto ufe. ; 4
, moft fpe-


Principal: m. ale: £. Principall, fouerai
ciall,chiefefl, greateft, bigheft.
PRE Principally , chiefly, moft cfheci-
ally. ote Fe
Principauté: f 4 Principalitie ; tbe Eflate, ov Stat, of
; HT | © ER allo, pes marae ex
trauagant Seignorie, bearing, vather then
ne


deferuine,
7 the


Original. trom


THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


P R I


P RI


the name of this dignitie , and ranked betweene an
Earledome,and Vicountie ; (Looke in the later end of
the word Prince.) :

Principe: m. À Principle, Maxime, ground of Art; al-
fo, a beginning or a beginner,

Principefque: com, Princelie,royall, foueraigne.

Principié: m. ée: f, Begum, or in breeding.

‘Principion: m. A pettie Prince.


Prinficf. Le Seigneur de p. The Lord Paramount, or


immediat Lord,of an inheritancechargedwithrent.

Pringalle: f 4 fafhion of warlike Engine vfed in old
time.

Pringert: m. 4 kind of fall bird. :

Prins: m. infe: f, Taken; feifed,cve ; Looke Pris.

Prinfault. De pr. Preféntly, immediatly, fuddainely, at
an inflant, at the fir(t chop, effort, or iwmpe ; out of
band,

Prinfautier: m, À ftarter,a nimble iumper. ©

Prinfautier : m.ere : £.Suddaine,quicke,nimble,readie,

inftant, (quickly) prefent at hand. .
Prinfe: f. A taking, feixing; a catching, or laying bold
= on; Looke Prife.

| Printaner. To (pring, or flourifh as the Spring.

Printanier: m, ere: f. Earlie,of the Spring.

Printemps : m. The Spring, or Spring time, À

Priorité: f. Prioritie, fenioritie, precedencie, auncient-
ne(fe,elder{bip ; a being, or going before others. ;

Pris: m. The price, rate ; value ; accompt, refpect, efti-
mation ; worth of things ; alfo,the prixe,rewar d,or ho-
nour got by, kept for, or due unto, the beft deferuer in
a Julis,érc. ÿ
‘A pris d'argent. For money.

Au pris que, Ever as, :

‘A quelque pris qu’eft le bled. what/oeuer it coft me,
how deerely foeuer 1 pay for it. ETS
Toute chofe fe vend au pris de l'oeil: Pro, AU things
are fold at the price th’ eye [ets on them.

Pris: m.ife: f. Taken; feixed,caught, apprebended, re-
ceiued, accepted of; imbraced undertaken ; alfo, put,
or put on. ;

Corne prife. Growne flatelie, proud, intollerable,
Eau prife, & vin pris. Turned,or curdled ; growne
thicke,and dead withal.

- Homme bien pris. L fet,well underlayed,

Pris à coup perdu. Gotten more by good bap then any
eat cunning. ; à
ris à per & à couche. Surprifed,ouerraught,jn dan-
er,ymet with cuerie way.
ris comme le More, Looke More,
- Pris dunez. That bath the Murre,whofe nofe is fluf:
fed,or flopped with cold. ati
Cela a defia pris coup. Hath alreadie gotten a fjee-
ding, or deadlie blow; is brought to that flate,that it
cannot long fubjift. 4
Elleapris fa tefte. She # refolued to doe but what fhe
lift.


Il luy a pris vne verruë. The giddie worme bites bim,
the toy bath taken him in the head.
Les plus rouges y font pris. Looke Rouge.
Les plus rufez font les premicrs pris: Prov. The
craftieft are the fooneft caught, 5
3 Trop tard erie oifeau quand il eft pris: Pro. if

chiefes being in,complaints are out of,date.

Prifage: m. 4 prifage, prifing, praifing, rating, valu-


fe | Rae. .
ife : f. as Prifa salle taking , (eixing; an arreft,or
Rin tea Bede obs bes i, a

Locke,or hold in wrafiling ; any adluantage alfo,a ke,


Le


or quarrell; a, a bootie, or prize ; alfo, the death, or


od f a bunted beaft,
rife de miarres, 4 kind of penaltie for the non-pay-
ment of Cens at the day wbereon they ave due.
- Prife de paupieres, The agglutination of the eye-lids;
: when they cleaue either togetber, or to the bornie, or
coniunthiue membrane,by meanes of fome vicer which
hath beene ill cured.
De belle l'en Faire, well liking, worth the taking,
acceptable or gracious tothe eye.
De bonne prife. Good, or lawfull prize; alfo, full
ripe, in feason, fit to be cropped, gathered, or got-
ten. :
Corner prife. Cela cornoit prife. That finifhed the
chafe,that made an end of the matter.
Eftre aux prifes, To be clofed,locked,or grapled toge-
- ther ; to tug one another, to wralile, or firine with
one another,
C’eft vne bonne prife que d'un ieune loup : Proy.
A young Wolfe is a game worth catching,
Prifé: m.ée:f. Priféd,rated,valued,eficemed.
Prilée: f. 4 prifall,rate,valnation ; a prifing, rating,va-
luing,
Prifer, To prife ; eflecme,relbeët,rechon,accompt ofalfo,
totax;rate,value, feta price on.
‘A l'hoftel prifer,& au marché vendre: Prov. Rate
thy commodities at bome,but fell them abroad,
Qui bien fe cognoit peu fe prife, qui peu fe prife
Dieu l'avife: Pro. He that bimfelfe kaowes well, bim-
felfe de(pifes,the felfe-defpifer God beeds,and aduifés.
Priferie: f. A prifing, or praifing ; a rating, or valy-


me.
Prifeur: m, A prifer, praifer, price-fetter x a rater, va-
lier, taxer. x
Prifine. Looke Prime,
Prifon:£ 4 Prifon, fayle,or Gaole.
Oncques n’y eut laides amours,ny belle prifon:
Pro, There neuer was faire prifon,nor foule loue.
Prifonnier: m, A prifoner. :
Tous les prifonniers s'en font fuys de fa bourfe,
All manner of pence are flowne out of his purfe.
Prifte, 4 kind of whall,or buge fifo, whofe faowt is verie
long,and notched like a Saw, :
Priftine: com. Former ; old,auncient; wonted,accufto-
med; alfo,late,or but little p2/t. ‘
Privaife: £ Lieu ou l'on fait les privéz ; or a Pipe,
or Funnel, for the voiding of the ill aire of a Priuie,
Privation: f. 4 prination, deprining, bereauing, with-
drawing of; 4 want, or wanting; a lacking,or being


without. Eb
Privativement.£xclufiuely,by way of exclufion,or to the
putting out of others, pe
appartient privativement 4 tous autres,
en onely to hin , no other bath ought to doe
wit . è ~
Privauté: f. Prinacie, priuate familiaritie or friend-
fhip,inwar d connerfation or acquaintance, à
Privé: m. A Prinie,lakes, houfe of Office,
En fon privé. Prinately, fecretly, clofely, retiredly,
within bis owne doores, without gadding,or medlinga-
broad; at bis ovwne bome. , ;
Privé: m.ée: f. Depriued,reaued,bereft of;alfa,prinie,
clofe,or fecret ; alfo,priuat, familiar inward,bold with,
neeve unto,as one of bis owne ; tame, gentle, traétable,
domeflicall; alfo, or dinarie; bomelie ; without charge,
office, or authoritie in the Commonwealth,
run larron privé on nefe par garder: Prov, No
creaturé can auoid the prinie theefe. iuase


—


a]


SRE PPT ey


Perse. |e (70


P R I


En os sb Sle


PRI


Privemént: m. 4 depriuing,or bereauing.
Privément. Lriuily,clofely, fecretl; prinately,inward-
\ dy, famnliarly ; after an ordinarie fafbion.

Priver. To depriue, reaue, or bereaue, defpoyle of, take


om,
Privilege: m. A Priuiledge, Libertie, Fraunchife, Li-
4 cence, Immunitie, Prerogatine aboue others: A French
Lawyer defines it to be, Vne_conceffion fingulicre
que le Roy oétroye à toufiours par Jettres Pa-
tentes (qui doivent eftre verifiées en la Chambre
des comptes.)
| Privilegié: m. ée: £ Priuiledged ; exempted from or-
7 dinarie dueties, or iurifdiction ; out of ordinarie
4 courfe, F
| Cas,ou deli& privilegié. 4 notable cafe,or notorious
f crime, which none but the King, or bis Fudges, may
examine, fentence,or cenfure.
Privoité. as Privauté.
Pix: m. Price; Looke Pris.
Probabilité: £ Probabilitie, likelibood, apparance of
truth.
Probable: com.Probable,proueable,which may be pro:
ued,likelie,or like to be true.
Probablement. Probably, likely, proneably.
Probableté. as Probabilité.
Probation: £ A probation, proofe approbation, pro-


ung.
Probatique. Pifcine pro. 4 Pond for the wafbing of
the Shecpe that were,by the Law,to be Sacrificed.
Probité: f. Honeflie,integritie, finceritie, goodneffe,vp-
rightneffe,true dealing, …,
Problématique : com. Problematicall,belonging to a
Probleme.
Probleme: m. 4 Probleme; a propofition, pofition, or
Sentence, hauing a queflion annexed unto it.
Reopens: f, A big faowt,buge nofe.
robofcide. The trunke, or (nowt of an Elephant, |
Procace:m, The Pofl,or Carrier that goeth weekely be-
tweene Rome and Naples... ; q
Procedé. Proceededs paffed forth gone forward; beld,
continued, or kept onin a courfe; alfo, fued, or pur-


aT es,


bed, ; ; cite dT
Proceder. ‘To proceed, goe forward, pale forth ; con-
_tinue,bold,or keepe on in a courfe allo, to fue, or pur-
ue. =i
. Proceder fommairement. Looke Sommairement: |
” Fins de non proceder. Rea/oas alledged for the flay-
ing of farther proceedings in Court.» iy
Jamais ne gaigne qui procede à fon Maiftre: Pro.
~ He neuer thriwes that sues bis Maifler.
Zeqenaent oceder'eft à l'advocat vendenger:
| Pro. Delayes in Law fill Pleaders Barnes.
Procedure: f. A procedure ; a courfe,or proceeding ; a
__ courfe of proceeding ; a fuing,a purfuing


mr fuing.
Procerité: £ Height,or lengtb of bodie ; tallneffe of fla-


OR RET , Ation, In |
"eter Lans ih ate ey ae
ee eRe re


LS Procez, mr mill; re . Small teat-like finewes in the
-_sfirepan CE red rene he 0948
ARLES een
és. A notable flirring, vnquiet, or
RSR es &


æ er es
kprocés à, To appeuch, or inte; 10 fi upon


+


9 ia ca PP hy ee 28 |


ments alfo,be is conuidled, or condemned ; be is but a
dead (but a gone) man.

Pendre vn procés au croc, See Croc,

Perdre fon procés. Tobe caft in Law.

e procés ou gift grofle amende, en tous tem
bon heur nous defende : Pro. From fuits that fubieët
be 10 grieuous fines,good Lord deliner vs.

En procés il n'y a point d'amour : Pro. There is no
loue "trvcene lawing aduer{aries ;or, there is no loue
ce that goe to Law, ÿ
Proceffeux: m.eufe: £ as Proceffif; or full of actions,
filled with fuits.
Proceffif: m.iue: £. Litigious,debatefull, wrangling al
wayes in (its ,cuer at Law.
Proceffion : £. A proceffion.
Proceffional: m, ale: f. Procefionall ; belonging to,
Seruing for,a proceffion.
Prochain: m.aine:f. Nigh,neere;next, neighbouring,
adioyniag,clofe to,bard by. T
Prochainement. Neerelp,nighly; next,or laff.
Prochaineté: £Nighneffe,neerenefe proximitie,neigh-
bourhood,
Prochas: m. A purchaft ; a purfuit.
Prochaffer. Looke Pourchafler,
Proche : com, Neere,nigh,ncighbouring,adioyning,clofe
Unto,
Prochefief: m. The Fief, or Inheritance thats held of a
Lord by a direët,and immediate tenure,
Procidence:£ A falling downe of a thing out of it
right place, |
Proclamation: £. A proclamation,a proclaiming.
roclamé: m. ée: f. Proclaimed.
Proclaner. To proclaime, to publifh by proclamation,
Proclameur: m, 4 proclaimer.
Proclif: m.iue: £. Fucliaing bending ; fubiedt, or incli.
ned unto, prone,apt,readie to fall.
Procours. as Parcours.
Procraftination: f. 4 procraflination, delay driuing off
from day to day, putting ouer tif tomerrow.
iné: m, ée: f. Procraftinated,drinen off,or put
ower, from day to day:
Procraftiner. To procraflinate, prolong,delay, driue, or
put off ,deferre from day to day.
Procreateur: m. 4 procreator ,begetter ingendrer,([e-
cond) maker, ; ;
Procreation: f. A procreation,ingendring,begetting.
Procreatrice: fA procreatrix; a mother,or damme.
Procréer. To procreate,ingender,beget,breed,make,
Proculteur, fed fometimes in flead of Procureur.
Procuration: f. A procuration; a Warrant,or Létter of
Alturney;a following of another mans bufinel]e by war-
rant; alfo, a Vifitatton executed by an Archdeacon, or
{ome other,as the Bifhops Deputie.
Paffer procuration.To appoint am Atturmty,or Depu-
tie; to make one à Warrant, or Letter of Atturucy, for
the following of bis bufinelfe; alfo,to yeeld,eraunt,or a-
RCCL UALS. oe ieee ?


£ LEO TETR AN
Procuré: m.ée: £ Procured, made; folicited.


Procurer. To procure, vet ,purchafe,acquire ; to folicite,


or pacaufe.

Procureur: m. A Proftor; an Atturney at Law.
Procureur fifeal. The ordinarie Proftor or Atturney
of a Lord high \utticier; who by him profecutes (with-


| in his onme Territories ) all caufes that either com


cerne the rights, and dependances of bus Seigniorie;or
"ne seshapianlanence of the Peate,and fafetie of
” is vaffalls. — ; ay


| Procureuts  Holpitaux. ‘Protos of Spite ;


Original from


THE OHIO: STATE UNIVERSITY


d. A 4


PRO


offices which receine she rents belonging to,and almes
chomed on,them.

Procureurd' dicaa: FA Seigneurie. The wAtiur- |
aey of a Moyen lufticier, who not


frum
Précureut de la Seigneurie dela Tuftices (which
is). a¢ Procureur fifcal,

a, m. A rope which compalfeth the faite yard


Ships
pete a male: f. Pradgalomtifie rotons,
‘| sw fal, exceffine in expénce.
Prodigalement. Prodigally, vathriftily, riotoufly, la-
uifhizgre fly.
Prodigali €: m. €e:f. Prodigalized, lauifbed,wafled,
pen riotoufly, difpofed of vnthrifuily, (guandered a-


Prodigalifér. To prodigalize it, pend cmbrifiily, wal,
dau confime, or fquander all away.
Prodigalité: € Prodigalitie,riotunthrifiinefie, lauifh,
or wafi full expente.-
Prodige: m. A pradigie; wonder, frange Sine unna-
_turall accident mar uelous thing,
Prodiger. as Prodiguer, $
Prodigieufement, Prodigionfly ; monflroxfly,wonder-
falls, mofl ftrangely or unnaturally,
Prodigicux: m.eufe:f, Prodigians; wanderous, mon-
flr ous mofl unnaturall or ont of cour fe,
Prodigue : com, Prodigall,unthrifiie, lauifh,waftfidll,
vivtous,exceffiue,or outragious in expentce,
Prodigue, & grand beuveur de vin n’adu fien ne
. four,ne moulin: Pro. ‘Tbe drunken fpendthrift wafis
his bef polfeffious.
vim To riot, life, — play the unthrift,
wafl,confume;let flye all be
iteur: nm. 4 ai ane bewrayer Aifilofer;
a pe or difloyall fellaw.
Prodition: FAP ere rene dial,
: extreame falfehood.
Prodrome: m. The  fore-runner or newes-bringer of a-
nother mans comming ; a preparer of the way for a-
_ nother ; whence
. Prodromes. Tbe winds which rife a little befare the
Dog dayes.
Production: : F4 produttion; a pro feyenidence,or te.
flimonie produced in iuflification, or confirmation of a


Pane: m. icte: £. Produced; ded, brought firth;
alledged,or fhewed,in proofé hs


Produire. To produce ; yeeld, bring forth; cite bookes,


. Urge proofes,alledge reafons ; alfo,to fornifl with lea-
= cherie,to helpe a manto a wene b for money ;(th’ office,
and prathfe of bawdes.)
Proë, Looke Proué.
Proëme: m. 4 Proeme,Preface, Prologue.
Proëline: m. The fame; alfo,a neighbor.
Pr sm. 4 pren, violater, vnballower,


son fd rps or prophaning ; a vio-
: ae Lo emporal pri wi
ked, llega


méc:f Prephaned; unballowed,violated ;
turned prises éme, fons die 10 an
humane,vfe. +
Profanemént: m, as
Profanément. Propane


Tue
Ed ; worldling-like, =


| Profondité.


PRO


Profaner. ro prophane, vrhallow, vielate ; put hotic
Lines to unbolie vfes, pissin


ner | ee .To produce,alledge,deline? ; peake,pronounce,
cannntbaue a Procureur fifcal, andiber fre fes


Profefleur: m, 4 ioe relies a publike Reader in Vni~


sor School
Prodi fA profefion, fackltie, qualitie, vocation, |
ae 3 mde hah open confefion,proteftation aduowall,
+ pr ent ; alfo,a Reading;0r profeffingin pub
choles, ”
Pro pefloirestae, Profefiuely,or by profeffion.
Profez: m, P vofeffed Monkes ; or, more generally, fuch
\\ asyhauing made their Vowes, are admitted of a religi-
ous Order.
Proficiat: m.Afee\or benenolence be flowed on Bifhops,
Perera à Rap ont Lerrmeed after their in-


PARA m. de: £ Wrought donen tbtead alfo,pur-


Profit: m. Profit, gaine, lucre, increafe of, aduantage
“3 ner scommoditie,benefit viilitiecheuiffance.

| prof demefnage. Roundly, foundly, throughly,

ut trifling’ Wenn a to parpofe, with a wit


Profit fans vertuine vaut vn feftu : Prov, Gaine

without vertes not worth a feskue,

Au defpendre gift le profit: Pro. Fn {pending thrift

con ifts ; aires expence makes many à poore man
‘rich

Chafcun tire à fon profit: Pro. Ewevie one inclines,

or bath an eye,to that which mayinrich him.

oo : com, "Profitable, Sey henna
modious.

“Hommes profitables. affalliof stom a Lord both
om bis pater arte other vf to bis profit.

igneur The poffeffor.or occupant ofan
ons be that,to me vimoftof itkeepes it
ia his ovone bands

Profiter. See Proufiter,

Profiterolle: £ 4 Pourfterolle : and in the Plurall
(Profiterolles) be the mall vayles, as drinking. mo-
ney, points, pinnes, ec, gotten by a valevor * groome in
his maiflers fèruice.

Profond : m, de: f. Profound, bib, deepe ; of much
agi of great receit; fecret ; unfatiable,bottome-


Pr smi ée: f. 3 pierced, of fearched
tf into; preffed, so fle ae into ‘be aime
Profondement, Profundly, des highly 5
ab nat btm ne) shee
rofonder. To found, fearch, cer ito ;
© to dinp,or finke-vato the rene rope nues


put into the ae
Profondeur ia ditie profiundneffe, Ss
deepenefte; ose :


Profufeur: m.A powrer out ; 5 preface ei
riotous, wafi fill [pender.


Progenie: f. A progeaie, off-(pring, brood, ifue, gene.


vation,
ogenier. To progenerate, procreate,propa atesbreed,
pH ieee forth, young ones. :
Progeniteur:'m. 4 progenitor aunceflor, forefather,
Prognoftication: £ 4 Prognoftication, fore-télli
fore-fhewing ; an argumentpr figne, of à a fiture thing ;
roar, fes things to comes
Prognoftique. # Prognoftication, |


5733 cr
107"


i ded as


PRO


etold.
oor aga To prognofticate, forefhew, prophefie,
Velele.

Prognoftiqueur: m. A prognofficatar, forefhewer, Al.
manack-maker, fortune-teller, foreteller. 3

| Progreder. To proceed, palfeon, goe forward, continue
ina courfe begun. .

Proyrez: m, 4 progreffion, going forward, paffing on,
a proceeding or continuing in a courft begun.

Prohibé: m.ée: £ Probibited, forbidden ; let flopped,
hindered, :

Prohiber. To probibit, forbid; impeach, binder, not to


ujfer.
Prohibeur : m, À probibitor,a forbidder. t
Prohibition: f. 4 probibition,inbibition, forbidding.
Prohibitoire: com. Probibitorie, probibiting, forbid


ding.

Proj ca : m. A proieét, purpofe,defignement, forecalt,in-
tent; alfo,a modell, or plot of a building made, or deli-
neated,in paper ; alfo, the iutting, out-bearing, or out-
leaning of a wall, garret,or upper roome,

Projecté: m. ée: f, Projected, purpofed, forecaft, fore-
thought of, defigued, meant or intended before-band ;
alfo,draypne,delineated, purtrayed, Ë

Projecter. To proieé, plot, forecaft ; purpofe,defigne,in-
tend al{o,to draw ,purtray,defcribe,delineate, propor-
tion,a thing before it be done. ;

Projection : F. A proiection ; a cating or throwing

__ forthya firetching or extending out.

Proifine. as Prefme. : i

Prolation: £ A pronouncing, utterance, delinerie of


wards,

Proleétation:£ A pleafant inticement, a delight{ome
prouocation.

Prolepfie: f. A maturall foreknowledge conceiued in
the mind; and bence,a figure whereby we preuent,and
auoid, that which another intended to alledge againft


Us.

Prolifique: com, Fruitfulljor breeding apace.

-Prolixe : com. Prolix, long, tedious; large, abundant,
bounteous.

À Prolixement. Prolixly, tedioufly,at length, at large; i-
ber1lly,ab, , plenteoufly.

Prologue: m. À Prologue,or fore-fpeecb; a preamble to
a Play. 5

Prolongation: f. 4 prolongation, prolonging, drawing

out in length; a ersten deere soap.

Prolongé : m. ée: f Pralonged, protratted,or drawne
out in length; deferred, put off,delayed.…. =

Prolongement: m. A prolonging, protraéting, de fer-
ving, delaying. ie

Prolonger. To prolong, protraët, put or driue off, draw
out in length,deferre,delay,

Prolongeur : m.4 prolonger, protra£ter,wyre-drawer,
delayer.

‘Promarginaire : com. Extended on the margent,

Pepe: m. À Butler or Drawer; alfè,a yeoman of the
Larder. ;

Prome nt: m. 4 walking.

P 1er. To walke ; See Pourmener.

Promefle: f. 4p ne avow made, or afurance gi:

werdef month

ey  protneñe fol lie: Prov. Faire promifes oblige
aie D eu beter tie Pr CR
fol sera ie.)

Prometteur: tA promifer

Promettre. To promife ; couenant ; vow ; undertake, or


Go gle


Prognoftiqué: m. éc:F. Prognofticated, prophefied,


P RO


jus word, for; alfo (in bargaining) to offer.

romettre fans donner eft fol reconforter: Prov.
To promife and giue nought contents the foole,
Beaucoup promettre,& peu tenir coufte peu à en-
tretenir: Pro. 7t cofts a mañ but little to fay much and”
doe little,

Entre promettre,& donner doit on la fille marier:
Pro, Betweene giuing fomewbat and promifing much,a
man may be bone[ily rid of a daughter.

Fons m. cue: Promoted , aduaunced, prefer-
red, |
Proineu aux ordres ecclefiaftiques. Hawing taken |
Orders.

Prominence: f, 4 prominence ; a flanding, iutting, or
fronting out; hence,a Pent-houfe,crc,in Buildingand
in the bodie, that part of a member which is bigger, or
thicker then it fellowes,or thofé that be next adioyning
toit,

Prominent:m.ente:f. Prominent ; extending, ont-
frretching,iutting out or ouer,

Promis: m.ife: f.Promifed; vowed; couenanted:ginen
by word ; alfo (in bargaining) offered,

Promifcué: com. Promiftuous ; confifed, mixed with.
out order, mingled without confideration; alfa, mutu-
all , indifferent , or without difference , common to
many, À

Promifcuément. Promifeuoufh, confifedly ; indiffe-
Hs without differesce, mutually, one with ano-
ther.

Promontoire: m. A Promontorie; a bill which,elbow-
like,lies out into the fea.

Promoteur: m. A Promooter; alfo,a Prottor; whence;
Promoteur d'office, as Procureur fifcal,

Promotion: £ Promotion,aduancement,prefèrment.

Promouvoir. To promole,aduance, pieferre.

Prompt: m. te: f. Prompt,quicke, fpeedie,nimble;pre-
pared,readie at hand.

La plus prompte courtoifie c’eft la meilleure: Pro.
A prompt, and willing (heed indeareth courteftes ; the


prompte/t,and moft willing fanor’s bef. «
Prptanie Promptly, quickly, (peedily, readily, at
[4


na.

Promiptitude: £. Prompinefe, quickneffe, readineffe;
pronene(fe, preparation.

Promptuaire: m. 4 Promptuarie,Storeboufe ; Buttrie,
Sellor Spence.

Pronateurs: m, Certaine mufèles whereby the band is
bent, or bowed downewards,

Pronau: m. A Pulpit; or the place out of which the
Prone és deliuered.

Prone: m. The publication made, or notice giuen, by a
P rieft unto bis parifhioners (when Seruice 1s almoft en-
ded) of the holy daies, and fafling daies in the weeke
following ; of goods loft,or frayed ; of fuch as defire to
be relieued , or prayed for; of Banes of Matrimonie;
or of any {ich thing, befides their prayers; fit for them
tovnderftand.

Prone: com. = ee ee

mouing ; alfo,inclined, lying downe or towar.
Cathe ing rends n
*: com. Pronounceable,

Soe :mée:f. ha | a?
ononcer. To pronounce ; expreffename pecially, de-
limer out or openly, vtter precifely, pri plainely,
make exprefe mention of.

Pronontiation: f. Pronunciation; plaine utterance,


open declaration, expre{fe deliverie, precife mention of; | 7.
4 pronouncing ; a denouncing. . 27" 4 {


PRO


Pronoftique. A prefage or prefaging; a foreknowledge;
or forefeeing,of; a fhrewd,orneere gueBe,at,
Pronube: £. 4 bvide-maidyor.fhe that attires the bride;
_, and attends on ber unto the bridegroomes boufe.
Pronube. (Adiettinely ; or as an Epithete, or Aditinét ;
whence)luno pronube,affifiant,or faperintendent at
martiages ; or the goddefe of Mariage. À
Propelet: m. A dapper, neat, fpruce, quaint, or compt


Propenfon:f. Vne pro. 4.4 propenfion, or prone-
Tes a(naturall) inclination,readineffe,or willingne[e
‘unten,

| Prophete : m. 4 Prophet.

Prophetic: £ A Prophefie.

Prophetique: com. Propheticall; propbecying ; of a

Prophet ; belonging to a prophecie. nes

Prophetizant. Prophecying

PRE: m, é¢: f, Prophecied; prefaged, fore-


told, ;
Prophetizer. To propbecie ; prefage; diuine, fore-
tell.


Prophilodtice : £ Am Antidote,a counterpoifou;or,that


the bodie. >
Propice : com, Propitiows, gracious, fauorable ; gentle,
tractable ; well inclined unto; al/,apt meet. fit,proper,
conuenient for.
= ‘A bon bluteur May propice: Pro. Looke May.’
Propine: f. Drinking money or fomewhat to drinke.
Propitiateur: m. A propitiator ; a reconciler, pacifier,
— appeafér ; one that procures fauor for others,
Propitiation: £4 propitiation,or attonement procured;
alfo,a propitiatorie facrifice. se!
Propitiatoire : com, Propitiatorie; appeafing, pacify-
ing reconciling attoning. : 5
Sep To propitiate, or make propitious ; to recon-
cile attone, pacifie appeafe.
Proportion: f. Proportion; a proportion, rate, fhare ;
| -meafure ,quantitie, fixe; an equallneBe,or anfwerable-
neffe.
Res, mi ec: f. Proportioned; equally rated,
Shared; meafured, [quared. ar
Proportionnellement.Proportionally,or proportiona-
bly ; equally, rateably ; according to the iuft meafare,
fixe,quantitie,or qualitie,of.
_ | Proportionnément. The fame. ;
| Proportionner.To proportion; rate foare sens:
Sire out equally, make one thing anfwerable, or accor-
p ding,to the other. ye, dif, end à
ropos: m, À purpofe, drift, end, intent, meaning, de-
Tene, dites alfo, talke, {peech, difcourfe,
chat, conference, communication; alfo , aprnefe, fit-
nefe, conueniencie, feafonableneffe, good feafon ;
re > the firft Bill which a plaintife puts into à
rourt.
. ‘A propos. Fitly, féafonably, conueniently,commodi-
si oul sink the purpofeor inft pat. |
uk “Apropos tule fdomed bon iour Maflon. À
_ _prouerbiall phrafé, ufed by fisch,as beginning to quar-
~ “rel, or expoftulate with others, perceiue on a fuddaine
© fome vnexpeéled thing , the refpett or feare whereof’
makes them as fuddainely change,or [weeten,their lan


guage. | |
rOpofé: m, éc:f. Purpoféd, intended, meant ; deter-
mined, decreed; alfo, pr 2 am Hoi}
‘opofer. To A A etermine,intend;


: to propofe, propound,alle, 3 publifh,declare,fet,
so is dome eta eae D canis


aa


part of Phificke which concernes the preferuation of


aa 420 TRES


| P RO
___ Propofer reproches contre, To challenge, or except
— again} (a witnelfe,erc.)
Propolcur: m, 4 propounder, a propofir.
fition: f. 4 propofition; a fentence, or matter
propounded’; a queftion, pofition,or fhort fpeech,contai-
pe! the fumme,or fabjtance of tioat which we intend to
owe, °
Propofition d’erreur. writ,or the laying of Evror;
Seeke Erreur.
ropte: m. Ones proper, or peculiar fubfiance, eRate
, Teehbeed cubes EN Fast aude em
Propre conventionnel. C’eft, quand il a efté con-
venu que les deniers feront imployez en propre
heritage; où quand vn heritage eft donné pour
eftre propre au donaraire,
Propre naturel, Lands, or goods come from a direét
aunceflor. ; ;
Propres com. Proper, peculiar, particular,ones owne;
Lf, fit apt meet conuenient,able for;handfome,feeme-
Lie,comelie well accommodated,unto the purpofe.
Propres heritages. Ones auncient inberitance;lands
defcended,or come unto him from his auncefiors,
Ce propre iour 13. That verie day.
Rien n’eft noftre n'eft que foit en nous f ropre:


Us,
Propre. (Aduerbially) whence;
Fai& au propre. Made of purpoft , done for the
nonce, |
Ilfe tenoit propre de fa perfonne. He kept him/el,
neatly,or banane. 5 ru di
Proprement. Properly, aptly, fitly, inf, meet; conneni-
- ently,bandfomely,decently,to good purpofe.
. Qu’aujourd'huy proprement, That iuft to day, that
this verie day.
Propret: m. ette: £ Prettie,gentle, feat; neat, /pruce,
picked, compt, minion,trick/ie,trimme. ;
Propreté: f. Fitnefe, aptnefe ; prettineffe, neatneffe,
bandfomeneffe, gentleneffe,
Proprietaire: com. A prop ie,an owner.
Proprietaire: com. Propriétarie,as an owner.
Rente proprictaire. A rent feruice,or fundamentall
vent, going with, or annexed unto,the land:
Seigneur proprietaire. The right owner of an inbe-
vitance.
Proprictairement. Ja propertie, abjolutely, as an ow-
P pov Fos ay -
roprieté: f. A propertie; proprietie ; owing,(becialtie
in aiuft and abfotute power eon a fee in; alfe,
the nature, qualitie, inclination,or difpofition of; a
abandfome or comelie affortment ; s, > sat À
j t; anda roome or place well accommodated
S ar fitted,


ropugnacule: com. fortre(fe,bulmarke,firong bold,
fuvre defence, ns ” be

Propulfation: f. A propulfation,yepelling,driuing back,
chafing forward, putting away.

Prorata. Aup. de. Ewerie one after the rate, or accor-
ding to the value,of.


 Proriter, To prouoke,urgeexcite, exafperate,


Prorogation: f 4 prorogation,or proroguing; a dri-
uing,or putting off.

Prorogé: m.ée:f Prorogued; prolonged, put off.

Proroper. To proroguc, put oner, drine off; prolong, de-

re delay, ,

site : M. An Outlaw ; a man defigned, or ex:
pofèd unio flaughter ; a proferibed, or attainted per
fon. à


Tit Pro-


Pro, Nothing can be [aid ours thats not bred with


meee ee er


ge ie ey


PRO


PRO


Profcript: m. ipte: £ Proftribed; attaintedsexpojed or
ss jened unto flaughter ; alfo,publikely fold,or fet visto


fale

Piolctiption: f, A Profeription; Attainder ; Outlarie ;
a defigning or expofing unto laughter; alfo,Port/ale,or
publike fale.

Profcrire. To profcribe; attaint ; outlaw ; to expofe,or
defizne unto flaughters ‘alfo,to publi ifb,or proclaime the
fale of.

Profe: £. Profe; ml ent Verfeor Meetre.

Profes, Part of the Maffe deuifed by the Abbot of S.
Galle,
De peu de chofe peu de profe: Prov. For final
— little firifé ; about [mal things but {mall a-


on,conuerted to our faith,

Profenette: m. as Proxenete.

Proferie:f 4 place es for the naurifument of
poore people,

Profñe. as Prone.

Profner. À Prisft to preach, or to pronounce , the
prone ; looke Prone.

Profopopée: f, A difguifing; reprefenting of perfons,
faining of a perfon to fpeake.

Profpective : £, The Profpeëliue,Per(peétiue,or Optick
Art; alfo,a (bounded) proppect ; a (lumitted) view, or
fiermey 32
En nes Openly;to the view, for a fhew,to be


fier

Profperément -Profperoufly, fucefuelysoapplyJuci-
ly, fortunately.

Profperer. To profper,thriue,paue or bring lucke;to gine
fuccef[e unto


tune,or fuccefe in,
Proftates. cersaine kernells in the necke of the blad-
der,
Profterné: m.ée: fProlirated, fallen flat, layed alongs
foyled, felled, borne, caflsor firucken dovne,
pee: m. Àprofirating, or laying along ; a
felling, foyling, ouertbrowing.


caf,beare, firi e downe.
Proftitué: m. 6e: f. Profituted, abandoned, fet gue?
ne D or made common by euerie one that sill


Prof tuer.To proftitute,abandon, fet open: si
_ mon for,euerie one ; to play the whore with, or fubielt
gato the pleafure of,any man for money.

Proftitution: £ A proflitution ; a feng oma fale, an

abandoning to the vf? of any man for money...

Proftration: f. 4 profirating; a deie ion, or falling at
the fe of; or as Profternement. …  -!


es m, The ficft Drain cio 7 Ded,
kept thereof; alfo, a Precedent fortbe drawing of a
_Patent,or Deed s alfa ofc recede |


wane 4]


profite: m. À Profelite;a firanger turned to our fafhi- |


Profperité: f. Profperitie, bappineffe, good lucke, fr-


Profterner. To proftrate, lay flat or along; 10 fines pu, |


_ . aduancing it felfe out of a building as
Ship


| Pro ogifine, A fecond Spllogifine - prowing the !


Papier she protedi, fhield, cower, Saue, keepe jane


Provelé: m.ée:f ayes off, put backe,drinen, or cha-
fed away ; delayed,


Proteler.Te if off; put backe,driueor chafe aw
to delay,defèrre, protr. . bs ‘ pes
Protenotaire: m. A Pregnotarie, or principal No-

- tarie,

Proterve: com. Froward, wayward, peruerfe, curl,
Loappifh, peeuifh; alfo, prowd, fawcie,malapert,arro-
gant, impudent.

Protervement.Peruerfely,waywardly, frowardly;alfe,
prowdly, fawcily, impudently,

Protervie: f. Frowardneffe, peruerféneffe, curfinepe,
peeuiflane|[e waywardnelfe ; Fle ata or es
lapertne Je,arrogancie,impudencie.

Protervité: f as Protervie.

Proteftant. Protefling,denouncing, openly anerving or
declaring,

Proteftant de trahifon, Protefting,or crying,that be
was betrayed,

Proteftation:: f. 4 protefation ; an open declarati-
on, auerment, or denouncement of an opinion, or pur-


pofe.

Protelté. Protefted; openly affirmed, carneflly auerred,
folemnly auouched.

Protefter. Te proteft; to affirme earneflly, auerre fo-

lemnely, anouch or denounce openly; alfo, to deny the
payment of a demaunded debt; or to returne a Bull of
debt unpayed.
Protefter de tous defpens, dommages, & inte-
refts. To challenge, demaund, or infift upon fatisfatti-
on for his dammages, and a reflorall of all bis cofis and
charges.

Prothocolle,& Protocole: as Protecole. a

Protodiables: m. The firflor chiefeft of Dinels,

Proto-martyre. The firft Martyr.

Protonotaife: m, A Pregnotarie, principal! Nota-
rie, chiefe Scribe ; (A title proper, and peculiar to
the Greffier civil de la Cour de Parlement de Pa-


Po pots + m, The firf forme, ypemodelLor patterne


Prou, for Proufit; whence;
Bon prou leur face. Much good may it doe them ;
let them follow their owne an, or take their owne


wayes, ©


| Prou. Much,greatly, enoug b


Provature: f. À kind of greene Cheefe nk in Fralie,

of the milke of Buffles.
Proué: f The prow, or forepart of a Shi ip ; alfo, a point
re out of a


Provest: m. Ge: f. well growne in age, or of good
yeares ; well [ludied in an Art; ae ,or farre gone,
Sn the courfeof, Aris, tape

'Provencales. Long flops, Marriners long breeches.


| Provende: f Prowender; alfo,a Prebendrie.


 Provenir. To ifuescone.Jlep, or {pring forth;to proceed
Proverbes 1 m,,d prouerbes adage, old faid fav, fhort,
‘Proverbial: m. "ale: £. Pronerbiall, of a Pro-
| Re Te


| pro rh De anal
tage ay


~


-Prou-


VS


PRO PRV


Provoquer. To prouoke,egge urge, move, flirre,incite,
incense ; defie,challenge. REC
p voqueur : ne prouoker ; a challenger. -
FOUVÉ: m.ce: f. Prowed,tryed; affured,verifieds inf
ae peed d, tryed ; alfured,verified; inf
Prouver.To prowe,try,e(Jay; verifie sapprowe,a{fure,con-

firme, inflifiemake good.
Prouyeu: m. Looke Pourveu.
Prouveu: m, eué: f. Prouided or purueyed of flored or


Proufitable: com. Profitable, eainefull, commodious,
aduantazeous.

Proufitablement. Profitably, gainefully commedioufly,
aduantageoufly. .

Proufitant. Gaining, profiting, thriuing by.

Proufité. Profited, gained,thriuen by.

Proufiter. To ns : 3 get, gaine,or grow rich,by;to doe
good upon; aff, to thrine,chieue increafé,grow.

Proufiterolle: 4 Proficerolle, :


i Provide: com. Prouident, beedfüll, circumfpeët, fore- fürnifhed with ; alfa, forefeene, forecalt,confidered be-
4 Seeing, forecafling;warie,carefüll,confiderate. foreband.
« Providemment. Prouidently, confiderately, heedfilly, | Prouvoir. To puruey or prouide for, to furnifh or flore
with good forecaft. with; alfo,to protec forecaft,beware, take beed, louke
7 Providence: £ Prouidence, forefight, forecaft. to, {hift for,confider beforeband,
ae Proujecter. Looke Projeëter. Prouvoyance: f. Purueyance, pronifion; forefight,fore-
oa Provignable. Propagable. caft,beed,caution,regard,confideration,
"+, Provignage. «s Provignement. . 1 Prouvoyant. Prouiding, purueying for; beeding, re-
a Provigné: m.ée: f. Set,or planted for breed,nourifhed | _ garding, looking unto.
he for increafe ; propagated, multiplied,renewed,increa- | Proxenetc: m. A Broker, or Huckfler ; a meane dealer
fed. | betweene partie and partie.
Provignement: m, A planting, or fetting of a flocke, | Proxitnité: £ Proximitie, neerenefe, nighneffe, neigh-
flaulke, flip,or fucker for increafe ; a propagating ynul- borhood; the next degree of linage,or kindred,
¥ tiplying increafing. Proye: f. A prey, bootie ; fpoyle.
+ Provigner. To plant,or fet a flocke, flaulke, flip,or fuc- Cela n'eft pas proye pour fes levriers ; That 5 no
7, ker, for increafe ; or (more properly) to couch them Lettuce for his lips,
| downe,or [et them double with both ends appearing a- Qui a le vilain il a fa proye: Pro. He that can feize
à boue the ground; whereby being, within a while, roo- a churle,commaunds all that he hath
4 © ted in the middle,they come toyeeld a manifèld,or doi: | - Regnard qui beaucoup tarde attend la Proye: Pro,
3 bleincreafe ; hence alfo, to propagate, multiply, get, The fox thats long away, for purchafe waiteth,
an - vaife,or breed many of one; 07 to renew things out of an | Proyer.as Preyer.
Bs, old flore. | Prudemment. Prudently, wifely, diftreetly, aduifedly,
Bee Provigner des procez. To breed (uit upon füitsraife | _ cunningly.
k one fii out of another ; to make worke for Lamy: Prudence: f. Prudence, diféretion, circum|pettion, ad:
ag ers, # i uifedneffe , warine[fe ; cunning, skilfullnepe ; know-
‘ Provigneur: m. 4 planter,or fetter (as in Provigner) ledge.»
Mt a propagater,breeder,increafér. ’ I Prudent: m: ente:£ Prudent, warie, (age, diféreet,
2 Provin: m, 4 flocke, flaulke, plant, fhute, flip, or fuc- circum|pettaduifed ; flye,cumnine skilfall expert expe-
ME ker planted, or fit to be planted (as in Proyigner) rienced in many matters.
Re for increafe. ; : _| Femmeprudente, & fage, eft I’ ornement de fon
> Province: £ 4 Prouince, Region, Countrey, Shire; pros mefnage: Prov. A woman wifé, and prouident, doth
NS perly fisch a one, as bauing beene fubdued by force of beautifie her tenement. fi
’ Armes, is gouerned by a Viceroy, Deputie, or Lieu- | Prune: f. 4 Plumme.
; tenant. à Prune blanche. The wheat,or white Plumme,
CRE Provifcur: m. 4 Purueyor;or prouider, . Prunedecheval, 4 Hor(èP lumme.
res Provifion: £ ne parueying,or proniding for;al- Prune de Damas. A Damfon,or Damask Plumme.
LES, So, prouifion, flore, furniture, Prune fauvage. A wild Plumme ; a Bullace ; (as alfo)
Tay Lettres de provifion, Letters Patents whereby an | a Sloe, or Snag.
Ble ‘a office or dignitie is grannted. Boo “ | - Ilen pelerala prune, He will decrely aby it, hewilk
À luger par provifion. For a time onely, untill firther baue much trouble about it,he wil furely payor fart,
2 «order Le taken,or prouifion made. . £ forit: : ; eae
"4 Par maniere de provifion. Ja the meane time, the | Il ng fait pas bon manger des prunes avec fon
* » whill?,or in the meane while. Seigneur: Pro. Looke ere
i Provifional: m. ale: £ Provifionall ; onely for a feafon, | Pruneau:m. 4Prune; or alittle Plumme.
ai > continuing but for a time; whence; 2. | Prunelat:m. The name of a Vine, or Grape, whereof
rs Sentence provifionale, A Sentence implying a limi- there be two forts the one white the other red.
SS tation, ar of force no longer then untill further order | Prunelette: f. ALittle Plumme,
pi may be taken. à Prunelier: m. The blacke thorne,or Sloe tree,
=. Provifdire: com, Prouiforie,conditionall, implying a liz | Prunelle: f. A Sloe,or Snag; alfo,thehearbe called Pru-
SA : mitation,including a prouifo; or,as Provifional. nell, or Brunell, Hookeheale, Sicklewort, Carpenters
Prouineu. 4 Promeu. bearbe ; alfo,the badl,or apple of the eye.
É Proumouvoir, Looke Promouvoir. © | Prunier: m. 4 Plummetree.
Provocation: f. Aprouocation, prouoking, egging ur Prunier fauvage. The Bullace tree.
ging,incen|ing, flirring inciting. Prunier:m.ere: f. Bearing or abounding with lummes;
i.” Provocatoire: m. A Prouscatorie ; a writing, &c, of,or belonging to,P lummes ; louing Plummes.
: _ whereby one is prowoked; a challenge. Prurir. Toitch;to tickle; to defire lufifaily. = — «
Le Provoqué: m. ée: f. Prouoked urged, incited, incen- | Prurit:m. Anitching, or tickling ; a lufifull defire of, or
Le fed ; alfo,chakengedor defied. ke affettion unto, eee °


Pruyer. as Preyer. ty alee me
Y me Ttt ÿ Pfalme: }


Proyoquement: m. A proñokings


P/V: Bi


| Pline: m. À Pfalme ; a fong made of,or vuto;God.
| Pfalnifte: m. 4 Pfalmift,a maker of Pfalmes.

3 Pfalmodie: £. The finging of Pfalmese

< Pfalinodier. To fing Pfalmes.


À | Pfalterion: m. A Pfalterie ; a melodious Fnfirument
; mbich refembles a Harpe. à

= Pfultier: m. 4 Pfaulter ; a booke of Pfalmes.

, Pfeaume. Looke Pfalme,


Pfeudonard, Spike Lauender,Lauender Spike.
Pfeudonard ( femelle. Female Lauender, white La-
uender; the [mallefi Lauender.

Pfilothre:£ Brionie,Tettarberrie ; al/o, an ointment for
the taking of baire away.

Pholoente. À kind of lightning whofe flafh deftroyes
whatfoeuer it lights on, €Rab.

a Prifane, as Tifanne,

£ Ptofchalazon. 4 Polypragmon, medler, bufie-bodie.


@Rab,

| Ptyade: £ A greenifh afh-coloured Alpe, which raifing
up ber necke and bead, [pits venome at thofe whom fle
cannot reach with her teeth,

Puamment. Stinkingly,moft vnfauorily.

Puant: m. ante: f, Stinking, ranke,unfauorie, firong;
that bath an ill wafi,or (mell,

Beftes puantes. ermine ; or bealls of the chafé of
the {linking foot; Looke under Bette.

Herbe puante. Small linking Fleabane Conixa.
Debonnaire mire fait playe puante: Prov. A cour-
teous Surgeon makes a corrugt fore,

Puanteur: f. À flinke, french ; Hg ; a nopfome
waft, firong (anor, ill finell. .

Puantife: f. 2s Puanteur.

Puberté:£ Youth; or the age wherein baire begins to
grow about the priuities. >

Public: m. ique: f. Publike,vulgar common, manifeft,

- euident apparant,in the eyes of the world.

Publicain: m. À Pablican,a Tole-gatherer ; a Farmer,
or leuier of publike reuenue,

Publication: £. 4 publication,diualgation, manifefiati-
on,open difcouerie,making of things common. ;
Publication d’ enqueftes. C’ eft quand les en-
queftes font rapportées, & receuës, & que les par-
ties en prennent communication 5 bg. laquelle
ils ne font plus receus à bailler reproches, & o ies


de tefinoings. @Ragucau.

( Publication dune. Theedition, fetting forth,or
(ending abroad, of a booke.

« feed; made common.


abvoad,lay open, (et forthmake common,or kagene.


Publicur: m. À publifher cryer, proclaymer


all abroad in the face,or eye of the world, -
Puce. as Pulce.


__ virgin or maiden virgin or maiden-like.
~~ <omte that with a puffe lights a candle newly put outs


; és Purcell de Marolles A crack peece; 4


Publié : m. &e:& Dinwlged, publifbed,fet forth, mani-
Publier. To publfb, diuulee, manifeft, proclayme,noyfe


Publiquement. Publikely,commonly,ynazifefily openty,


Puceal: m. ale: F. Virginemaiden,or maidenlie ; of a
1m. A mn that bath nat lft bis virial


P'VI


hath got a clap ; one that rather goes for amaid then


wont,
Petites pucelles font enfemble belles : Pro, Young
girles Looke faire when they together are.

Pucher. To take up. {Norm.

Pudeur : £ as Pudicité.

Pudibunde: com. Shamefaft, bafbfüll, modeft, bo-
pe |
pee pudibundes. The prinie parts, or mem-

ers.

Pudicité:£ Pudicitie, chaflitie, modeflie, puritie, un-
taintedne(fe,cleanene|fe Pie’ FRS ROUE

Phiique: com,Chaft,pure,vntainted,cleane; fhamcfaft,
modeft,bonefi.

Pudiquement. chafily, purely, untaintedly, modeftly,
Shamefafily.

Pueille. as Peulle,

Puël. Bois eftans en pul. Hawing beene lately cut, or
lopped.

Puer la Vigne. To cut a Vine ; or as Pouér.

Puerilité: f.Puerilitie,boyifhnefe,childfbneffe;trifling,
fimplicitie.

PA J A peg ina Hogshead, crc, of Wine ; alfo, the
peg-hole,

Pugnitif: m.iue: € warlike, fighting contentions,quar-

relfome, |

Puinne: f. Spindle-tree, Prick-wood,Prick-timber.

Puir. Toftinke, finelbranke, yeeld anill waft, haue a bad


fauor,

Ce qu'on donne luit, ce qu'on mange puit : Prov.
True bountie confifis rather in giuing men meanes then
meat; gx,as under Luire.


Quis: mA vel, 3 apit.
Marier la cave, & leBui mingle wine and water
together.
Pendant que la corde eft au puis. bile we baue op-
ortunitic while occafion ferues.


ierre en puis n'eft pas pourrie: Pro. Looke under


Pierre.
Puis. (Of the Verbe Pouvoir;) Fam able, 7 can. -
Puis. Then,after,moreouer, furthermore.
Puis que.Seeing shagggnce that.
Et puis. Well then, fot en; boe, what fir, bow then,
what thoughwhat of that, put the cafe it be fo.
Et puis; qu'en fera il? Afier all that, or fuppefe all
that be [aid or@lone, what will follow, or what come of
it? (in difdaine.)
Puié: m.ée: £ Drawne vp,taken in, fucked vp; dray-
ned,or drawne dry. 2
Puifement: m, 4 drawing up,or out of; a drayning,ore


drawing dry. :

Puifer. To draw up, take in,or fucke out; alfo,to drame,
or draw dry. . ?

La Navire puife. Leakef, or fhippes in water a-

- pace. :

Puifeur : m. Adrawer,or drayner of water,coc.

Puifne: fas Puinne. ,

| Puifné. Punie, youn borne afier. =

: Palme im Puifrantly, power filly,mightily, flrongh,

| frei

: | Puiffance:£ Puifance, poweror powerfullneffe; force,

might, frengths abiliie, pofibilitie wealih, f>ay, an-

thoritie iurifdiction,alfo,a power ,armie, or great num-


ber of men.

Prince de fief. The power fome Landlords baue to
= yedeeme to their owne vfes the land fold by their Te-

nant, by img unto the purchafer wbatfoeuer begaue

Prim defrayed about it. mit Pui


J ro
TATE UNIVERSITY


- HE Ot HO S


Pi W Li PVR


: dee then the other, but euerie whit as flinking.


Puiffant; Puiffant, nithiie; pie fil firong, forcible,
Lherbe aux punaifes. Fleabane, Conixa, Fleabane


moft able ; wealthie, of great meanes or authoritie,


sing ere: teen hic wi j sides, d : Muller. “
Sergent puiflant,& refleant. Which re, or wel Punaifie: Stinke, flench,ranke fauor.
Me nd outed,” Pundtille. as ike fo seat


Pünétion: £, 4 pricking, foyning, ficking ; flinging; al-


Puitier: m.4 digger,or maker of pits 34 well-makers
Soya pointing
Puce on ale: f. Punttuall pointing; alfo,pricking,


Puits:m, a Puis; awell.

Rake: f, A flea ; ale, the {mall ‘freckled, or freed
_ » Spider.

Pulce de mer. 4 final vermine inthe fea refembling
a Sbrimpei

Lee mufhieres des Hoftels-Dieu’ de Paris


Cheb a pulces Fleabane,or fleawort; Looke Pal:

cierc. «

Méfurer les fauts des pulces. To fpend, or beftow
time verie fondly.
‘Ala Sainéte Luce du faut d'une pulce: Prov. viéi
Le iour croift, !.°

© Qui fe couche avec les chiens fe léve: avec des

ulces: Prov. We grow the worfe for ill companie :

Pr his Prouerbe is alfa applyable to fuch as adherevnta
poore, or hard maifters, from whom no good can be ho-
ped,or drawne.) ©

Pulceau: m. The name of a Vine,

Pulceux: m.eufe: Full of fleas.

Pulcier: m. ere: f. Fleaie; of a flea; full of fleas.’ “|
Pulciere : £ ‘rhe hearbe Fleawort; alfo,Fleabane; (The
ee of that vefemble fleas ; the perfume of this doth

alt th |


Caerephéual See Cautere.
ne bo f A pointing ; a marking, or diflingui-
ES):
Pundtué: mue: f, Pointed; noted, marked, or diflin-
: guifbed by points.
memes to wake points; to note, marke, or


difingui “pe Plane
Punefie, Plaurefies (a ruflicall word, )
Puni: m. ie: f Punifhed chaftifed corrected,


vengeance of.

Puniffable: com, Punifhable.

Punifleur: m, A punifher,chaflifer, correttor.

Punition: £ A punifhment, chaflifement, correëtion;
~ paine inflitted vengeance taken; alfo,a punifhings cha-
Slifing correéting.

Pupe. The fifh Pourcontrell or Many-feet.

Pupilaire: com, Pupillarie, of or belonging to a Pu-


pr
Pupilarité: f Nonnage.
m.) swe m. A Pupill Wagd,Orphan vaderling, one thats
Pulçot: m, 4 little flea Ar ve called a Vine. | _: under agei,
: tes ake “ in. Redo. es à
ulege: m.Pennier \Pudging graffe, | Pupine, The name of an apple.
Letdifh 1 3 ne y% L +: ma Thé bird called a Wboope,or dunghill Cocke; FY


ee Budding, rh: » Springing. or Sprowing alfoya kind of Frog.


a! MORTE AD GkethewWhoope,
“Pullulé. Budded,  fhot, fprung,or [prouted out y ur: m. ure:f. Pure; ess perfect, full, entire, of it
Pulluler. To bud, foot, fpring, put,or fprout out, I + fel; white; faire, éleereycleane,un{potted,uncorrup=
Pulmonaire: The héarbe called Lungwort,or pr


ted neat; thinne, fine, fmooth; innocent fimple,boneft
of Ferufalem; ayes mofe called Lars upright, fincere ; without eve, filth; condition, or
Liuerwort.


wr exceptions
Pulinonée: f arvodlihelée:


Pure perte du vaffal. An abfolute Stiflere of, or entrie
Pulpe: f.The pulpe,or pith sun eee, into,thé land of a tenant or vafall, made by bis Land-


Cf


re ox (olide and'mifeulie flefh of the sg { lord,
*% Pulpite. Looke Poulpitre.: * *: one id Default fimple,ou pur. Looke Simple.
y Pulsatil: m.ile: f Krocking b eating.» *A put; & à plein, Flatly and pi an-
as PER f. Pape ao fee an 5 née oie
| \ urée: £ Sap; im
a Pulsation: f: Akkinehumpingbcatng, teh urée de potas Peal fred Peu pottage, or
Pulte: f. A poultice, he liquorof Peafe. : rye h ; init


purée de Septemb

spi Purely; neatly, agree pe ntl filly,

in lo nacre url port fomp sone ME
welt,or gard > without exceptionor condition.

Purer. To maltar ; 10 grow unto. head, or mattar;alfo,
to yeeld,or diffill mattar. .

Pureté : f. Puritie, paren neatne(fe,faireneffe, clen-
line $ harteflie, finceritie,integritie, inno-

ñ ceci inten . inf
urgation:if. A purgation, purging, cl eer! Gag;
brin a good exe, Pme

inflificationy 0's
Purgatoire: m, Purgatorie.
atoites.com. rer lg ti
er co ete Ch 1 iti
urge: £ Aipurge,purgation,cleering, ia it inf
F3 sensi ov the indeauor which a eli
esto purge le. 1 “i
sia rte ÿ . hr:


Pulverin: im, The touch-hole of apeëce done) |<.
gg meget f ‘Palwerixeds: eme et


“Ys


peter: To hts rl be make, into


Palin: m, À boulfler for the bed of a Prince ; af,
tiing bed made ia the Romane Temples to the

pr and for the ea(e,of their gods.
Pulviné: m. ée: £ Furnifhed,or boulfered it =

ons,or pillowess YO verre Pie

Puinice, Pierrepuinice; 4

Punais: m. aife : €. Stinking , ranke or ie hits ik ho
uor, loathfomely ings ales haning, a. corrdpts:en |
objtrutted pe lng-little, of no= |


Pana fre ny ;
~ ea a ymiezorthe 791 ie] VOOR WBE w
_ Punaife des champs. "The field Bune nee


en IS AQU isonmhsu


Punir, To punifh,chaflife,corredin flict plagues on, take


Re ee US 1 Pen NON PC TON


\


FLY F


Purgé: m. ée: £ pit clams cleerd; inflified ;
expiated. ]
Purgement: m, as Purgation.
Purger. To purge,clean(e,cleere, (cowre ; expiate, fatis-
£ sremedie iuftifie, excufe filly,
urger les arrierages de rentes ; les defpens, les
deh, les droiéts feigneuriaux. 7 To difcharge or pay


Pen le defaut, À deféndant,or any other, that ap-
peared not at fir/ty:to.come in by bimfelfe, or by bis At-
turney,and offer to anfiver.
urger vne maifon,ou hericage.C’eft faire fçavoir
we oo epee am affiches,que heritage &c,eft
purger,& qu'il {era decreté par iuftice, afin qu'il
fe purgé & defchargé de toutes charges,hypothe-
ues,& empefchemens, autres que ceux qui feront
declares, & receus par fenrence, €Ragueau,
Purificatif: m.iue: £ Purificatines purifying.
Purification: f. A purification, purifying, cleering,clen-
fine. purging, fcowring.
Purifié: m. ée:f Purified, cleered, clenfed, purged;
fcowred.
Purifier. To purifie,cleere, clenfe, purge
Puron: m.4 botch, powke,or blaine full of srdureserfl-
thie mattar. _
Purpurin: mine: f. Of Purple,or Purple-like,
Puruleat: m.ente: f. Mattarie,corrups;filthie, full of |
bealing, full of ordure.
Pufillanime : com. Daftardlie, cowardlie, faint-bears
ted, white-linered,
. Neceffité rend magnanime le couard & pufilla- |
nime : Pro. Neceffitie, and diflreffé puts courage into |


cowards,


Pufillanimement. Daftardly, cowardly, without me: |


tall, heart, or courage.

Pufillanimité: £ Pufilanimitie , faint-beartednefe,
- comardife.

Puffons: m. The fimall greene fires that lye cluttering
wader the leaues of bearbs, and withina while de-


> woure them
Puñule: £ A pufh,blaine, wheale » ater-powke, final


blifler.
Paftuleux: m.eufe: f. Fall of pufhes beats lanes,
little blifters,
Putain: f. 4 whore,queane, punke,drab, flurt, umpet,
0 so li pack, light bufwife;common
hackney.


ie en putain, As bold, or: brafen-faced, asa

whore. . | oh 25 2
Putain fait comme i. comneitiey plus fe lave & pl ies
noire eft elle: Pro:A queane and "crow alike doe re,
the more they wafh the fouler they ares») 90.0 «


fait qui fortune pafle, & us encor qui pu-
ortune. :


tain chafle: Pro. asunder F


Fils de} putain ne firiamais bien; Prov. rpg | |


Fe Es 1e de ai ge de well,


Pure net wt NÉS SIN 10 film aed


Prat,


Putaffzie: 2 € whoring, hore: nating, ti |


Putaffier: m.ere: £ Wherifrmtere-ikeofor
ing to a whore.
es & atte opted mena i


as de € : pan 4
hens eee SEE A
tainte Se


PY’ R


Puterie: € whoring, whoredome, whore-bunting, wen


Putier: : m.4 nr hein fo fe,


wencher.
Putier: m. ere: £ Whorifh,drab-like,impudent, immo.
deft light; lafciuious, wenching rsa ‘sa a:
Putoir: m. A flinke jll fauor, ilthie wafh, rank ol
Alfo,as Putier,and as Putois.
Putois: m. A Fitch,or Fullmart.
Purput: m. 4s Puput.
Putredineux: m. eufe: f. Full of rottenne[fe.
efadtif: m. ine: f. Putrefadlive, |
Putrefaction: £. Putrefaction,rottenne ffe,corry tion,
Putrefi¢: m. ée: f. Putrified,rotten corrupted.
Putrefier. To putrifie,rotcorrupt.
Putride: com. Putride, putrified, rotten, tainted, cor:
rupted.

Putte: £ Awénch; laffe, givle, modder ; (efpecially one
that is no better thea pe Shoaib best ni is
Puy: m.as Puis; AWel ; alfo,a biloeke, or bigh lob of

earth.


Puye: fas

Pugnes de dde

tat m. as Pis ; the breaft cc; Neha word.)

ee fe Pap pher, Looke Piaffer. |
ye-pou. The round-rooted,or Onyon-rooted cronies

Pipe im, éê: f Dwar fie, fhori,lor;litile,of a final
4 re.

- Pylore. The maw-gut,or flomaci |

3 gr alee vem


Le Rab, r
laride: f. A fire-fly,or worme bred in the fire, from


i Tobie ifit be kept a while or remoned any diflance,


it dies, ,
ticles er Pirémide; &
Pyrate: m. A Pyrate,Rouer, fea-robber.
Pyraterie:£. Pyracie, rouing, fea-robbing,


Lf dei com. ‘Pyratical ; 5 afs or belonging 10,4 Pye


rate.
Pyrethre: mm. The bearbe called Bartramor Pelee
07 ,the right Pellitorie of Spaine.
Pyrethre fauvage. mae Bartram, wild Felis
site bearbe Sneefe «!
Pyrolle: f. Pirala,(hearbe DE
Pyronomie: f. The art of touring ordering Ali
a miflicall fires... # (one)
e. ‘of ferie-r ee me.
put a The making of fire-workes.
othiqué: com. Cauflicke,end corrofiue.
ÉEREE m, AShittlecocke. = 5
+ ere 3 See Pirouëtte.
que. A fouldierlie forme of dauncing i in pei
eet by Pyrthus King of Macedonia,


Pyvoine:£. Pioaie, Peonie, Kings bl Rofe of the
Legere
Oh; 20 yh cn ester Ï
9 wt Hh i Gree Lu wer 1
host |
ds sana | IQ


t com. Of. forte Jeares,
=m. ses een orb


Quadrain te Sta a Staffeof, foure ver.


ad far fat fauare Pa ure
{Bence cms  à fs T|


-  Qu-


QA


QW A


Quadrangule: com, The fame,
Quadrantier smere: 6 of, foure yeares ; alfo, foure
yeares old 7
. 7 Quadraturé : m.ée: f Square, well grave, well,
é almoft as thicke as long.
EN Quadre. les Quadres de la Lune, The Quarters of
the Moone,
of Quadré: me: f. Squared; alfo, fitted, or agreting
à . Ale,
2 ‘| Quadrelle: f An Aroma Shaft.
Quadrer. To fquares alfo;to futesbe fragree unto,fland
= well with, ferme injtina place.
Quadrilettre: fi A word of ‘foure letters.
Quadrille: f. 4. Squadron coli 25 (or fewer)
7 é Souldiers. i
Quadrin :m. Earl.
Quadrivie: f. A place where fete Jioedrie wayes doe
- Meet ; alfoya way that hath feu aang turnings, or
| partings.
EX le Quadrupe: com. Foure-footed,
a Quadruple:com.Quadruple, foure double.foure. fild,
' foure times as much,
(T4 Quadruplé: m.éc: f.Quadruplated; fuldedrenewed,
td RE pe times oncr; made foure times as much,
k Quad pect ement:m. as Quadruplication.
ou rupler. To fould, renew, repeat foure times; to
3 quadruplate,or make fiure times as much,
Quadruplication : f..4 quadruplication ; a renewing,
~orépeatine, making fore times ouer.
Quadruplique du defendeur:£ 4 fecond reioynder ;
or the thirddefence made,or writing put into Com D
*_ a defèndant.
iz ul 'a-huqu'a-ha. well or ill,1 know not bow; here or
À there, one way or another ; alfo, laboriou inf bardly,
+ painefülly, with muchpaine with great a
CAN Quai: m. The key of ariuer;or bauen ; ai, a piller of
V4 Marble,or flone.
k Quaifle : A fquare woodden chef, fucbas Armour,or
Re Marchandife is carried in; alfo, a great, and chefilike
Partition in garners ;to put corne in; alfoja Dramme,or
(moft properly)the.barrellor wood of a Diumme; af,
- a@Scoope,or Ladle, fuch as Canoniers lade their pecces
pti bef à à
5 aiflier: mA € eeper; be that keepeth the keyes
eps SS chefl wherein publicke Records, or oman,
=< are Rept.
ae Qualibee: :m, The bore ofa Gunne,or [xe of the bore; |
26 | “sand hence) alfo,the fixe, capacitie, or fafbion of any
Such thing; alfo,the flate,condition,calling,or bimsor of of
a man; whence zx ;
I n’eft pas de mon qualibre. He isnot of my quali
tie, vanke;or bumor, be is no fit companion for me,


Qualibre: m. ée:f. Fit for,or Ste moi br, a |


= piecing with,or applied unto the fixe, of:
ans de fer bien qualibrée. V4 bullet of a geod


Qu ,07 Gime 88 ebore.


be: f. Qualified, intisted, filed, athe,
| Toqualifies tearme, inticle, call, fiile;~


où ear


qui, ité:f. Aqualitie, condition, (ort, fa{bion, manner, | |


| “degree, flate, name, title function , calling ; any cid.
a cumflance accompanying, or belonging to,a thing, :

=. Quand. when;at whattume,wben as; alfo, if that, al.
sz though, howbeit,noimit ending amer ity al eee


ing that ; alfo,till, againfithetimethat.\> |


EL, Quandoque. Dose ns que. ee |
is Quancué: A D MENT Te


Go gle


‘eh à. As fr, as touching, à in as much as; in regard


une & & quant. Fortbwith incentnently, Here.
20%Uh,by and

Quant& quant vous, Alogesber ageber with in
Companie of, pou,

Quant eft de moy. For my part, as for me.

Quant ores, Aibeit though, although,

pars. a quant ? How fare off ? in long to ? untill


I fair bien le quant à moy. He flands on verienice

tearmes;bemakes verie frange or daintie of the mat»

~ bers allo, beflackens, relents, grawes calme; alfa, bee
bath a good conceit of bimfelfe, or values a Lan fs 0-

ion of bis owne aboue alluthers. ;

Moree. fois. How often, bo many times, .
Toutes & quantes fois;or,Toutes fois & qu ames,
As often, as many times as

Quantiefne: com. Of kate number jor wbich(in aum-
ber? )imawhat place,ranke,order?

Quantité:f Quantitie, fize, bigne[fe, groupes
deale, flore, plentie,abundame,

Quanton. as Canton.

Quaqueroles :f. The 1awnie Beetles which buxxe a-
ous by flockes in-bay-time alfo, the foells of Suayles,
or.

Quaquet:m. Prattling,tattling,tittle tatile,prittle prat-
tlemuch talke, lowd chat, many words.

Quaquetant, Prattling , "rattling » babbling, chatte:
vin,

Quaqueté. Tatiled,prattled, babbled.

Quaqueteinent:m. À prating, prattling, babbling,
ities, chattering.

Quaqueter. To pratesprattle babble tattle,cbatter,efe
many words.

Quarantaine : f. Lent ; alfo,a terme of fartie dayes,du
«mr prayers are,in fome places, powred out for the

» dead. .
La Quarantaine du Roy. Fortie dayes truce, du-
ring which it was not law fall for a man ins. Lewis bis
time, to profecute anyrenenge againft the kinfmen, 07
friends of fuch as bad wronged,or outraged bim,

Quarante, Fortie,

Quarantiéme : com, The fortieth.

Quarentaine. a Quarantaine, ::: > ,

Quardine: m. Leat; See Carefme.

Quarefmeau, Jour quarcfineau. 4 ass or a
aay. i

Quatillon:as Carillon,

Quarlet: m.. The fmall Plaicesor Fehon Die ;

»\07 a kind of broad,and {hort Plaite..
uarme:m. The Horne beame, Hard mest Wied
afell, Yoke tree, 0

Cantine Contes son ty ; 5

Quarquan. See Carcan.

re m, ASquare, anaes fear Ph ec
thing that is foure fquare 3 and: iperunlary) “square
bedin a Garden. .

Quarré:m.ée : f.Square, foare(quare ; ;uarubggiide
square,

Qhér Quarreau:ms: 15 (generally) à ‘little Jquare, or fquare

thin 3 (particularly) a Diamond, or Picke;at Cardes ;
: REZ fare or bricke; fit to pane with ; alfo, a

cufhion; alfo ina Garden; alfo, a re, or |

boult for a nes offebow,or an Arrow with a foure-fquare

head; alfo,as Plinthe; See Carreaiy |

Le quacteau de prifons. The Maifiers fide, ::
Quarrefour :im.The place in,or part-of a ive bee


ee are ere
*,


.
‘s :
3


sn


QUE
net Secking for, fearching out inquiring after,


tquois +m, À quiner for arrowes,
uerre. # Querir.
Quesne. Looke Chefne.
Quesnoy : m. A wood,or forrefl of Oakes.
Quesse. as Quaitle.
Queftable: com, Finabletaxable, as fame tenants are
at the pleafure of their Lords; alfo, fearchable, feeke~
ble


avin

Queftal : male: £, Seruile ; bolding by Villenage; beld
by a feruile tenure.

Queftaux: m. Villeines , the propertie of all whofe ef
tate is in their Landlords; fo that they can neither de-
uife by Will, nor alien by bargaine,any part of it,

Quefte: f. A quefl, inquirie, (earch, inquifition, féckings
alfo,a demaunding begging, de fring; alo, an Aide gi-
uen,or contribution made,by tenants unto their Land
lords, vpon occafions putting bim to an extraordinarie
charge (as,for bis ranfome ; towards the mariage of bis

© eldest daughter exc; tearmed thus,becaufe be 15 in per-
fon to demand it of the; alfo(within the Furifdittion of
Acs) a generall rent, or fine, payed in common,and at
once by all the inbabitants of a Patifh,vatably,and ac-
cording to the iuft quantitie of euerie mans land.)

efte courant. 2 Impofition layed by a Landlord
on fome kind of tenants, in what feafon, and at what.
rates be lift.
Cens à quefte. which muft be demanded by the Lord
thereof or by bis Officer.
Lettres de quefte. 4 Licence to beg, or to gather
almes,in Churches, for the poore,

Quefte-pain: m. 4 common begger ; or a begging;
whence ; Qui eft au quefte-p. That is moft beg gerlie,
or the next doore to beggerie, thats growne toa verie

‘low ebbe ; thats drinen,readie, or fit, to beg bis bread,

Quefter. To feeke, fearch, trace,out ; quefl, bunt, make

diligent inquirie after ; alfo, to demaund, or beg, ear-

nefilie ; alfo,to quefi,er openyas a dog that feetb or fin-
svdeth of bis game.
Quefter fes gens. A Lord to fine , or taxe bis vaf-


Jaks.
uefteur: m. A feeker, fearcher, inquirer, tracer out
. of :alfo,an earneft begger,defirer,demander ; alfo, one
that hatha Licence to beg, dict dons je
on: f. A queflion,dema loubt; controuerfie,
Le ; propaftion sreafon ; cafe ; alfo, the Racke,or
torture giuen,, to wring out conféffions,
Ileftici jondelavie. This is.amatier of lif
and death, mens liues are hereby brought in queftion.
« In'eft pas queftion de cecy. It cencernes not this ;
we paffe not for this ; it is not this we treat of,or area
bout ; it is not this that bolds,or troubles ;vs. f
ionné : miée:f. Queflioned, examined,deman-
ded or asked ef, SAME 2
ic + To queftion,demaund examine aske a
tess Afinall queftion, fle
queflioner.


To
ur: m. 4


- ference betwecne it and


' two Muids and a balfe (viz. 90 Septiers) of Paiis


, Yooles Cotteninto it,and growne, in time, fo big, that


- Queué de fcorpion. wartwort,ereat Tornefole.


\ phorically)one that hapgs on a Gibbet.


* daunce of lecherie.
> (great) demaunder or
longs vnto,or depen


qu pi m
Couper Ja queuë à, See Couper.


Q‘V'E
at eight Parifien Pintes to the Septier : This Queuë
us particularly, tearmed Queuë Francoile, for a dif:
Queué de Bouigongne,
which is much bigger then it; alfo,a whetfione,.
Queué d’srondelle. A manner of clofng,or faftening
together of timber, boords or flones, which refcm bling a
Swallowes,(uluers;or Dones taile,is(alfo by our work-
men)called fo.

Queuë de Bourgongne. A wine vefell containing
Gultas much as the auncient Romanes Culcus ; or)


meafure, ;

ueué de cheval, Shaue-graffe,Hor/e-willow,horfe~
taile ; a water-hearbe(whereof auncient writers baue
defcribed but two kinds ; (viz, the great Horfe-taile,
& the little one otberwife tearmed naked Horfe-taile,
and Shane-gralfe(ufed by Fletchers, exc,) but our mo-
derne Hearbalifis baue found out fie or fix kindes


more.) À
ueue de l'hyver.Tbe feafon about mid May fotear-
M de à feañ ay fo


Queué de l'oeil. The corner of the eye.

Queué d'un penon. The point, or end of a Pennon,
which flutters in th'aire,

Queuë de pourceau. Sow Fennell , bogs Fennell,
Hore (hong, Horefirange, Brimflonwort, Sulpherwort.
Queuéde regnard, The bearbecalled Fox-taile, or
tatled Wheat ; alfo, the flopping of a conduit pipe by |


the water bath noroome to paffe.


Queué de fouris. Moufe-taile,Bloud-frange,
Boutons à queué. Long buttons,

Chaufles à queué de merlus. Looke under Chauffe.
Damoifelle de queué, A waiting, or tr aine-bearing
Gentlewoman.

Demy queué. The halfé of the Queuë(Françdife;)
a Hogshead,or veffell containing 216 Parifien Pintes.
Monfieur fans queué, 4 Maifler without any addisi-
on ; a finglefoled Gentlemans alfo,a cheater. |
Robbe iy queue. A traime-gowne.

Seau pendant à double queué. (1s properly)a Seale
annexed vnto,or banging by, a double labell ; (meta-


Queué iqueué. Nef in arfe; one clofe after,one in
the necke’ of, another, sh

La queué entre les jambes, Wily afraid (as ado,
that bath flolne a pudding,e>c, and flinkes away wit
bistaile clapt betweene bis legs; ) alfi, foully difgra-
ced much afbamed,or with fhame ynough.

Danfe du loup la queué entre les jambes. The


Laqueué levée. Is'en va la queuë levée. He goes
away merrieolie, livelie, wellcheer edup; er merrs-
siolli ETC \ ; ê ) è

à hail queuë. Elle s’en va à page queué. Ve-

rie faft,or in great baft, fe goes ; (film the fafleon of

women, who to make the more bafi, tucke up their

clothes behind.) : HAT:

Cette queué n’eft a deceveau. This no wap be-

Is upon, that,

à la queuë, The bardeft will be at

“i in 7 conclufion, or knitting vp, wee [ka baue

motte doe — j ;

Briderfon cheval par la queué. To take a wreng,or
3 à aukardiy;or the contra-


A Cou-


avi


Couper la queué au jen. To giue ouer awvinner.…
Efcorcher Jes anguilles par la queuë: To doe things
- diforderedly, aukwardly,the wrong wap .
Faire la queué, To play the coward, come or drag be-
bind, march in therere. 4 mre)
Frizer la queué. To lecher. dre
Prendre vn rar parlaqueuë. To cut a purfe.
Regarder de ia queuë de l'ocil, To leere, gleeke, or
à looke askew; to caft a fide-glaunce,at.
«Revenu de queué. whofe taile is new grown, or come
againe; Appliable 10 an old Cokes, or Callet,- growne
wanton ona fudden ; ov, to one, that afier a great
weakeneffe bath recouered bis owne, or pickt up bis
LU erummes againe. +

; Tenir la queuë de la paelle. Seeke Paelle.
Trainer longue queuë. To be long in doing,or to con-
tinue long ; to haue a farre reach; bee of great confe-
quence,carrie ox traile many things along with it.
La queué eft pire à efcorcher : Pro, The laft is bar-
deft io be done. bio 14
‘A la queué giftle venin: Prov. Appliable to fuch
as referue the difconerie,or executiozof their villanous
roic és vntotheconclufion of a bufineffe.  .
A mauvais chien la queué luy vient: Pro, Rake-
bells thriue better, battle fafler, come forward fooner
(after a loffe)then honefter men.
‘A qui eff l'afne file tienne par la queué: Pro, Let
. bim that owes th Affe bald, bim bythe tayle; be that
|... batha fuit to follow, or a thing to keepe may thinke no
Solicitor fo good, no watchman fo fit, as bimfelfe.
Le regnard cache fa queué: Prov. The cunning
knaue conceales what would difcouer him.
- Qui parle du loup on en voit Ja queué : Prov. See
Loup. fs:
Quine retiredefa vache que la queuë ne perd
pas tout: Proy. ‘Ti good,wben all is going, to ane a-
ny little ; fometbing,though meane, bath fauor nothing
none,
Qui tient la paefle par la queué, il la tourne là ou
il veut : Pro. Thofe that commaund,or manage,lawes,
expound them bow they lift.
Vache ne fçait que vaut fa queuë iufques à ce qu’
"elle l'ait perduë : Prov. we know not the worth of
> things till: we baue loft them... :
Queüé : m. ée : £ Tailed that bath a taile.
ueucrte :f. À little taile, (laulkesor fleale ; the tip of 2
sae 3
Queus : m, 4 whetflone..

reufe : f. A rude lumpe,or wos as of yron,dt,com-
, y from the finace, or before it bee wrought into
atres,
Queuffer. Queton car ne fe queuffe. To keepe thy
cart from beingouerthrowne. )
ueut : fs Quens,. +
ute *. Small drinke; finall beere : (Pic.
| Queux:m. 4 Cooke,


Le grand queux de France. The Maifter Cooke,the
aa Û ist chief of the Cookesyat Courts


&


ueux:

ucymander. from doore to doore.
Oued PA oe Genders Numbers,and per{ons;)

Who,which, that, that which, whom, whofe what, any
» bodie, fame bodie.. — = ra
~ Qui ça,qui la. One here another there,this man bere
that there ; here and there 5 afiinder, in feuerall parts
or places. Rent Cs 3
, Qui quesce foit, or vohatfoeuer bee. bee;
what name foener be beareth; what ranke foener bee
ny :


a — EEE EEEEEESISSSISIISSISISINERONnenmenmmeesseee=es= =e


«bath what worth foeuer be is of,
Ils fe feront mal qui ne les departira, They will mif-
_chieue one another of they be not parted, Ÿ
ia. I eft à quia. He is almofl at a nonplus.
Quiconque. Whofoener,or whatfoeuer.
CC: f, An acquittancé;releafe,difiharge.


Ould ler. See Quiter,
id pro quo. A palpable miflaking, a groffe errour
wie fe pice “Vds miflaking, a groffe 3


Quidam. vn.qy 42 odde,or certaine, flow.
Quiddiratifs f
Sisresfill of quirkes, fraught with quiddities; alfo,con-
… tentious, wrangling, titigions,
Quideau :m, 4 wicker Engine whereby fifh is caught.
tierchier : m, The name of'a fimall bira.
Quietin. as Theatin, te
ee if. Ref, calmenefe, tranquilitie, peaceable-
uelje. ) | mi}
Quignet: m, 4 little comerss
Quignon : m..,4 cantill, gobbet,lumpe,luncheon good
big peece of.
Quignon de pain. 4 corner of a cruflie peece of
bread ; or,the cruflie heele of aloafe.
Quiilard: ma Billart, oo. à
Quillat: m, The refining, or touch of gold; or, as Ca-


Fate :

Quille:f. The keeleofa flip; alfo,akeyle ; a big peg, or
pinne of wood, ufed at Nine-pinnes, or Keyles ence:
“Ala quille, & au.quillard, At cat and trap.

Onluy a donné fon fac,& fesquilles. Locke Sac.
Troufler leurs quilles, To packe up, or prepare, for
their departure,

Quillebandier: m. One that playeth much at Nine-


_pinnes. :
Quillela. A kind of play like unto (at and trap.


Quilles. Keyles,or Nine. pinnes,

PE ar mur roots. mater)

Qui lons de la garde d'un'efpée. The croffe barres of
the bilt of a for > a


Quinaire: m. 4n auncient Roman coyne worth about
3 d. ob. fterl. vi: :
Quinaud:m, Az Ape,or Monkie ; and bence, a defor-
med, or enill-faoured creature,
Ie l'ay rendu quinaud.t baue blankt,or graueld him,
I bane put bimto a nonplus, or to the wall (imdifputa-
tion.) is > ae yh
Quinande:f'A fle Ape, or. Monkie ; alfo, anouglit
wench,a Madame Ougliess se. © sat)
Quinconcé. vergier quin. The trees whereof beran-


~ ked in equall dijlance afunder and divefily one ouer a+


gaiaft th'other. À a sb ue
Quine.Faire la quineà. Tomock,or make a mouth at;

to point at with the finger. + SHAD
Quines. Two cinks, or fives, on the Dice. —


Quinette s€ A crutch; the flaffe, er fupporter ofacrip. ;


ple; alfo,a Snite,or Snipe... >>)
Quinquaille :f. Chinkes;coyne.
Quinquailles:£ Old yrom; alfo, fmall yron waves or
pedling wave of yron,copper,erc. f
Quinquailler : m, as Quinqualier, or Quinquallier,
Quinqualier: m. À paulirie Pedler; alfo,one bat fells,
or i= AE Qs = * say
uinquallerie: f 4s Quiriquailles ; or; all hind o
Qa Wyron-morheyas Padlorkes,Snuffirs, su
or Hindges for doores, cc; fold by Ivonmongers. +1)
Quinquallieur :m, 42 Ironmonger ; or one that fells
all kind of ({mall) Iron-ware. PE ES
Quinquaneleut : m. A bankrupts weiner,
53> EC es


:miue:f. Quidditatine, doubtfill, ob»


PT FORCER


2 :


CAPE


RP) Mere ‘ a: I > <
eT Sh Mla ee EN EP PR ee 10


he Ales à 1 D


L


M ra
(PR as


-


+2 Lisa.


à mae ey oe "fe 7. En


forces bis creditors to giue bim fiueyeares day of pay-
ment,
Quinquangle: com, Fixe-cornered, bawing fine an-
gles or corners.
Quinque. Painde quinque. Delicate bread made e-
[pecially againf thé foure folemne feats of Eafter, S.
Peter andS. Paules day, th’ Affumption of the Virgine
Marie,and Chrifimas, © ; J fl
uinguenaut : m. A little flinging, and venomous flie,
As Prouinces of Sologne,& is Beaufle,
Quinquenelle. as Quinquennelle,
Quinquennelle: f. Arefir, or terme of fiue peares.
Faire quinquennelle. Togrow bankrupt ; or, as @
bankrupt,to procure,in vefpeët of bis pouertie or lofses,a
re(pit of,or protection for, fine yeares, during which bis
creditors can recouer nothing of bim,
Quinquennon. Privilege de q. 4 Protettion for fiue
Jeares, granted by the Prince (or bis Officers) unto a
debtor, who makes good proofe of the lofje,or extreame
diminution, of bis eflate, fince the time of the making
of the bargaine, whereby be became indebted.
Quinfon : m. A Spinke,or Chaffinch.
uint: m, À fifib,or fift part; alfo, as e quint denier.


uint datif, The portion of an inberitance whereof


: onely a man may difpofe, by gift, will,or otherwife,
Quint naturel et couftumier. The portion of younger
breibren ; being(within the Countie of Ponthicu,and
in other places) a fifi part of all the land their father
died feiféd of, equally diuided among them; yet fo, as
when any of them dies, bis part is to renert unto the
foure parts enioyed by th'eldef. à
Quint & requint. Looke Requint.

Quint viager,ou heredital, Whercof a man may dif:
pose as of his one inheritance (by tbe cufloms of Ami-
ens;) or,the portion of an inheritance Feodal beloging
to a younger brother(by the cuflomes of Peronne.)
Quint de vivre naturel. as Quint naturelet cout
tuner.
‘Droié de quint. as le quint denier.
Quint:m, quinte: f. Theft. _. :
Le quint denier. The fift pennie,or part of the price,
of land thats fold ; payed umto the Lord of the foyle by
the feller in fome places, in others by the buyer, and in
fome others equally by both,
Quintage:m. 4 fifi part, or the laying out of the fift
part of aninheritance for younger brethren,
Quintain: m, French Laune;or, as Quintin.
Quintaine :f. 4 Quintane (or whintane) for countrey
= youtbes to ruine at,
Les eee ae vin en de-
tail. as


roid de ban à vin.


x


À Quintal: m. 4 Quimabor bandred weight, —


Quinte : f. as Quint; 4 ff part ; allo, a fifi(or the pro-
por tion M 9 Cs Ul bu-
“mor or elfe + sms )


Les quintes d'Angers. The Territerie,Libertie, Civ-
citer extent of courir yswberein the Preuofi.or ordi-


Be es RE Lean mile lan he mn


odde conceits,at this time in bis braine,


44


say bath taken


| ecg nm


: Go gle


en quinte de faire cela. He is in the vaine,or
him in the bead,to doe that fame sbe is


Quinter les fiefs, To diuide a fift part of them among


er brethren, .
Quinter fes heritages, Todifpofé of a fift part ther-


of. -
ay TT f, A quintefcences the vertie, force, or |:
b eter Bie extrathe
uin cé:m. ée:f. Exceedingly refined, or puri-|


QuintefSencer. To extraël the quintefcence, vertue, or |


(irit, ont of a thing; to refine, or purifie exceedin


Quintefsencieux : meule : f. All guintefcence, fill of À


fbirit,exatily fine.


uintefsentier. as Quintefsencer,


Quinteux :m, eufe :£ Humorous, fintaflicall tif, i


+ sa moodie, wafpifh ; barebraind, giddie bea-
ea.


Quintin: m. Acourfe kind of Laune.
Quintil :m. A rafh Judge, or haftie cenfarer.of otber


mens writin


5.
Quinuneve En ordre quinn Checker forme,or Chec-


ker-wife,

Quinzaine. A terme,or delay of fifteene whole dayes to-
getber,granted, in fome cafes,by the Judges. 4
Sauf quinzaine.With referwation of the 15 dayes ref:
pit,or terme which be bath gotten,


Quinze :f. Fifieene,
Quinze-vingts de Patis, 4a Hofpitall wherein three


- bundred blind people be releened with bread lodging,
and about iiij. d.a day; befides a priuiledge to beg at
certaine Church doores,


uinziefine. le q. The fifteenth,
pe ve a mr
Quis: mife:f Sought, looked, fearched for; demaun-


ded,asked,inquired after ; fetcbed,gotten.
Quitance: f. An Acquitance Releafedifcharge.
Quite :com. Difcharged, quit, freed, releafed, forgi-
nen, abfolned, fet cleere aboord.
Jouër à quite,ou à double. To play double or quit,
' win the mare or loofé the baulter,
Un’eft pas quite qui doibt de refte : Prov.He is not
quit that oweth ougbt. aes
Quité : m, ée: f, Quitted, forfaken, forgone, remitted,
releafed, yeelded up, giuen ouer. ;
Quitement. Freely, quietly peaceably, without let bin-
derance,impeachment or diflurbance. :
Quiter, To quit, forgoe, renounce, yeeld vp, abandon,
gine ouer ; to void withdraw, or part, from ; torcmit,
releafe difcbarge,acquit.pardon, forgine, abfolue,dif-
pence with,


uitervn boeuf pour prendre vn oeuf To leane an
Oxe fir the loue of an egee,


Quiter la ceinéture, Looke Ceinêture,
Quiter les cendres, To flirre abroad ; or,toquit bis
idle,bafe,or vmworthie courfes.


Qui Dieu quite eft bien heureux : Pro® Flappie à


be whom God abfèlues,
Quiterne :f. A Gitterne. - Bane ;
Queer 2m. Æquitiersacquiter, freer difcharger ; one
t eines an acgnittance,or Quietus eft,
itté,& er. as Quité,& Quiter,


a r.
Quittus : m. An Acquittance,or Quiewus eft.
Qulocul :m. 4 diking,or re 3 the lafi,or young-
eft child one bath,

:m, Sbaled nuts : Rab.


Quocquetier: m. 4 Huckiter. *È
ne + . rm. A quirke,or quidditie; alfo, a ieafl, or
wor :


Vn


Bec EA


QV ‘©


Vn vieux quolibet. 4 moath-eaten adage, or pro-
uerbe; andold {aid-faw,
Quoquar : m, (A cbildifh tearme for)an egges
Quoquelicog : m.Corne-rofe,wild Poppie,red-Poppie,
Quoquemartim.A Cauldron,or Chafer,to heat water,
Oe yin.. |
Quote: f. A quote,or quoting; a marke,or note vpon an
rticle,
a quote des tailles, The (effing, or affeffing of taxes.
-Quote. la quote partie. The fewerall portion;or fhare
velonging,or fahing, to enerie one,


| Quoté: mée:f Quoted, marked, noted in the mar.


gent ; alfo,taxed affeffed rated.
Quoter. To quote, or marke in. the margent,to note by
the way; alfo,tofelfe,affeffe,tax,rate. -
Quotidien : menne : f. Dailie, returning day by day,
bappening euerie day,ordinarie,continuall, vfuall.
Qiotiens. Totiens quotiens. Efifoones,verie often ;
at pleafure,or as often as he pleafes. .*


pe res : m, The part or portion which,in the diuifion


of a thing among many, falls unto euerie ones fhare,
Quotizé : mée: f. Taxed, feffed,afieffedyrated.


Quotizer. To feffe,afsef[e,tax,yale,
Quortité :f Aneuen afieffement, a rate or totquot im-


pofed ; the laying on enerie one bis fhare,

Quoiiat: m. An vaderling,writling, flarueling.
Quoûe : m. ce: f. Taëlsd,hauing a taile.

Froument quoûé, Foxtaile,tailed wheat, 0
Quoy: mye :f. Quiet, fill, peaceable refill, eafe-af-
= fedting, hufht, calme.

Îl n'ya pire cau que la quoye: Prov. Silent,mu-
fngsor dreaming {pirits are ( for the moftpart) more
daungerous,or of a worfe com others.
Quoy. (Interrogatine) What ?.Why? how ? what fay

‘you ? what would you? bow fay you to this? what
would you thinke of it,or doe with it?


Quoy que. Wbatfoeuer borfoener; notwithflanding, |


… albeit,or although, that.
“A quoy faire? To what purpofe ? for what caufe ?
what to doe ?
De quoy. Looke Dequoy. KT
Avoir de quoy,er (better) dequoy. To be rich,baue
fomewhat to take-unto, haue wberewitball; V ay en
de quoy,mais. 1 bane beene able to liue;the time was
when 1 could haue fhewed my head among the bef of
-them,or held it as high as another; but.


: AS ur Quicily, filly, filently, calmely, peacea-
| Quoyeté: £ sieges rth calmenejje; fo-


brietie ; filence; peaceab
R
x a
) Abais :m. An abatement,deduttion, defalcation,
… diminution extenuation an exoner ation, remif-


fiondifebarge ; a giuing backe of; alfo, a fall in
prices or affoure vate, or low price, whereto a thing


Boome AN, 5
Rabaiflant. Abating; abafing deiecting taking downe,
pulling under. ess
Se


ieftedly much difaduowing bis owne §
Rabaïffé : m.ée : f.Abated abafed,taken downe, pulled
under, brought lower, 1: T4
Cclaluya bien rabaiffé le menton. That shivig
bath bumbled bim, or ‘him downe excee-


| dm


aiffant bien bas, Verie bumbly, lowly, de-


Go gle


Rabaiflement: m, Am abating, diminifhing; abafire, |


Rabat: m, as Rabais ; 4/0, beater,the flaffe wherwith


_. memes (after the receit of good ones,


VAT |
|


Rabaife

er. To abate ; abafe,deieët,pull d =

der,take abole lower. — er =

aiffeur: m. An abater 5 an abafer,

Raballe :£ A certaine root of'whofe inyce (mixed with
other fimples)a prettie fauce is made,

Rabalter. To rumble, rattle, or makea terrible noyfe,
a5 (they fay) [pirits doe in fome unfortunate, or vafre-

. quented boufes.

Rabans: m. Rope-yards x the ropes, or treble cordes
whereby the fayles of a [bip are tied unto the yardes,

Kabanifte :m. 4 dunce ; or,one that fiudies,or is cun-
ning in,the workes of the Rabbies.

Rabaschement :m..4 r#nbling;or a terrible vatling,
Such as(they fay) is made by Hobgoblins in fime vafor-
tunate,or unfrequented boufès. si

Rabafcher,& Rabafter. #5 Rabalter.


Plaiflerers beat their morter ; alfo, a Rebatoe for a
womans ruffe ; alfo,a falling band ; alfo, the retrine in
hawking; alfo; the bone, or penthoufe of a Tennis.
court,

Vnrabat de bride, 4 ich, or checke which a borfé
giues himfelfe witb bis bridle. .

Le rabat dès couvertures des maifons, Theeauesyor À
eauings; the bottome of the voofe.

Rabat de manteau, The cape of a cloke.
abat-joye:m. A bringer of ill tidings a teller of ill


Rabatre. To abate, deduét, defaulhe, diminifh, leffen,
extenuate; remit, bate, gine or draw backe; alfo,a
horfe to rebate bis curuet.

Rabatre l'attendué, ou eongé. C'eft le faire re-
voquer par comparition {ubfcquente faiête en
temps, &lieu.  : 52

Rabatre vn congé, ou defaut. To recall,or difanull
them,to make them voi

Rabatu : m. ué:. Kebated, bated, abated, dedufted,
EX ARS 3 diminifhed; giuen.; taken , or drawne

acre, {
Jouër aux dames rabatués. Looke Dames.

Rabavit : m, Prickmadame, Sengreene the lefers
abbais, &c, as Rabais, |

Rabbatre,& Rabbatu, as Rabatre,& Rabatu,

Rabbe. Looke Rabe, ode)

ienné : m, Éc : f. Reconciled, made good friends
againe. ye |

Rabbienner. 10 reconcile attone, make friends, bring
into good tearmes together,againe. | :

REI ANA HU TN


Rabdomantie:f. or fmalls wane
Rabe: f. 4 Rapeor Turnep; a Limofin Raddifh.


age


ST à D EE ee ne RS oc ge Cre


Rabiere :f 4 plot,or bed of Rapessor Turneps, "1
eer :f Reinabled, repaired, ree tablifhed,
Teltore ;


Rabiliter, To reinable, repaire,amend,r céflablifh, reco.
Be abilagees copie une rene fell
a Oe:m.d repairing ,meding yenewing,yeforming,
Rabillé:mce :£ ented: amended ; reformed, co7-
recled,repaired,renewed,trimmed,or dreffed up. :
Rabillecouftrer. To patch,to mend. ar
Rabillement. as Rabillage. ota
Rabiller. To mend,amend, renew, repaire ; correët, ve-
forme ; trimme or dreffe up an old thing; thereby ma~
ing itfeeme new. ;
Rabilleur: m.4 renewer,mender,amender trimmer Up
old things. - 51 Rishi’ 2) Pa.
Rabin: m. 4 Rabbie,or Doëtor among the Femes
Vuu …. Ra


;


R. A B


Rabine :f. 4 bigh-growne wood ; or as Bois de haute

fuftaye.
| Rabinique : com. Rabbie-like, of the Rabbies.

Rabioles: £ Turaeps: Proven

Rabitué : mée: f. Reaccuflomed,reinured,ufed anew ;
Setled againe.

Rabituer. To reaccuflome,reinure,vfe anew; alfo,to fet-
tle againe.

Rable : m. À Plaifterers beater; alfo,the chine,or parts
about the chine,of a Deere,crc ; thence alfo,the power
or vertue of the backe in venerie,oc.

Rablé. Strong-backed, well furnifhed about the reines ;
and thence able for veuerie.

Rablette:£ 4 Shrew-moufe.

Rabobeliné: m.ée: f. Patched,or peeced agaïne.

Rabobeliner. To patch,or peece againe.

Rabobelineries : £ Patches renewed,or patches upon
patches,

Raboilicre: £4 Rabbets neaft; the bole wherein a Doe
Conie keepeth ber young ones.

Rabot: m. 4 Foyners Plane ; alfo, a Plaïfierers beater.

Raboté: m.ée:f. Planed; euened,lenelled, fmootbed.

Rabotement:m, 4 planing, euening, leuelline ; alfo,
roughnefJevaggedneffe unenennelfe.

Raboter. To plane; lenell, make or lay euen; alfo, to
finootb.

Raboteur : m. 4 planer; leueller; finootber,

Raboteure: f. 4 planing ; lewelling,laying euen ; fmoo-
thing.

Raboteux:m.eufc:f. Rugged, rough ; unewen, crag-

- gie, flonie.

| Raboudris: m. wraglands ; crooked , or mifgrowne
trees which will neuer proue timber.

Rabougri. vn rab. 4 grub, counterfeit, fhort or fhort-
necked crooke-backe.

Rabougri: mice :f. Growne crooked, and low ; wrie,
mifhapen, or imper feck of (hape; mifgrowne; grubbie,
dried vp, fhortened more then ordinarie by extraordi-
narie beat,

Rabougrir. To grow crooked ,and low withall ; to wax
milhay en, or imper feel of fhape; to become a wrag-
land,or grub ; to be fhortened or dried up by extraor-
dinarie beat, .

pire “ priv Ss :

abroüant. Checking,chiding, febooling reprouing.

Rabroiié: m.ée: f.checked,chidden,taunted,reproued;
difmiffed with a fharpeor fower denial,

Rabrotier. To checke,chide,reproue, taunt, feboole, dif
mife with a foarp,or crabbed anfwer; (peak fowerly,or
frowardly unto,

Rabroüeur : m. A/ower,or froward reprouer, checker,

: taunter,cenfor ; an auftere companion,

_Rabufer. To reabufe.

Racaille:£ Therafcalitie, or bafe and rafcall fort ; the
fiumme,dregs offalls,outcafis of any compame.


Raccamufé : m.ée: TA pafbed downe; flat-


tened beaten or made
Raccamufer. To /quafh, or pafb downe ; to flatten,beat


Saemithe fla


acquainted with ; alfo, to reconcile,
coller.Toscimbrace,iterate imbracements,imbrace


Raccorder,. To reaccord, reconcile, make friends a-

Py aon “a i : Pr
ir. Te bo bard

TS dre à


“ a
ot


i. »
Raccointer. To reacquaint; to make (or grow)once more


RAC

Raccoupler. To reunite ; 10 couple, or yoke together a=
gaine. J L

Raccourci: mie:f. Shrunke, fhortened, contraëted,
compacted ; chubbie, truft up, fhort and flrong, knit
well or clofe together.

Croix raccourcie. À croffe Humet, in Blazon,
Raccourcir, To fhorten,abridge,curtall, contr act,com-
patt, fhrinke or drawup,knit or draw clofe together.
Raccourciflement:m. Afhortening, a curtalling, a
contratting a drawing up clofe together. :
Raccouftré : m.ée:f. Mended , repaired, new dref-

Sed or trimmed up.
accouftreinent :m..A mending repairing new trim.
ming or dreffing Up.

Raccouftrer. To mend ,amend,recdifie, repaire, make, |
trimme, or dreffe up anew.

Raccouftreur : m. A mender,a repairer, avencwe7 ; a
dreffer or trimmer up of old things ; a botcher.

Raccouftuné : m. ée : £2 Reaccuflomed , reinured,
brought vp,or into ufé, againe,

Raccouftumer,’ To reaccuflome, reinure, to renew a
cuflomeito bring up,or into Ufe,againe,

Raccueilly :m, ye: & Gathered,

Race :f. Arace; linnage, fumilie,kindred,boufe,bloud,
litter,brood ; fort kind; alfo,as Rape.

Faire race, To get children ; alfo, to begin,or fet up, 2

vace,or brood, of borfes dogs ac.

Noble de trois races. Noble for three defcents, or
three manner of wayes.

Rachais : m.aife :f Leane,carrion, ftraggie.flarueling.

Rachalander. To recower former cuflomers, 10 get into
trade againe.

Rachapt: m. 4 redemption,redeeming,rebuying,yecoue-
rie of a thing [old,by paying that for which it was fold ;
alfo, an abilitie, or power to redeeme, or torecoutr
land in that mannet,by being next of kinto the feller;-|
alfo,avanfome,or paying of ranfome ; alfo,a Reliefe; or
whole yeares poffe(fion,e profit of land,or a fumme of
money (as the culiom is)due ugto the Lord of whem the
land is beld by homage, vpon encrie redemption,colla-
terall defcent , exchange, or other change of the te- |
nant.
Rachaptabonné. 4 Relief rated unto the tenant at
a certaine price. a
Rachaptrencontré. 4 Relief vpon a Relief; or, |
Quand durant l'année du rachapt efchet autre
rachapt d'aucune terre tenué à homage de la ter-
re qui court en rachapt : Im which cafe though the
Lordenioy both, yet it muft be no longer theniduring
bis yeare in the rae:

Droiét de rachapt. as before in Rachapt; alfo, as
Droit de ventes.

Rachapté: m.ée : f.Redcemed,recouered.gr delinered,
ranfomed ; brought backe,er bought ous, (or money.

Rachapter. To redeemes 10 reconer, or deliuer, toran-
fome or buy out, for money, : aa
Rachapter du Seigneur feodal. (Le nouvel acque-
reur ou vaflal) accorder au Seigngpr feodal pour
retenué,ou profits de fief,& luy payer les drolds de

ra

Racha An m. A redeemer; a ranfomer.

Rachalfé: m.ée :f. Chafed,or drinen,backe againe,

Rachaffer. Tochafe,or drine,backe againe.

Rachafleur :m, 4 chafer,or driner backeagaine.

Sergentrachaffeur. Looke Sergent. ..


pate a
pei om
for money.


Redeemablrenfomableecnraie
> J a-


R A C


R'A D,


- Raddouber, as Radouber. |
ade :£ 4 road, an open barbor for fhipping,
ade: com. Duicke, fwift: Pic, iti
peau oo A ane at-boat of timber.
adial: male :f, Ofor belonging to, th’. id big.
oo tn ere i
Radiance imi.ée: f. Readapted,reaccommodated.
adjancer. To Yeaptyeadapt,readiuft, reaccommodate.
Radiation: € A rafing,or blotting ont; (a Law tearme;)
+ Moa radiant brighineffe, sof the Sunne-beames; or
. & blazing, fhining, glittering; cafting forth of beames,
po iis € :f Radical ofsor fram,the root;belong..
. Oar... \ Mel ;
} aes radicale. Radicall, or natural moiflure,
calement. Radically ely, up by the root
th’originall, ae Hr ays Les


adieux: m. eufe : f. Radiant; fhining, glittering, bla-


Racheté,& Racheter: as Rachapté;& Rachaprer:
pee f eat en saranfomer; arecouerer
of things pafe jJOF MONEe à oN A os
Rachimburges mrs Certaine Judges of caufès which
were determinable by the Law Salicks 100
Raein. as Raifin: ¢ Langued. \
Racine: £. 4 root; alfa, the fpring, fource, originall, or
| aufe ofa matter. aiid} :
- Racine creufe. Hollow root, Holewort, Bulbus fn:
storse ; (an hearbe:). ant da) '
acine iaulne. The Garrotroot, ;
Racine quarréc, Is(im Avithmetich)anumber which
multiplied by ut [elfe yeelds another whole (andfquare)
» umber ; as 6 doth 36 ;ar 105100,) à...
Racine fanguinaire, kind of Storks-bill, tearmed
Bloudwort, of the propertie it bath to flaunch bloud,or
cure bloudie wounds, \ |
Racine fentant larofe. Rofewort,Roftroot;an hearb,
Racine & tout. Jpor euen, by the root; wholly, vt-
terly, quite and cleane.
Telle racine telle fueille : Prov. Such root (we fay;
fucb tree) fich fruit. . !
Racinette : £, 4 /mailroot,
acineux : m, eufe:£ Rootie, full of roots,
Raclant. Scraping; alfo,rafping,or grating.
acle :f. 4 feraper; arafpe,oï grater; alfo,th'yron(ring,
\or)bammer of a doore. ‘
aclé:m. ée: f, Scraped;rafped; grated,
C'eft vn poinezraclé. It isa cafe refolued, a matter
sexcludel, of,a thing fully determined.
acledenare : m. A ferape-good, - .,,
aclement:m. 4 ig 34 rain) once
Racler.To férape ; räpes grate; rake,rub, ferubs raf.’
“Abander & à racler. By booke or crooke; by vight or
by wrong; iz all extremitie ; Looke Bander. |
Racleresse:£f. A woman that [crapeth.
Raclet. (The name of }a foole ; and therefore of little un.
derflanding inthe Law > @Rab.
Racletorets: m. Such as rubfweaters in bot batbes,or
hot-boufes.
‘Racleur: m. 4firaper ya rafper,a grater,
: Racleur de cheminées. À Chimney-fiveeper,
‘Racleure:£.45 Raclure,
acloir: ni, Arafpe, grater, feraper; alfo , tbe firickle
wherewith corne is meafured ; alfo,as Racle,
Le racloir d'un’arquebufe. The crooked pin of yron
Scrued into the end of the fcovering ficke; we call it a


xing, flaring, leaming , full of beames,

Radis : m. 4 Raddifh ae i Te
Rand The double Raddifb, or many-yooted
Raddifh, >

Radot, les arbres qui fervét des radots aux maifons,
Which ferue or aie good {or,the reparation, or mending À

of houfès.

Radoté vn vieux radoté. 47 old dotard,or doting fool.

Radotement : m. Dotage,or a doting.

Radoter. To dote, raue, play the cokes, erre groffely in
vaderflanding.

Radoub : m, 4s Radoubement,

adoubé: m.ée : £ Patched botched,peeced,mended,
OubeMent:m, 4 peecing, mending, patching, or
> Patching up of. oni:

Radouber. To peece,mend,tenew,patch,or botch ups
acoubeur: m, A mender, peecer,patcher,botcher,

Radoüere : £ 4 firickle for the meafuring of corne,
adrefle. A redrefferefor tion,amends.

Radrellé im. €¢ :f Redre damended,reformed,cor -
recied. st

Radreffement : m. 4 redreffing, amerdin reforming.

Radrefler. To redre pre | >

Rageatiens im. A redreffer samender, correétor,a re-

rmer. ' :

Radvefir. To veaduefi,reinuelh yein{eifin, put againe in.
to poffeffion.

Radveltiflement: m. 4 readueflure or a readaefling;

arcinuefling,reinféifining. (as
veu: m.ué: £ Readuowed; readuouched,reacknow=
ledged,reapproued,taken into protectionagaine,
seRadviler. To readuifé biofelfe, take frtber aduife-
ment, thinke better,or otherwife, of the matter,
aduné : me :f. Affembled,or gathered together,
aduner, To affemble,or gather together.

Radyouér. To readwow,yeaduouch reacknowledge, 16-
approue,warrant, or take into protection,againe,

Raf i neleur lairra rifny raf. Looke Rif, aes}
Rafaux :m, wild Bores of about twoyeares of age,when
Érf their tuskes begin to peere out of their mouthes.…

Rafe: f. 4 ri ing or as Raffle; whence; :
Faire fa rafe.To make his hand,or make vp bis mouth,
by many purchafes,or prizes, MAMIE) |

Rafé: m.éc:f. Rifleds feraped; caught, or fnatcheds
allo, flipped away, . + SE est

Rafer. Torifle 20 catcb,or fnateh ; alfo,to Lèrape ; alfa;
to flip away. + 2 CURRT

der. Toraile ; or {coffe at; (, oldword) .:;

Le mi eles nie osanc ME ra

affinage: m. The refinement or quintefcence ofe

Rafhné; mde if Refined, purified. TE ob sey Raf.


Vury
= : SS - _ Set


Raclure:f. 4 (eraping ; raping ; erating; raking  rub-
bing, ferubbing ; rafureser a rafing. -
Raclures. Scrapings, (hauings, pavings ; offalls, frag.
ments yemntants.
acominodé : m.éc:f. Reaccommodated mended or
Racompter. as Raconter,
Racontésimée: f.Toldrelated,rebearféd reported, :


%


Raconter, Tatelrelate report,rebearfe deliner.


Raconteur se mx pamela reporter,


Racorder. See Ra
Racorny: mye: f, Growne bornie, made or become as
bard as borne es in


Racourci: Looke Raccourci. La
Racourir.To recourfé,torecurre, t0 run towards again,
Racquette. as Raquete, — se
Racquit. See Raquir, 41
Racrocher.To wrie or 7


lo (1 iV
ke,to make of a bookie forme,
seRacroupir. To knityor draw be haps 225
|» ther(as a doing borfe)bis binder parts,


sil


rade ot


oe I PTE
PS NOÉ PU NE


Ee ES EEE


R A G


Raffinement : m. A refining,a purifying.

Raffiner. Torefine ; clarifie, purifie; (prucifie.

Rafhineur: m, A refinerspurifier clarifier,

RafHade : £..A gripe,gra(pe,or violent feifure.

Parvne rafflade. At once,allat a clap.
Faite vne rafflade, To gripe,catch, or (natch at, feife
haftily, grafpe violently 5 ANS fevape,or foratch ;al.
fo,to rifle.
Rafflater. To flatter againe.

Raffle: f. A game at three dice wherin be that throwes
all three alike,winnes whatfoeuer is fet; alfo,a rifling;
alfo,the flaulke of a bunch of grapes.

Faire vne raffle. To rifle,rauage,make bauock, [weep
allaway before them.

Teter vne raffle. To throw three dice alike,as three a-
ces @rc,to win all ; alfo,to fnatch,catch,or fcratch.
‘Raffler. To fcrape,or fevatch;to catch,or feife on,violent-
ly; alfo, torifle; to rauage ; make banocke, or cleane

worke ; to fiweepe all away.

Raffoler. To burt,or fell againe; alfo,to bring into a new
fooles Paradice,to befot againe.

Raffulté: m.ée: £ New flocked; fitted with a new flaffe,
or flocke ; frame,or carriage.

Raftufter. To fit,or furniflo with a new flocke; flaffe,car-
riage, frame.

Rafle,& Rafler. #5 Raffle,& Raffler.

Rafrefchi : mie: f. Refrefhed,cheered,reuiued, pat in-
to heart; alfo,renewed.

Rafefchir. Torefrefh, reniue, cheere, comfort, put into
heart ; alfo,to renew.

Rafrefchiflement: m. A refrefhing,or avefreflment ;
a comforting reuining, cheering up ; 4 renewing.

| se Ragaillardir.To be blithe,to wax merrie,

Ragalice: m, Lickorice.

Ragats d'eau: m. A great floud, inundation, rauage of
waters.

Rage : f.Rage,furie madne[Je woodae(fe, fier ceneffester -
ribleneffeoutragion{ne/fe. F
C'eft rage. Tis a wonder.

- Faire rage, Tobe verie briefe, or verie bufie ; to doe
great matters,worke many wonders keep a great coile,
burrie, flurre.

Ils firentrage de promettre. They promifed moun-

taines,or wonderfull matters,

Qui veut tuer fon chien luy met la rage fus : Prov.

He that will bang bis dog pretends be’s mad.
dre :m, Toping,dalliance wantonne/fe,lafciui-

oufneffe.

Ragencl m,ée: f.Readapted,readiufted,y eaccommo~

ated. : |

Ragencer. To readapt,readiufl, reaécommodate, order


ancæw, .
Rager. La{tiuioufly to toy,dallie,or wantonnixe it.
Ragevr: me ff, ano fii fl É
aggrandir. To greaten,augment incre. inlarge,
Kagot: m. The A of a cunning French “at
À Bide a booke of all bis owne fubtilties, and died verie
foe fay worth 3000 1.) Rab. sen
Raouife A pete 0 againe, “im
Raï: m. Looke Ray. | RE à 4
Raie,& Raier. a Raye,& Rayer. ‘1388
Raiete :f, A wrinkle im the face ; Looke Rayeres
ajcuni 'm. ie: f. Growne young againe,
Rajeunir, To g mung againe. ee
Raifort :m. The Raddifh, the Rabone.yoot(or bearb.
© Rayfort des champs, Moumtaine Raddifh,
difh.ereat Raddifh, Irae


Railler.70 ieaft,boord, fport,be merrie,or pleajant,with;


RA 1
Raifort Lo = The wild Raddifh; alfo,the water
Raddifh,(Ruellius affirms shat Elatine,or female Fln-
ae in fome parts of France tearmed,Raifort fau-
vage. LL
Grand raifort, Great Raddifh, borfe Raddifh, moun-
taine Raddifb. :
Fradture faite en raifort.A fmple fracture (of bones)
without any fhiuering,

Raillant. jeafting; fcoffing at.

Raillard: m.arde:£. Jeafting,boording,pleafant,ymerrie,
with; alfo, flowting,gibing, fcoffing mocking,


to deride,mocke, flot, fcoffe,gibe at.

Raillerie : f. Zeaftime,boording, (port merriment; alfo,a
flowt ov feoffe sa flowting,or fcoffing.

Railleur : m. A ieafler border ; mocker, Jcoffer. *

Raillon: m. 4 fifhion of thr ee-edged, or tveble-bladed
dagger, which opens and fhuts wibavice
Fer de fleche à raillon, 4 Sheot-head; a for ked, or.


barbed bead,

Raim:m. A bough,or branch ofatree, 2
Par raim de bafton ; &,par raim & bafton. A deli-

< uerie,or quitting of pole (jon of land,by the delinerie of

4 bough,red,or flicke that growes thereon, :
Raimceau:m, A little branch,or bough.

Rain: m. 45 Raim ; À bough,

Rain de forefts. The purluessor skirts of forrefis ; the

places that be next,or neere adioyning, vnto them.

Raine: f 4 Frog.

Raine de buiflon, The bedge Toad.

Raine verte. The little venomous greenFrog,or Toad,
Rainette : €. A little Frog ;alfo,a Pawne at Chefs.
Rainfeau: m. A little branch,or bough.

Rainfelet: m. The fame.

Raiol€, as Riolé. |

Raion, 4s Rayon.

Raionné: m.ée:£Furrowed; fet,or fowne in, furrows;
digefled into feuerall rankes yowes 07 firvowes.
jpaire. Looke Repaire.

Raiponce:£, Rampions garden Räpions,the wild ‘Rape.
Petite raiponce. Small or little Rampions, wild
Rampions. ©

Raire. To fhane.

Apres faire n'y aque tondre : Prov. Sheeres after

fhauin find noworke 10 doe.

‘A barbe defol on apprend raite: Prov. By trim-
ming fooles about the gill, a Barbers prentife learns bis
skill; or,by doing a thing ill one learns to doe much bet-
ter; unfeemelie prefidents are warnings to the wife,
Vn barbier rait l'autre: Prov, One great man , rich
man , cunning man, ferues anothers turne, :
Rais : m. The Sunne-beames,

Rais: m. aife:f. as Rafé. - ,

Raife : f. 4 path,or fiarrow,betweene beds in « Ga rden,
orinatitted ground.

Raifin: sn. À Grapes allot aifin; alfo, the kernell of
a Grape ; alfo,a bunch,or clu [ler of Grapes. ;

aifins de cabas.Alligants,or fraile Raifims.
aifins chenins. A kind of great red Grapes, fitter

+ to make medecines,then meat,of.

Raifins confiz. «s Raifins de cabas.

Raifins de Corinthe. Currans,or fmall Raifins.

Raifins deDamas. The beft,and greatefi kind of Rat-

the Sunne, .


rode entier. A bunch,or cluster of Grapes, -


Sed de lierre. Ivie berries. "0
Raifin de mier. Sea Grape, (et Rains Jee yan |
betas À little forub growing on’ banks

to A


eae NES


a ‘TA


RA I


Raifins de mer. The frie,or fpawne of the Cuttle-fifb.
Raifins d'outre mer. Red Goofeberries,garden Cur.
rans,
Raifins de panfe. Raifins of the Sunne,
Raifin de regnard. Garden Night{hade, pettie Mor-
rell; alfo, bearbe Paris,One-berrie,True-loue,
Raifin renverfé, as Raifin de regnard ; (in the for-
mer fence.)

I n’eft ny figue ny raifin. He is neither fifh nor flefh,
there is little or nothing in him.

Moitic figues,moitié raifins.Halfe tone balfe torber;
and (particularly)betweene ieaft and earneft,

Raifiné : m. 4 confection of grapes,made thicke,and ea-
ten with bread,as honie ; or as Raifinnée,

Raifine :f. Ro/èn. |

Raifinée. as Raïfinnée,

Raifineux : meufe: f. Full of grapes.

Raifiniere :f. The third membrane,or skinne of the eye,
(and the firft that clothes th'Opticke finew) wherin the
bole is by which we fee; alfo,th’Uuula, :

Raifinnée: £ 4 /auce, or confection of delicate, blacke,
and ripe grapes, firft preffed betweene the bands ; then
boiled with water andfalt; and then flrained, éx put
into earthen veffells where it will harden like a Mar-
malade,and keepe verie long.

Raifon : f. Reafon; alfo,due, right,equitie, iuflice ; alfo,
knowledge,mdgement wit, aduice,difcretio,difcourfe ;
alfosacaufè argument, occafton, confideration ; re(pect,
regard; account,reckoning.

Papier de raifon. A booke of Accounts; or, a bill of

* Account, ;
Avoirraifon de, To gethis due, or ovene of; to bring
VALO an account,or unto equalltearmes.


will,of; or as Ranger à raifon.

Ten’ay pas plus de temps que de raifon, 1 bawe but
euen a reafonable time; or, Lhaueno more time then
I need.

Mettre à raifon. To reduce into,or compell unto,fome
order ; or,as Ranger à raifon.

Regardez fi ic ne me mets pas à la raifon.(In a cô-
tratt,or agreement) See whether Ihave not made a
faire offer.
Ranger à raifon. To tame, fubdue,reclaime bring in-
to order unto cinilitie,or to indifferent tearmes,
Raifon eft au moulin : Prov. Looke Moulin.

Mets raïlon en toy, ou elle s'y mettra: Prov. Let
reafon rule,or it will saerrnlesion
Necefsité eft la moitié de raifon: Prov. Necefitie
bath balf the force ofa reafon; a fault which muft be
made is halfe excufed.


Raifonnable: com,.Keafonable indifferent equall,iu(},
right, / :
Raifonnablement Reafonably, indifferently, equally,


iufily vightly.

Raifonné: “À ée :f. Reafoned,argned; diftourfed.
Loix raifonnées.Laws sd on reafon,or whofe
reafons areannexed vato them,

RS m, A reafoning,arguing, diftourfing ,

i paring re SRA

Raisonner. Torealonyargue,difcourfe,difpute,.

Raiz. Looke Rets. ©" : ip

Raiz: m.aife : £ Shauen,powled neere,


Raize. as Raife.


| Rale de cheval. The Pafterat of a horft.


Ralenti: m, ie: f. Slackened remitted, 5
: Ralentir. To flacken ; remit, loofen, foreflow,wiredraw,
. linger draw out in length ; to relent in.


D EE nes -


ee


.


Avoir la raifon de. To take bis pleafüre, to bane bis |


R AM


lama de ralette. Treading lighthyor faire |


se Raliéter.To fl ficke,or get bim fiche to bed,againe.
Ralle. a Rafle.

allement : m. A ratling in the throat.
Raller, To rattle ia the throat ; alfo, to returneor goe a-


aine,
Raller terre. To /un fafi,and clofe by the round ;
A fo does the Rayle.) me. :

Rallié : m.ée: £ Ralied,reunited,reaffembled,attoned,
reconciled agreed.

Ralliement :m, A rallying,reaffembling, reuniting ; a-
Freeing attoning,reconciling,

Rallier. Torabie,reafemble, reunite, gather difperfed,
clofé difioynted,things together ; alfo, to accord,recon-
cile agree,make peace betweene, ;

allion :m, 4a arrow witha forked,or barbed bead ; à
broad arrow, \

Rallumé:m.ée:f.Reinflamed,kindled,or lighted againe.

Rallumer. To light kindle,inflame,or (et on fire againe,

Ralongé :m.ée: f Lengthened, pulled, firetched, or
dravone out in length, ,

Cercheralongée. A certaine Inflrument wherwith
Mafons round,and fafhion pillers.
alonger.To lengthen; to firetch,or draw,out inlength,

Ramadoüer. as Amadouer.

Ramadoux: m.Th'Indian Rat; enemie to the Crocodile.

Ramage : m,Boughes,branches branching ; or any thing
that belongs therto; bence,the warbling of birds recor-
ded, or leaynt,as they fit on bougbes ; alfo, kindred, or
linnage ; or abranch of a pedegree. :
Velours à ramage. Brañched,or wrought Veluet,

Ramage : com, Of, or belonging to,branches; alfo, ra-
mage,bagard,wild,bomelie rude.


Chant ramage. Natural! chaunting, rural! fng


ing.

Efpervier ramage. 4 Branchier,aramage Hawke,

Ramaigrir, To wax leane,or fall away ,againe.

Ramaison. Looke Ramoifon,

Ramanché: me: f. Rebafled, rebelueds put againe
into it right place ; reduced unto fafbion,or order.


Ramancher. To (et a new bafi, or handle, vatos (and À


bence)alfo, to reduce unto fafhion, or it former order ;
and,to put againe init former place.
Ramar :m:The ffh called the fea Fox.


Rana :m.A pile,beape,collection,medley mingle man |


gle. Woes

Ramaffe :£ 4 broome,beefome,or long braifly; alfoya kind
of bigh fled, or ra pars bats trauellers are
carried downe certaine fleepe,and flipperie billsin Pic-
mont.

Ramaffé: m. ée : f. Gathered, piled beaped, colledied,
ore together ; alfo,carried downe a fteepe,or
Slipperie billin the fled Ramaffe,


Rainaffer. To pile,beape, gather vp,colleët or affemble |
together; He conucy downe a Lance flipperiebill |
Ramafle 7


ina à
Rambade : £. The bend,or wale of a Galley. à
Ramberge:f. 4 falhion of long fip,or fea-veffell,nar-
rower then a Galley ,but /wift,e> eafie to be gousrned.
Rambure:f, The name of a jowrifh apple.
Raine :f. 4n Oare ; alfo,areame of paper.
Gens de rame.Water-men,Barge-men, Galley-flaues;
Rowers,
‘A rame rancade. Amaine,apace with all their oates,
- as faft as they can make,or drine, a
Ramé:m.ée: £ Bougbie, - of boughes underpropped
with boughes ; alfo,rowed. uf
Van iy Bal-


.


RAM


Balles ramées. Croffe-barre (hot.
Cerf rainé. A raine Deere,
Pois ramez.Great Peafe,garden Pease baftie Peafe,
French Peafe,Roman Peafe.
Rameau : m. 4 branch,a bough.
La fefte des rameaux: Palme:Sanday,

Ramée : f A shicket; a thick and fhadie groue,or copfe;
alfo,the fhadow of boughes; and an open roome,arbor,
or booth,made of boughes ; any place thats couered, or
oucrfhadowed ,with boughes plafbed one within ano-
ther,

Rainené:m.ée:f. Brought backe ; returned reduced;
alfo,retived or drawne backe.

Ramener. To reduce,retire bring or draw back.
Seramener. À horfè to pull in bus bead,or draw bim-
felfe in,t6o much,

Ramener la complaince fur les lieux. To procure a
Fudge toheare , and determine a controuerfie in the
place,or on the land which it concernes,

Ramener vne pile. To caff,or firike backe a ball,

Ramentevoir. To remember, call 10 memorie, fuggeft,
putin mind of.. ~

Ramentu :m.ué:f. Remembred, called to memorie, or
to an account brought into the mind or Unto memorie.

Ramer, To row ; alfo;to pricke or flicke full of boughes ;

to underfet or underprop with boughes,

Ramerci:m. A certaine(forbidden) Engine wherewith

fifh may be caught. À

Ramereau: m. 4 young Stockdoue.

Ramerot : m, 4 young,or finall Stockdone.
ameut: m. A Waterman,a Rower,

Rameure : & Arowing; alfo,as Ramure.

Rameux :m. eufe:f Full of branches,or boughes.

Ratnieller. To ue firther inticements; to fiveeten once
againe,

Ranier: m. A Queeft,Ringdoue ,Coufhot, woodculuer.

Ramier: mere: Of a boigh, like a bongb, lining a-
mong boughes ; whence ; rts
Coulomb ramier. The Queefl;èrc; as Ramier, *


ALT


F


a à tend


VV COMM INTER


L  Peafe,French Peaft. ù |
: Ramification :£ À branchings a fpreading or dini.
ding into fever all branches.


| Ramifié: m. ée: f Branched, fpread in branches,
: Ramifier. To branch; to put outor fpread in branches.
Ramilles : £ Small flickes, or twigs; little boughes, or
cl b dnote apie 4
} Raminacrobis:m: A counterfeit, or counter feiter
i granitic; a feuere outfide of a fleightinfide; one that
would bide a moft vaine and idle beartin an outward
auflere habit. ; |
Raminoue: com. Froward, peeuïfh; or(as th'Italian
ramengo)wandering,loytering,roning about; whence;
: Sheval ramingue. An icon(lant moning borfe ; one
t'heëpes not in any direct way; one that not a-
soled ae vd suai, empered
é:m.ée:f. Moderated,qu tempered,
\deret. To moderate qualifie temper. ie
:m,4 feared,or dead branch cut from a tree.
im. Loppings or the tops of branches lop-


ie deters ber fre, wie aces


:


|»


'


ne EE ithe, icon piste.
PE ARR, cs es Ses |
| Ramoitit:70 mein bed faker ep ouen apse.
ai £* ea > ¥


Pois raimiers. Branch Peafe, garden Peafe, baftie |


R A


and meale feafoned with falt, & boiled in water untill
ried float ; when,they are taken out of it, and ferued up
of. | 1


Ramollir. Tofofien ; or make oft againe.
Seramollir. To foften, flacken, velent, wax gentle,
grow tender, L

Ramolliffements m, A fofiening, mollifying, making

er. 4


Ramon: m. 4 broome,or beefome.
ainonné : m.ée : f. Swept with a broome,

Ratnonner. ‘10 fweepe,or make cleane with a broome. |.
amnonneur de cheminée, A Chimney-fweeper, |

Ramonter. To lift up on bigb.

Ramortiflement. as Amortiffemeut.

Rampable : com. which may be crept om.

Rampar. Looke Rempar. |

Ramapo Droi&deramp. A priniledge,or power,to

cher. | is

Rampement: m. A creeping,or crawling along on the
ground; alfo,a climbing.

Ramper. To¢reepe; runne, crawle, or traile it felfé, a.
long on the ground; alfo,to climbe.

Ramplaige. as Ramplage. i

Ramponne:t. A flowt, {coffe, mocke, gibe, gleekesieaft
re on on. Le i


Ramponner. Togibe, flowt ,Scoffe deride, mocke, ieaft
at,


Rampofne. as Ramponne.
Ramson. as Rae (anold word.)
Rainu: m. ué :f, Branchie ; full of branches.
Ramure:f.Branchine(fe,or a fpreading in branchessalfo,
branches.
Laramure d'un cerf À Deeres head well fet, or
: ‘with all bis rights ; the well-fpread bead of a red


Deere, :
Ramufelé. nez ramufelé. A thicke and fhortnofe; « |
bottle noje.
Ran: m. 4 Ramme : Pic. ;
Rancade. ‘A rame,ou à voile,rancade. With all their
oares,or fayles ; as faft as tbey can goe.
ance: com,as Ranci.
Ranche : com, Hoarfe.
Ranci: mic: £.Muflie, fiflie,reafie,reftie tainted, fale,
patrified, wafted, flinking, vnfanorie, ill-fmelline.
Rancin: m The ner bunting of dogs after a default,
se Rancir.. 10 putrifie, wax tainted, get a woft, grow
muflie, fuflie, veafie refi, fale,
Rancissure:f, Muftinefe, fiflineffe, reafneffe, refli-
nefe,a taint, | it; putrifuction, unfanorineffe.
Ranco. Trotter de ranco. To walke from ranke to
ranke, from one to another,


aricoeur : m. Rankor , haired, malice, an inward

grudge vankling de(pight. à

Rancon:m. AWel{hhooke,.or bedging bill; or (moft
properly) a triple firked weapon about tbe length of a

… Partis eve |


fA ranfème; Looke Rencon.


Rancon: |
:m Éc: fs Ranfomed, put vaio ranfome s al. |.
( ted upon, :


Rançonné
Rançonner. Ter. ome, to put vntoranfome ;alfo, to
ole defpoyle, exaët, or extort mefef bis fub-


as


Ranconneur:m. A ramfümer ; alfo, an opprefor, or
extortioner. : fs” :


Rancune :£ # Rancoeur. | NE,
| Randon :m. The fwiftneffesor firce of à flrongand vio-
~ lent flreame ; wbence, Aller à grand randon. Togee


-


: verie faftor with a great and forced paces.


Tank


Original. from
PHAOMO:STATEUNIVERSITY


RA NI
Sang refpandu. a gros randons. Ay great guess or


im great quantitic, at once.

Randonnée: f. A (ivifi,or violent coups:

Randonner, To runne fwifily, spare fi as be
can.

Rane:f. 4 Frog. A

:m. À ranke, row, fi, fl ping comes place,or-
der, array ; alfo (plusallythe lifts of a Fufis,or Turna~
ment,

Vn luth à 16 rangs. 4 fisteme-flringd Lute;or a Lute
with fixtecne firings...
Au rang de. Amongflor in the companie of,
Mettre fur les rangs.Ta make meation,haue {peech. of;
to remember, br ing upon the Stage, or bring in among
the reft ; alfo, as
or ef fur les rangs.To deride side mocke,gibe feafe,
Or tealt at,

Rangé. Looke Rengé.

Rangée: f. A rank file, row.
Rangée d'avirons, A banke of oares.

Ranger. To range, ranke, order array; fet; fort, plact,
dispofe of, ordaine unto.

Ranger à l'eftroi@t To drine,or bring vnto a firait.
Ranger à à raïfon, Totamesreclayme;cwilixe,bring in:
to temper,vato reafon or order ; to ouercome,bring vn-
der, fubdue,
Seranger a.To (et ,addre(fe, frame,addiit apply, alfo,
to yeeld, himfelfe vnto.
Seranger au montoir. Looké Montoir.

gier: m. A Raine Decte. TOP GH

Ranglier. The fame. @ RE.

Ranguillon: m. The tongue of a buckles:

Ranimé: m.ée:f ob por mn
reftored vnto life.

Ranimer. Toreanimate, reincourage, reuiue, put into
beart ; infife new vigor, life,or (pirit into,

Ranulaire. Veine ran. A veime under the tongueoper
ned,or let bloud, for the Squinancie.

Ranules: f, The veines which are under the tongue; al-
Sfastbe little muskles of that part ; fo tearmedbecanfe
they fomewhat refemble the flayed thighes of a Frog.

Ranulet: m, 4 painefill felling of the veines under
the tongues of cattell.
anuncule: m. The Crowfoot, Butter flower Kings Cob,

golden Cup; and (efpecially a kind thercof)Spearewort,


Dont
Raouler. Seeke Rouler.
Rapacité: € Rauening,rapacitie, gedinefts extortion,
catching extreame couetoufne[fè.
Rapaire: f. The dung of a Hare,
atrier. as Repatrier. + :
Rapé: m. 4 verie finall wine M be shoe
on the mother af grapes,which,
the wine which comes from avefell filled with whole,
and found grapes (diuided from the clufter). and +
wine 3 which being drawne out, fupplyed-by
the leauings of good wine, put iato the veffell, and on
uiued and kept in beart awhole pare long by whe iv
Sy
Rape: f. Rae rough Fl à
Rapé: m. ée: £ Ka ed, feraped,
Rapeau: : m, as ala reme so” «fem
courfe.or hurle at Ki La
| Rapede-nare. as are. ,
Rapel :m. 4 Lure for a Le
pos m. À rafping,


ie ef fème, to ferape)at a docre,érc.


GO: gle


| Rapetafler. The fame. ;
KR: É: m.ée: £, Diminifbed,leffened,grown lefJe and


eenepreffed; alfo; |


1. To raÿpe,ar(crape SE 2-10 tohneske (frame


R A P


Rapetac om.ée: : & Patched, peeced, clowted mended


itched.


acer, To patch,peececlowt mend ,botch,


€; alfo, fet in,as a peece of worke.
apetiffement: m. 4 mS diminifbing, extenua-
a making or growing lee and lee; alfo a fetiin,
ane of a peece of worke. varient 7; |
petiffer. To /efen,diminifh,extenuate make lefe and
alfo,to fet ina peece of worke,or a pecce uf worke
“to fland in,beyond it fellowes,
Rapeur: m. A Rafper,or hard Jéraper.
R as Raifort.


ana
RARE fauvage. The pas Dittanie, Dittander,


ppermort.

Raphe:m. 4 certaine beaf thats Shaped like a wolf,
and {potted like a Panther; alfo, the name of a Saint;
whence ;

Malde$. Raphe. A leaprofie or the wild feab,

Raphe: £..4 Raddifh; alfoya leapers clicket ; alfoya band.
end graspfall of; 3 alfo, the Game at Dice called


Rapher. as Raffler.

Raphileux: m.eufe: f. Rugged rough, knottie, Knobbic,
al a, full of feames,

Raphine: £ The name of a certaine Saint ; whence;
Mal de $.Raphine. The wild feab.

Raphler. as Raffler.

Rapide : com. Valent, impetuous, haflie, fudden, fivif,

© vebenient cruéll, : firionss tauenous,

ideiment.7mpetuoufly, violently, fwiftly, baftily,

' suddealy; raucnoufly; cruelly, fisriou fly.

ye oe ee if Violent fwifine(fe,impetuous ballsuebement

farie;rauenous crueltie,

Raprect. m. Ge: f. Peeced,patched,botched vp.

Rapiecement: m, 4 pea Mespeicbine, betcbing,

Rapiecer. To peece,patch,botchsclowt,mend.

Rapieceur : m. A peecer,patcher,botcher,

Rapiere : f. An old ruftie rapier.

Rapille : £. 4 kind of fand gortenat Pouffole neere unto
Naples; and ufed in the cutting of Marble. x

nt, robberie, violent


apine: f. Rapine,ranine, raui
snatching, forcible taking.
Rapiner.To vinineihdpepicpak of,ranifh, take violent-
ly, faatch gree. c away haftily, from. …
apineux: m.eufe: f. Rawenous,grecdie;violent,coue-
tous, (or violét in qe ar :
-» ofail,or the beft things one bath. | Ahi. 7
apoil: m. A Shauer,or Barber.
apoule: £, The Clote;Burre-dockeyor great Burre..
+ mi Small wine; oras {
rf. AGameyr Exercife, mbercin. th’ Aëlors be-
ing armed with Gawatlets buffet one another,
Rappé. as Rapés brouét rappé. The broth of chickens
© and Veale,bauing added vata it the crummes of white
bread; liners of Pullein, Verinice, and white Ginger,
firained together, co then being boyled againe.


Ra as A

Rabpechts m. the a fifo called,a Heauen-gazer..

Rappel: m. Arepeale, reuocation, recalling ; a calling,
or fetching backe.

Rappelé: m.é¢: E.Repealed,reuaked.recalled: fetched,
or withdravene from. :

Rappeler. To repeale,renoke,recall,call backe, fetch, or


withdraw


Rappdlerparboürfe. Te redeeme, or ta recouer, by
tbe aile of neere kindr redsan inberitance which
it
4 Original from
THE. GHIO:STATE UNIVERSHY


ee


+ PPS


KR AP


hath beene folds gining for it onely fo much as it was
fold for.
Rappcler le cochon. To repeat, or intreat of, bis for-
mer subielt ; to fallinto, or come Unto, the matter a-
gaine: alfo,to lesue,or end as be began.

Rappeller. as Rappeler,  "}

Rappes: £. The Paines; adifeafe ina horfes legs.

Rappetiffement. Looke Rapetiflement,

Rappez : m. A kind of Grapes preferued in Muft ; and
serued to the Table as great dainties;Looke Rapé.

Rappiecé,& Rappiecement.as Rapiecé,& Rapiece-
ment. '

Rappiecer. Looke Rapiecer.

Rappoinété: m. ée:f. New pointed, or fharpened at
the point.

Rappoinéter.To fharpen the point of, or fet anew point
on; alfo,to repaire the lofies of, to farnifh anew with,to
reflore 10 a former eftate, to fet vp againe allo, to re-
determine, redecree ; reattone , reconcile; bring into
good tearmes againe.

Rapport: m. 4report,relation,recitall,rebear(all, deli-
ucrie of a tale; alfo, thereturne of a Writ; or that
which a Sherife,Sergeant,or other officer, fets downe on
the backfide of a writ ferued , or otherwifé reports of
the feruing,or executing, thereof; alfè,a refemblance,
corre{pondencie,accord,or agreement between fenerall
things ; alfo, a bearing, yeelding, or bringing forth of

riit, R
Rapport & denombrement, A furney; or,as De-
nombrement, Qc #1
- Rapport de main pleine; C’eft; garnifon de la
main de luftice de biens fuffifans & valables, pout
Ja fomme pour la quelle execution eft faiéte , fur le
rapport du Sergent des biens defia par luy prins fur
le debteur; en quel cas il peut avoir recreance,pro-
vifion,& delivranced’iceux, |
Tefte de rapport. The branch of a Vine that beares
the Grapes, is ordinarily a {hoot of one that [prung out
the yeare before. :

Rapporté: m.ée: f. Told,reported,related,recited, re-
bearfed ; alfo,likened or compared with, refembled,re-
ferred, applyed, or layed neeve unto; alfo, fitted, adap-

ted, correfpandent, enenly ioyned, iufily applyed 3 alfo,

brought or carried backe.
Vers rapportez. Vérfes whofe words reportingly an-

… over one another; as in, Paftre,Laboureur,Duc, tay
peu, befché, foubmis, de rains, de pics, de mains,
chevres,champs,ennemis,&c)

Rapporte-nouvelle. Vnr. 4 newes-bearer, or tale-
cartiersone that takes up,or bearkens aftersany mewes,
to report them,or make tales out of them,

Rapporter. To report, relate, recount, recite, rebearfe,

a


match, fit, equall one with, another ; to lay peece by

peece, or one clofe by another; alfo, to beare, yeeld, or

bring forth fruit ; alfo,to bring,or carrie,backe ; alfo, 10

_ reprefènt,as formes,vnto the thoughts, toimprint them
‘elit ,


"Se
veferre,or commit.


ac


Rp


EE Ce ONE ET |


liver; alfo, toreferre, compare, apply one to; to |


= be : Rapporteryn proces SuccinEtly,and fincerely torts
ear {e, and openvnito the Court the principall points of

- amatier alreadie debated at large by the Councell of
Fapporeerd. Terme, agree mith at

To lay the charger care of a buf
henc rapporte à celuy,
émis


R À: Q


_ will; and, lem'en à ce qu’en eft; Letthe
thing defend, or fbeake for, it felfé, 1 neither make nor
meddle with it. «

: Ou fe rapportent, & frappent les rayons, where.
the beames light,or meet. -

_ Rapporteur: m. 4 reportera relator, a recitor, a re-

earler. a
Rapporteurs de Chancelerie.Certain officers,which
open vato the Mafters of Requefts (in that Court) the
effect of petitions; and the difficulties, ov inconuenien- |
ces, whereto the Writs, or Letters Patents required by
fiitors are fubieët. :
Rapporteur de proces. The Prefident or Confeilli-
cr, who, when a cafe hath beene filly argued, and de-
bated by the Councell on both fides doth epen faithfully,
and report fuccinéily,the principall points thereof; im-
mediately after which the Court proceedes unto Sen-
tence,

Rapprendre. To learne ouer againe,

Raprecy: m. A reualuationor new price made,of.

Rapfe:"f.as Rape; a Rafpe.

Rapfodie: £. A Rap/ôdie ; an improper colleétion, a con-

fifed heaping vp,of many fentences.

Rapt: m. 4 rauifbing; a violent fnatching, taking, or

pulling away of.

Raptacer. To patch, piece, mend ,botch, clot.

Raptaffer. as Raptacer..
aquaille. as Racaille.

Raquamé: m, ée: f. Imbrodered.

Raque: f Durt; filthordure ; mud, myre; or, as Raf-


que. . .

Raqué. Vin raqué. (Perbaps in flead of Rapé.) Small,
or courfe Wine, faueexed from the marc, or dregs of
the grapes,alreadie drayned of all their beft moifiure.

Raquedenare: m.A pinch-pennie, ferape-good,mifera-
ble wretch.

Raquetier: m. À Racket-maker ; alfo,one that handles
a Racket well,

Raquette : f. ARacket.

Raquettes. he bigh-fided periwigs,or wires of baire,
worne heretofore by Gentlewomen.

Raquit: m. 4 reacquitment, redemption, buying out, à

' diftharge,or extinguifhment of rents,Oc.

Raquitable: com. Redecmeable.

Raquité: m. ée: £ Redecmed,bought out.

Raquiter. To redeeme,difcharge,extinguifh,buy out,

Raquoifé: m.ée: f. Quieted, filled, calmed, affuaged,

|< appeafed, pacified, —

ras Toquiet, fill, calme, alfuage, pacifie, ap-
peaje. :

Rare: com. Rare, feld,onufuall, geafon; thinne,cleere;
daintie, precious, excellent,

Rarefacient. Making pirate feant.


Rarité: £ : be , ravitie, féldomeneffe ; thinnefe,


Ras: m. The fluffe called Serge, |
1 de Milain. The fineft kind of bare Sergesora filke


Ras: m. afe:£ Shauen, cleanefhauen, cut clofè by the
ground or bottome ; cut quite away.
Campagne rafe. An euen and plaine field without
hillocks, farrowesor trees.
Or ras. Smooth Gold, Venice fluffe.
Pst d'or ras, Smooth, or vafrixeled cloth of |
G . A d

Velours


: Original fre


g | 1
EE OHIO*STATE UNIVERSITY


Pier: 2


R AS


lg ai 5 Ds af a ae
R A S.
* Velours ras. Vent Veluet. ©


Couper tour ras. To cut cleane off, to fiveepe quite
away. :
Vouloir prendre vn homme ras par les cheveux.To
le or exaét, of a man much more then he can
peeld, at .
Rafant. shauing, fheering, paring,or cutting clofe by the
root, . bottome s ulfo, raxing, or laying euen by the
ground, > ese t
Rafcas. Douffin rafcas. The great fea rein.
Rafale. as Douffin rafcas ; or (ia Languedoc) the fea
Scorpion. Las
Rafthe: f. 4 feauld, or a running feurfe, or fore (fill of
little holes) efpecially in the beads of little children,
| ŒLangucd. à 4
Rafcle: £. 4 Partridge (about Montpellier.)
Rafe: £ A fhauing, fheering, powling’;\and thence, a
“pa into,or a rauaping ofan enemies countrey ; Looke
aze, -
Rafé: m.ée:f Shawen, cut cleane off, powled clofe to
the skinne ; alforaxed,or layed enen wuth,or leuell'un-
to, the ground, ‘ ,
Mefure rafée. Clofé,aeere, or hard meafure ; firicken
meafisre,
Rafeau: m. Networke; alfo,a great flat-bottomd Boat,
Barge,or Lighter; or,as Radeau.
Rafement:m. 4fhauine, fheering, firiking, or cutting
clofé off; avaxing,a laying leuell to the ground,
Rafe-poil : m. 4 Barber,a haire-fhauer. À
Rafer. To fhawe; fheere; cut quite off, clofe by the root,
cleane away; alfo,to raze, or lay leuell to the ground;
_ alfo,to touch,or grate,on a thing in paffing byit.


the water. :

+ Rafer les herbes. To fit (as the deaw,c>c)on bearbes.
Rafette: f. The lefe bone of the arme,or leg. 5°
Rafibus de. Clofé or hard unto,leuell or euex with,

Rafibus qui bouge ? The word ofa certaine Game,

wherein one with a flaffe firikes all along the top of an

re and vp-flanding Hogshead, and thereby makes
ucke downe into it another, whois within it.

| Raficr de bled. 4 meafisre containing about foure Buf-


” fhels. ‘
Rafle: m.4 rattling in the throat; alfo,the fowle called,
- a Re, É
Raîle de geneft. The ordinarie Rayle. ~
Rafle grand. The Moorebenne, ov fmall Coot; refem-
bles the ordinavie Coot in all parts but bis feet, which
be clauen. ;
Rafle noir. The Brooke-Oujéll,or Moore-benne.
Rafle rouge, The common Rayle,
© Courir comme yn rafle. To runne verie faft,and clofe
by the ground.
Rafoir: m. A Rafour. |
: Rafoirdemer. as Rafon.

Faire la barbe à quelqu'un fans raloir. To affront,

braue,abufe one.

“A barbe de folle rafoir eft mol : Pro. A Goofe will

brooke any ieaft,or put up any abufe ; euery barfh thing

hath a gentle touch in his dull conceit. :

‘A barhe de fol hardi ir: Pro. Looke Fol.
Rafon: m. 4 delicate red-skaled fifh in the feas about
À Rhodes and Malta} tearmed thus, becaufé bis backe is

fafbioned like a Rafomr,
| Rafpatoire: m. A Rafpatorie,a Rafpe,an inflrument of

fcraping. yee AN JÆ : t
Rafpé: m. as Rape + 7 .
Raspe:f. 4 Rafpe,or @ rough File.


Rafer leseaux. To skimme ouer,to skue or fayle upon, |


Rafpé: m. ée:£. Rafped,feraped, grated; filed.


Raspecon: m. The fea-fifh called (by fome) a Heanen-


gaxer.
Rafpeux: m. eufe: f. Rugged,rough as a Rafpe.

Ras ue: f. The {cur fé of a [cauld head.

Raft file .Toreafayle,reaRault, fet on againe.
Raflafié: m, ée: f. Filled, faded, fatiated, fatisfied.


-Raffafiement: m. 4 glutting, fillings fatiating, fatis-
) \


fring. . - \
Rafafier. To fill, glut, fade, fatiate, fatisfie.
gant. Sitting downe againe.
Raffel: m. Arfe/mart,water Pepper, Killridge, or Cule-
- rage (an hearbe.)
aflembler. To reaSemble,to rally; alfa, to fet together
againe.
Raffeoir. To reft, fettle, (et,or fit,downe.
Raflerené: m, ée: fi Made lightfome,cheere full ,cleeve,
ca'me, .
Rafferener. To make light(ome,cheerefull, cleere,calme.
Rafleurer. To secure, make fure, confirme , or fettle


unto,  *
Raffis: m.ife: € Setled, Rayed,at reft; fober,temperate,
well tempered, whofe wild oats are fowen.
Pain raffis. Stale bread, j
Vin raffis. Ripe,or fined wine,
Rafloté: m.ée:f. Growne fortifh,doultifh, or childifh;
fallen into dotage. .
Raflotement: m, Sortifhne[fe dotage.
Rafoter. To dote, become doultifh, grow fond; vaine,


childifh, foppifh.


Rafteau: m. 4 Rake ; alfo, a Portcullis.


aftelé: mée:£ Raked; broken, leuelled, or gathered
together, with a Rake. :
. Torake ; to breake, leuell, or gather together,
with a Rake. <
Raftelier: m. 4 Racke, to put Hay cc in; alfa, the
flaulke, or fleale of a Grape; al/o, a row of pegs, or
woodden pinnes,to hang things on.
Couvrir leur raftelier.To cover their gaping mouthes |
(which otkerwifé would difcouer a thinne,or ilfauored |
fett of teeth.) j
Haufler le raftelier (viz. le bec,ou le nez)à. Scorn-
fully to caft up the head at.
Tout fe trouve au raftelier de cuifine: Prov. All
things are, at the length, difcouered, or brought vpon
the Stage. * : ;
Raftellot: m. wild chernill mocke Cheruill, Shepbeards
needle,Venus Combe,or our Ladies Combe.
Rafton: m. A fafbion of round, and bigh Tart, made of
butter egges and cheefe. Fra #
Rafue. as Refue. pie Pe
Rafure:£ Afhauing; a clofe cutting,or firiking; allo, a
vaxing out of written things; alfo,the fbauings or fèra-
pings of a thing; whence; ters.
Rafüre d'Aloës. À
Rafurier: m. 4 Shauer,a Barber.
Rat: m.4 Rat ; alfo, a Moufe; alfo,the fifh called,a Hea-
uen-gaxer s (alfo,as Rapt,in old French.) |
Rat d'Hongrie, The Hungarian Rat ; a little greenifh
beaft which refembles a weefell,but is no bigger then a
Moufe.  * ‘
Rat d'Inde, as Rat de Pharaon.
Rat de Lafle. The Laffet Monfe ; a beaft that beares
the Furre which we call Mineuar. : :
Rat Liron. 4 Dormoufe.
‘Rat de Montaigne, as Marmotaine, as
Rat Norique, The Norican Moufe;bodied like aWree-
fell, baired like a Hare,and eared like a in cape
mo,


VIG


Go. gle


Medak |


DT es


| ie en a
Racer To


RAT


R À T;


moft_on Nuts, and (contrarie to aber Mice} is eafily | Ratiocination: f. A difcour fing, difcuffing arguing dif. E
puting veafoning debating of matters,
pe adeppag To reafon difcoure ifeufe,difpute argue,
coate,
Rational: male:f. Reafonable,indued with reafon,ba-


tamed.
-_ de Nuremberg. The Rat of Noremberg, coated |
off like a Hare, and boning but two little boles in
Sa of eares,
Rat Pannonique, A fimall rat ofa greenifh eau
but othervvife refèmbling our weefell.
Rat de Pharaon. The fndian Rat ; as big as a Car,
and mortall énemie to the Cr ocodile , whofe gaping
mouth he creepes into, and getting thenceinto bis bow-
els ,eats them,and kills bim.
Rat de Ponte. The Ponticke Rat,or Moufe ; white of
colour,and as big as a Squirrel ; bis tayle (of a fingers
length) bauing a verie blacke tip, makes bim held, by
Some,a kind of Ermine,or Ermeline.
Rat velu. 4 Dormoufe.
Oreille de rat. The hearbe Moufe-eare ; alfo, a bind
of Chickweed,or bearbe like Chickweed.
Yeux de rat. Small cyes, pinke eyes.
Ratsen paille, A rufiling, foule cayle hr lyburly af
ling; alfo, a reuelling, or iollitie; whence; a
Plus ioyeux que rats en paille. More friske,or linelie
then Rats on a Chaff-heape,
Prendre vn rat parla queue, Tocuta purfe.
Les rats fe promenent à l'aife là ou il n’y a point
dechats: Pro. The Rats may fafely play, when as the
Cat's away,
‘A bon rat bon chat: Pro. Looke Chat...
Tropitard fe repent le rat entre les pattes du FH
* Pro. The Rat can verie ill plead Law whem the Cat
hath bim vader her paw.
Rataconné: m.éc: £. Patched, botched, cobled, clow-
ted.
Rataconner. To patchsbotebscoble,clovete | ra
Rataconnerie: f. 4 patching,or botchings di cablage
clowting, ils
Rataconneur: m..4 patcher,botcher,cobler,
Rataconniculer. Toreiterate leacherte.
Ratatiné: m.ée: f.Grubbie, forunke ihiet end hors |
Looke Rartatiné,: ~~,
Rate: £ The Spleene,or Milt.


Ayez bonne rate, Be liuelie,be merrie,plucke up your


{pivits man,be of good cheare.
Rateau: m, as Radeau.
Rateceler. Lo élowt,or coble a fhooe,érc.


Ratelant. Hunting after Mife and Rats; alfo, bowling, |


or crying,like an Ole.

Ratelée: f. A rablement a fond fav, or wings
Sa ratelée du butin. H& fhare of the. ;
En dire fa a ep cake ae ‘blurt ont bis
fentence deliver vp bis opinion, of the matter,

Rateler. ‘To bunt Rats, and Mice as ae; alfo, to
howle,ski eeke,or cry, like an Owle,

Ratelier. a Raftelicr.

Ratelle: f. as Rate.


| Raplou; m. Ling Harter rer ml Br ,


* cola, atta
. Batt. = Fa
ty


ost, GOUSlE


uing the ufe,or power,of reafon,
Ratiffé: m.ée: £. Seraped, raffed, grated,
Ratifler, To ferapes.t0 rafpe; to grate,
Ratiffer lé cerveau, To vex,or perplex the braines.
ets f..4 Raïhe ; alfa,a Grater,
Ratiflouër: m..4z pron vafpe,rake or fcraper.
Se aa f. A rafping, or férapres ae Jerapiner


Rat-liron: m. 4'Dormoufe.

Ratoir : m. A Meufé-trapor a Trap for Rats.

Ratoire: m, ARwptorie; a skinne-breaking oyntment,
medicine,or falue,

Ratoire: fThe bole in a dore fra Cat t0 goe in and out
at; alfo,a Moufe-bole ; alfoyas Ratoir.

Raton:m. 4 little Rat (or Moufe;) alfo,as Ratton.

Ratouëre: f. A paring fhouell ; aifo,a Rat-trap.

Ratrapé: m. ée: £ Reintrapped.

Ratraper. To reintrap; 10 catch, or bay hands on once a-
gaine,

Rattaindre. To reachor ontrtake againe.
attatiné: m.ée: f Grubbie, fbrunke in, shicke and
Short; alfo,as Revnoagar ont Rechigné.

Ratte. as Rate,

Ratteindre. To veach,or onertake once more.
atteint : m, te: f. Raught,or oncrtakenagaine.
atteinte: f, A reaching,or onertaking once more,
atteloup. as Rarelou,

arn . To make tender or {oft againe.
atte-volage: f. 4 Batt,

Rattier: m.ere: f. Sullenyretired ,vnfèciable;vncompa-


nable, folitarie, flrange; alfo, Spleenasicke,or belonging


to the Spleene. ..

Rattierement. Sullenly, retiredly, priuately, folitarily,
«vn(ociably,in buggar-muggar.
at-veul: m, À Dormoufe..

| Rature: £. Avage,orferatch; a raxing, or feraping out ;
ua cancelling,or putting out,

ature encrierc. A dats or firoake through 4 ui
with a penne.

Raturé: m, ée: £ R ed, , feraped, me, cancelled,
blotted, flrucke,or di defined, ont. ::

Ravacher. as Ravafer,

Ravage:m. Raaage, bauocke, fpoyle ; a violent, and
Sfuddaine ranfacking, forraying, irruption i iato;an oner-
running 07 onerflowing of a countrey,whether by incur-
“fion of enemies, or ion of waters.


4


| Ravagé: in. Ge: f. Rauaged, Spoled for een


ransacked,ma de banocke Se walled: asi

R runne,violently and fudda Asa : . , fl
avager. To rau prey upon,make ha-
mr of; fackessanfackes F mal to.ouerrunne, fud-
. dainely to outrflow. .


Rav: m. Avauager,{poyler., forrayer, facker ran-
“fier one tbat makes hauocke of all be can come


ME, Oc


} Ravaille: m. Small fifh fold onexith another. _


Raval. as Ravallement.
Ravallé: m. ée : F. Deieéted, humbled, caft or fine


downe, debafed, depreffed; lefened or fallen i in ne


brought low,taken or fwallowed downe.
Raval y= A re MU à depreffi
cafting, or fiaking, a taking, or fivallowi
«Tallon in price ; an bumbling, siege


Original from.
TRE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


R A V


RAY


bearing or pulling dovne. a
Ravalletnent de courage. Faintneffe,or a fainting ;
faintheartedne([e, difcouragement abafhment.
avaller, To pull,cafl,bring,or beare,downe ; to debafe,
.… deprefe,deieët ; lefen,diminifb, abate; bring low,take
lower ; alfo,to fivallow or fivill dovone againe.
Se ravaller. To humble bimfelfe, to floope, yeeld,
condifcend , or vayle bonnet unto ; alfo, to fall in


price.
Il fe ravalla dedans fon li&t. He fanke downe,or lay-
ed him downe, againe into his bed,

Ravanel: m. The Raddifb root,

Ravanille:£ Alittle Raddifh.

Ravafler. To raue,to talke idly. |
sn en dormant, To fleepe vnquietly,or talke in

eeping.

Ravauder. To patch,or botch.

Ravauderefle: f. A woman botcher.

Ravauderie: f. Lotcherie,or botched fluffe,

Ravaudeur: m. 4 Botcher ; alfo, an idle, or ignorant
Speaker; one that cither confounds,or vnderfiands not,
what be fayes; or one that neither does, nor fayes,
ought rightly,

Ravaudeufe: f. as Ravaudereffe.

Ravayde: f. A coyle, or flirre ; or,as Ravage. @Or-
leannois.

Rauder, 2s Roder ; al/o,to laugh,ieaf?,be merrie,renell,
riot it,

Rave:f. 4 Rape, or Turnep; the Kaddifh is alfo cal-
led fo in fome parts of France, but efpecially about
Paris. i
Rave douce. The Raddifh root,

Rave forte, The fame; orsas Raïfort.

Rave de Limofin, 4 Turnep. =i

Rave longue, The long Rapeor Turnep. $
aes e. The ordinarie Rape; alfo, the round
Raddifh. by

Rave de Savoye. The Sauoyan Rape,the greateft kind
of Turnep,

Rave fauvage. The water,and wild,Raddifh; alfathe
wild Rape, or Turnep ; fome alfo call Speedwell(or E-

* latine) fo.

,Ce mot fent fa rave, This word is clownifhor fauors
of the clowne.

Raveforte. as Raifort.

Ravel. Bogue ravel. À little fea-fifh, that bath great
eyes, scale belie, a reddifh backe and
tayle, and all other parts not much vnlike the Cacka-
rells. ‘ $

Ravelin: m. A Rauelin (in fortification.)

Il y a bien de ravelin en fon fai& AU is not well with
him,he is much out of fquare. |

Ravenet: m. The Raddifh root, © rakes

Raverdir. To wax greene; or to canker,as a brafea vef-
fell thats either not ufedyor ill kept. sl

Raveftiffement: m. Areaduefling,reinueflure.

Ravet: m. The Raddifh root.

Ravette: f. A little Rapeor Turnep. Ë Be:
La petite ravette. The garden Rampion, or wild
Rape. , Win ;

Raveul: m. 4


Ravi: m. ie: f. Rauifhed, fuddaine!y or fincibly carried


away. ownteend a :
Belle chofe eft toft ravie: Prov. Faire things are
quickly fnatched up. 2


Ravicre: £ A plotor bed,of Twrneps. ? rl FL
Ravigoré: m. ée: f Recouered;refiored unto vigor ; |


cheered up againe.


Ravigorer. To recouer, to reflore unto vigor ; to bear-
ten, firengthen,reniue cheere up againe,
AaVISOLCT. To reujue; or,a balfè-dead man to veturne
wolf Pic. | >
avine d'eau. À great floud; a rawine,or imundation of
water, which onerwhelmeth all things that come init


way.
Ravineux: meufe: f. Renenous,violent,impetuous,like
a forcible flreame,or inundation of waters.
avir. To rauifh, to faatch away haftily, pull away vio-
tently take away forcibly beare away fuddainely.
Ravifé: m. ée: f. Readuifed, well betbought of in bim-
elfé, thought better, or otherwife, of.
Se Ravifer. as Kadvifer.
Raviffant: m, ante: f. Rawifbing, rauenous, violent,
greedie, fivifi. 3
aviflement: m. À rauifhing,a rauifbment.
Ravifleur: m, A ranifher ; a violent,or forcible taker ;
4 rauenous,or Creedic companion.
Ravivé: m. ée: f. Renined,
Raviver. To reuiue; to returne,or to reflore,vato life.
Raulet. The name of a certaine great Peare.
Ravoir. To vecouer,to haue againe.
fa Que To reuiue,recouer,come againe unto bim-
ere.
Ravoire: f, as Ravage.
Ravoirer. (Sometimes vfèd) as Ravoir.
Ravolé: m.ée:£ Fled backe,
Ravoler. To fly backe,to returne flying,
Renae : com. Hoarfe; bar{h,or unpleasant of found,
Ra À f. Sedge, Gladen, Glader, Swordgraffe, Sbeere-
graffe.
Ray: m, A ray,or beame of the Sunne ; alfo, a {poke of a
. ee .
Ray de miel. 4 boney-combe.
Rayaht:m. ante:f. Radiant, glittering, fhining, bla-
xing, leaming.
Rayaux: m. Barres; or long , and: narrow peeces of
mettall.
Raye: f. Ray,Shate,Thornebacke.»
aye au bec pointu. The fharpe-faowted(or daintieft
kind of) Ray.
Raye bouclée, The Rocke-Ray; the Ray whofe backe
is fet thicke with little knurles, not valike unto buc-


bles. es re
Raye cendrée, A kind of fmooth Ray; or,as Coliart.
Raye eftclée: The flarrie Skate,the rugged Ray, À


Raye lize. The finootb Ray;whofe finnes are powdered |


with little fbecks like Looking-glaffes.

»\Rayeau Fe bec, The Botte, “<
noïted Ray. ;

aye polic, The mooth Kay. LA BaF
vi f..A sales 5 roake rom; firrow;alfo,the fpoke,

\ or flaffeof a wheele. yt TS

~ La raye des'arbres. The graine of Timber , or of

-oTrees. ” ic
La à du cul. The nock,fould,or dint betweene the

ant d’ a raye. So much arrable land
whichis to be fowed a # |
Ils font au bout de la raye. They baue done as much
asthey can; they are gone as farre as they are ablesthey
= haue no moretodoe,or tofay.  -

Rayé: m. ée:f. Rafed, féraped, croffed, or cleane put
out;alfo,rayed rewed, flreaked,or skored all ouer; alfo,
blazed, or glittered, ai S5e0A

Rayement: m. 4 rafing, feraping, croffing, blotting, or
putting out; alfo, a glittering, blazing, flaring, bright


long, Promtedor Sharp


ER, … dt nd


BAS 2 x
Fe Oe Te ee ee ee ee ee


RAY


R' & Ar


_ foining, fending forth of beames ; alfoya rewing, firea-


king or skoring all ouer.


Rayer. To rafé, crofse, blot, fcrape, firike, or put out ; at:
so, to rew, fireake, or skore all oner'; alfo, to blaze,
flare, leame, glitter, fhine brightly, fend forth beames.


Se rayer. To be full of rayes,rewes,or reakes.


La mamelle ne rayoit que du fang. Keelded nothing
but bloud ; nothing fpowted, flowed, ifued, or came
from it but bloud ; hence alfa, Il luy fit rayer le fang


par le nez,


Rayere: £ A loope-hole ; a long, and narrow cleft in the


wall of a Prifon, Dungeon, or Tower, whereby light,
and ayre (though but verie little) are let into the
roomes thereof.

Les rayeres d’un moulin à eau, The armes,or flarts
of the wheele of a water-mill,

Rayeure: f. as Rayement,

Rayfort, as Raifort.

Raymolles de blancde chapon, The brawne of a Ca-
pon, Raifins of the Sunne, and marrow [bred all toge-
ther, then made into little cakes or loaues, and fryed
with feame or Hogs fewet, and fèrued vp with fugar
firewed on them, ,

Rayole. Seeke Riolé.

Rayon: m, A farrow ; alfo,a reyne, or drayne for the
doiding of fuper fluous moifture; a water furrow; al-
fo,a ray,or beame of the Sunne; alfd, the poke,or flaffe
of a wbeele ; alfo,the lee bone of the arme, 1:41:

ayon de miel. Aa honey-combe, si

Rayonnant. as Rayant. ‘LA ioe hs

Rayonné: m. éc : f.Furrowed; made,cut out,or plow.
ed up, into furrowes.

Rayonner. To furrow; make fürrowes, or make fur-
rowie ; alfo,to radiate, {hine,leame, flare,blaze,glitter,
yeeld bright rayes,cafi forth beames. |
Rayonner des arbres, To plants on fet trees im fir-
rones.

Rayonnerlaterre, To plow vp land in fiarowes; al-
{o, to draine it,


Rayonneux: m. eufe: f, Full of beames; fill of ft:


roms. |
Raze: The broadef part of the Omoplate,or fhoulder-

blade; verie grifilie, and bending towards the back-
_. bone; alfô,as Rafe.

Trois razes d'angonnages;(in flead of Races) three

kinds of pockie botcbes.@Rab, )
Razé: m. ée: f Raxed,ruined; fhauen, clofe-cut.
Raze-forts. Forts-raxing,bulwarks-onertbrowing,
Razer. Looke Rafer.’


“drying up of fares,
Ré. Shauen ; Looke Rez. tag 2701
Re. Of it felfe bath neither fignification, nor fe (other.
‘then as a Muficall, ov finging Note) In compofition’, it
: fometimes alters not the fence ; as in Reccler,Recom-
- forter,Remercier,Remonftrer, Repaiftre,Refcha


“ | M ME A it fcaifietagcine aoe


é auffer, Relaver,&c; and backe, as.in Reculer,


_ ably, or backe againe; as in Rebecquer, Refrapper,


| Reballier. 7.
&c; and mutually,interchange- Re 4


Readjourner. To readiourne, to cite or fummon againe.
is: m. ife: £ Readmitted,

Readopté: m. ée:f, Readopted.

Readopter. To readopt.

Reaffle: m. The dinell,

Reaftranchi: m. ie: £ Reaffranchifed, made free a-
gaine ; redeliucred,releafèd once more; alfo,doubly re-
claymed,or tamed, made franc in per feétion.

Reagal: m. (The right) Aconitum,or Aconite,

R vation: £. A reaggrauation ; and (particular-
2) 5 the laft, and moft dirafill excommunication of of.


lors.

Real: m. 4 Reall, or Spanifh fix-pence; alfo,a kind of
the beft Sturgeon.
eal: m, ale: f. Reall,e(entiall ; in prefence;alfo,king-
le, princelie, royall.
Sauce reale. Venifon fawce made of red wine Vi-
neger, whole Cynnamon,Cloues,and Sugar boyled toge-
aoe Pipkin,unto the confumption of almoft their


L'oeil du maiftre real engraiffe Je cheval: Pro. The
horfe growes fat whofe maifter often eyes him.
Realement. as Reaument. |
Reapsc The fume,or finoake of Mineralls.
ian tion: f. A realization, a realizing, a making
reall.
Realifé: m.ée:£ Realixed,made reall,
Realifer. To realixe,to make of areall condition, eflate,
or propertie; to make reall.
Realifer vn contraé, C’eft le recognoiftre par de-
vant Je Seigneur dont I’ heritage eft tenu, ou par
devant les officiers de fa iuftice; afin d’ acquerir
droié reel & hypotheque,& pour eftre nanti.qRa-


gueau.

Reallegué: m. ée:f. Realledged. ‘
Realleguer. To realledge, to alledge againe.

Realler. To returne,to goe againe.

Reant. Braying,as a Stag.

Reaplani: m, ie: £ New-lenelled, made plaine or euen


againe.

Reappoinété: m. ée: f. Pointed anew, or new fharpe-
ned at the point; alfo,newly,or againe,agveed,

Reau: m. A deepe reyne,or farrow.

Reaudition: £ 4 fécond bearing ; or,a bearing ower


aga 171€.
Reaument. ra pices! Ly throughlysa(fis-


redly,certainely verily,in verte deed,
Rebaigné: m. ée: £ Rebathed,or bathed againe.


~ | Rebaigner. To bathe
Razis. A kind of white oyntment ufed by Surgeons for the | Rebaillé


aine.
: m. ée: fi Reflored.gintn backe.
Rebailler. To reflore,gine back,returne a thing that was
giuen ; gine anew,or againe.


Rebailler forme a. To beflow a new fhape,or anotber


Ly ag PRE

Rebaifer, To kifeagaine, }

Rebaifotter. To reiteratea frequent kiffing ; to hiffe of.
tenandagaime. =

fiveepe ouer againe,

+ mi €es £. Bent ; bound; or bandied,againe.
. To bend; bind; or bandie,againe.

i: m. ie: f. Reexiled, againe banifhed.


. Ke
| Repannii Toveexile,tobanifh againe.


Rebanqueter. To make (or be at) a new, or another ban-


Resp = ée: 3 vo ee aa
. Torebaptifè rife ‘ond ti
Sate deg ms esa


Seuere ; froward,rude,or be omer à" €,
e=


A "TRS ©


R E B


Rebours: m.fe: f. (Adje&t.) Croffe, ouerthwart, way-
ward, furlie ; rude, froward ; wild, fauage ; untratla-
ble,unfociable, )

Rebours. ‘A reb. (Adverb.) Arfeward,backward,pre-

| pe pofteroufly oblikely,avry,ouerthwartly quite contrary,

| full again{t the courfe, wooll,or haire ,infide out upfide

, | _ dowae,cleane kamme.

: | Rebourfant, Going arfeward, backward, the wrong

| way; working againft the wooll, or haire ; turning, or

ftanding infide outvoard,or the vpfide dovwne,

! Rebourfé: m.ée: € Difordered, arfeward,ouerthwart,
awry; wrought azainft the wool, or baire; turned ia-
fide outwsrd,or upfide downeward; placed,or planted
the wrong way.

A flot rebourfé. Vp the water, againft the tyde, or
flreame,

Rebourler. To worke againft the wooll, or baire ; fet, or
place. the wrong way; turne infide outward, vpfide
dovoneward; 20e arfevoard,or backward; take a courfe


_—”"


A TT ae.) Ue Or


acainft all cour(e.
Rebourfer chemin. To returne, or come backe (the
[ame way he went.)


Rebourfer de coeur. To repent at the verie beart.
Rebourler le poil du drap. To row, or to raife the
wooll, ov np of cloth,

Rebourfer vne riviere. To paffe up a riner ; to fayle,
or (wimme againft the freame thereof.


kers ra'(e.the nap of new cloth,

Reboufché: m. ée: f. as Rebouché.

Rebouffé. as Rebours (Adje&.)

Rebout: m. Arepulfe, fiyle,denyall.

Reboutant. Repulfing,repelling ; denying.

Rebouré: m. ée: f. Repulfed, repelled, reietted; foyled;

- alfoydenyed, refuted; alfo,taunted, rebuked ; alfo, bee
fowed,or layed vp.in a conuenient place. vit


fifing denying; taunting,rebuking. ‘
Rebouter. To repulfe, foyle, drine backe; repell,reiedt ,

refile deny; alfo,to rebuke, taunt, or take up; alfo, to

beftow, or lay up in a conuenient place. :
Rcboutonner. To bud; or button, againe.
Rebranfler. To fhake againe, "7" "0"
Rebras: m.A tarning up,a tucking or foulding upwards

orinmards; alfo,a fadanne

‘A double rebras. Thicke and threefold.

Vn entendement à double rebras, 47 odde bead, a

_ notable wit,a terrible pate.

" Manches, ou robbes à double rebras. Sleewes, or
govenés (> long, or fo wide, that they may be twice tur-
ned or tuckedup. Ea aint

Rebraflé: m. 6e: f Turned, foulded,or tucked vp;alfo,
plotted,or contriued anew. s ss
Bien rebtafté. Confidently, audaciou[ly ; alfo,earneft-
fy,48 one that meant not to dally.

Vn des plus re


Sieft of the companie.


man
‘ee Inqueft
nn al


, To | ane. ;
lement: m, Abe liege intl a
L 2,07 1 qr gts +
| [Rés m.e: Era) dr rake gaine © =


D ee


brel


Go gle


ST TO eee


Rebourfoir: m. The pron combe wherewith Clothwor- |


Reboutement: m. A repelling, foyling, reiecting ; re- Liu
Re

_. | Rebutée: £4 repulfe, foyle ; reieétion,denyall,
| Rebuter. To repulfe, repell, foyle, drine, put, or thrupt


_ Recacher. To hide againe.
: Recache
beeles. ae :
| Recalculé:'m.ée:f Recaleulated,whereof a new cal-
jm ee Torecalculate,or make a nev computation
of. Booms
Recamé: m, ée: f. Fbrodered.


_, | Recamer. To imbroder. |
brafiez. One of the forwardefl,or bu- | Recancelé: mée: f.Recancelled,cancelled againe,

Rebraffer. To turne, fould,or tucke vp, the fleeues, érc 5
Rebric 1É: mA motine,or aduertifément in writing vp=


uh. ~ | a succinét relation, of things alreadie delinered at
“mate «motne ot adertfement nso Pela A ie NY,


R'E B
Rebrifer. To bruiftjor breake againe.


Rebrocarder. To retort a ieajt.
Rebroié. Seeke Rebroyé.
Rebroffer. To returne, to retyre; alfa, to bend; alfo, to
turne up the pointedge,or end,of athing.
ebroffer la terre. To breake vp the ground,
Rebrouiller. To mingle, or confound anew,
Rebrouffé: m.ée: £. Turned,tucked,bent vpwardjal/o,
returned, retyred.
Rebrouffer. To turne, or tucke vp the fleeues ; alfo, as
Rebroffer.
Rebrouffer chemin. To turne backe, or to returne
the fame way be came,
Rebroutter, To brow/e,or nibble againe.
Rebroyé: m.ée: f. Brayed, flamped, povended againe,
Rebroyer. To bray, flampe,or powend againe. :
Rebruire. To refound ; or to make anew rumbling:
Rebrunir. To burnifh,or florbifh anew.
Rebuglants Lowing, bellowing agaive ; alfo, refoun-
* io


ee
Rebugler. To low, or bellow againe; alfo, tori t
+ JE gaine; allo, toring, or to


Rebus (ou, Equivoques dela peinture à la paroïe)
bereprefentations of ordinarie,or odde things, accom-
panied with mottos,or words which as they fland,feeme
to make a fentence, but pronounced Frencb-like, and
without flop, de[cribe the things reprefented : As for
example; afoole being painted kneeling, with a horne
at bis mouth, and the words, fol age nous trompe |
neere bim, pronounce them as aforefaid,and you baue, .
fold genous trompe,

Rebut: m, The reffufé,offalls,outcafis,or leauings of bet-

‘ter things ; alfo,a foyle repul(e,reteRing, putting backe.
Brebis de rebut. Drapes, Cullings,or Kebbers ; old,or
difeafed fheepe which be not worth keeping.

‘Madame de rebut. A loathfome queane, rafcallie

drab, ouerworne punke, pockie whore; whence, Les |
yafles couleurs de Madame de rebut, The Pocks.

table: com. rm able; foylable.

Rebuté: m, ée?f. Xepulfed,foyled, reiected, denyed ;

-alfo;retyred witbdrarwne,difufed; from. |


backe; to reiect,veif@, deny.
Recaché: m.ée: f Hidden againe.
ter, To feale once more.
Recalcitrer. To kicke,winft, or firike backe with the


culation is made.


ml, of an Aljeé,
ne


Recapitulation: £.4 recapitulation; a fhort rebearfall,


Recapirulé : m, ée: f. Recapitulated,
Recapituler. To Le vor rehearfe, relate, make a
~ Shore repetition of a long difcourfe. y
arder Ja laïne: To card wooll oucr againe.
Recargaifon: f À backe-franghtjor the lading of a fhip
bome againe. . | R
. e-


Gear Fron
TAE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


“es


AVE à


Fat ow


=i


R EC:


Recarreler fouliers. Ta fet ner fôles on fhooes,
ecaflé: mée :f, Caffed, or abolifhed againe,
Recafler. To cafft,difebarge; abolifbagaine, .


Recavé: m.ée:f. Hollowed, or digge re ;


Recayer. To hollow,or dig into,againe.

Receindre. Te gird anew.

Recelation: f. Amextreame concealing iding Seppe
fion; Coucring,or keeping verie clofe.

Recelé: m. as Recelée.


Recelé: m. ée:f. Suppreffed, clofe hidden, much con-'


cealed, exceedingly difembled ; al, receiued as a
flolne thing,

Recelée : f. 4 concealement, fuppreffion,clof? hiding of;
alfo,a fine of 60s due to a Lord Cenfuel by the pur-
chafor, which hath not, within eight dayes after the
purchafe made hun acquainted with it,

Receléement. Hiddenly, couertly, clofely, moft pri:


uily. :
Recelement: m.4 Recelation; alfa prinie receiniag


of flolne goods.

Receler. Clofely fobide, emorsnmert, difémble, fup-
prefe; alfo,to veceine flolne things.

Recelereffe: £4 concedlere(fe ; alfo, a woman that pri-
uily receiueth flolne goods.

Receleur: m. A mu ro fuppre(for ; a fècretre-

= cetuer of

Recelle,& Ref as Recelce,

Recengler vn cheval. To gird a horfe againe.

Recensé:m. ée: € Numbred, told, reckoned; reci-

= ted; rebearfed, related ; mufiered, ‘perifed, viewed
ouer.


Recenfement: :m, Anumbiing,telling.reckoning vp of;


archearfing, relating, reciting ; alfo;a miuftering, per- |


seen ouer.
cenfer. To number ell yeckonselate,reciteebearfes
rer out ouer,

Recent: m, ente: f. Recent, frefh, new, late, biet now
come or done.

Recentement. Recently, #efhly, newly, lately, a little
before, fine afier,

Recepé: m. ée:f. Cut of, or away; ali, repaired,
mended ; or vuderfet, (as an undermined wall) at the
bottome.

= an tout Je bois, To flocke it por cut it wholly as


eye
Receper vne muraille. To repaire, oF mend it at the

R rs
ecepice. as Recepifle.

Recepiflé: m. Am Acquittance,Difeharge,or Nage.
knowledeing the receit of athing.

Receptacle: m. 4 receptacle fiore-boufe,or rware-boufe;
allo, a finke or fever; any thing thats fit for the recti-
wing or (afe-keeping,of things.

Receptaire: m. A‘Recéptarie ; a note of Phifeal re-

à ef Aréceit Prainien tele. corepente ad-


3 the full fatisfattion of a debt.


des finances. Gentrall Re- !


ceits, de places Cas receit, of the Kings reuenue ;
Theft be Paris, Amiens, Rouén, Caëni! |
Bourges, , Tours, Poiétiers, Rion, Agen, |
. Lens
Mains REG ecepes palier ane du do
ines tticulieres tant du,
milneie des. cs


R € A réceityreceining; alfo,
ri | n


Exchequer. oni


Lo)


er, Lyon, Aix, Grenoble;& Di- |
cunedefquelles font departies les plus |


ti


q


R EC


Receptoire: mm. À Receptorie ; any place,or vefell,thats
fit to receiue.

cepveur, as Receveur.

Recerceller. To boope, or incircle anew ; aljo, to curle,
or turnevp,asthehaire,

Récerche:£ .4 diligent (earch, inquifition, exami-
nation ; a férious groping, feeling, fi fing, founding.
Cela eftderecerche. That is greatly fought for, of-
… layed for, much banted aficr, exceedingly i in ve-


Recesctiés im. ée: f, Diligently Searched, or examined;
sa bunted, inquired, or fought after; greatly in re-


Rybasens Diligently to fearch, examine ; bunt, in-
quire, after ; sen to feeke, looke, found, fetle,
grope,,

Recercher le bout de lafufée, To intreat of; or fall
intoshis former fubieët.

Recercheur: m. A diligent fearcher, examiner, inqui-
rer; feeler, founder,
eceu: m. as Recepiflé.

Le m, eué: £. Taken, receined, amstarrepted


Recevable? com, Receiuable, acceptable, ddmittable,
fit to be take
À en RE Currant money.
Receveur: rm A Receiuer.
Aux receVeurs les honneurs, & aux femmes leurs
douleurs: Pro. Looke Femme;

Recevoir.To receine,take,accept,admit of;to intertaine;
comprebend,containe,
Fin denon receyoir, Reafons for the reieEling of a
pleas or forthe cafling of. a caufe out of a Court s hereof
fone | betemporall,and dildtorie ; (ome perpetwall, and
peremptorie.
Se faire recevoir par main fouveraine {when 2


Landlord refüfis;vvithout inft caufe,the homage and fe.


altie of bis valfal; or when two Lords contend fir'the
tenure of one fief, the all (who inthe fecond cafe is

* not bound: to ack; canes either. of them as long as
their fuit continucs) bath hisrecourfe unte fome royall
Judge (that vfaally dealesin feodall caufes\and by bimi
may be admitted as amply to all purpofes,as if the Lord
bimfelfe had done it : But the Lard mu{t in this cafe be
Summoned unto the admiffion.

Recez: m,Recoylings,retyralis,rctreats,goings backesal-
fa departures or abfences from ; and benñce,Les Efcho-
les ont leurs recez, Haue their vacations, or times,
whereinfchollers be not at them.

Rechaftaudé: m.¢e: if Setsor Prefented, om ‘a Sfeaffold


RÉ aRäuder. To fn fiona ald ane


Rechamailler. To bache, bese vf mal, ge
. Offend
Rechaner. 70 bray like like an Afe, Tir
Rechange: f Shifi,cha interchange, ;
Doré, & argenté à rec ps ange. Perel iis onine
- terchangeably filuered and ee Quilts ST oe
Robbes de es Change,or chics af garments ;


Ri of a a répare fits.
f. Shifted, feoorfed, interchangeds
Re toe
echa oer «Afin chine
ging; a ¥@ changing agai
Rechan


> Tofhift, interchange, exchange ; alfa, to |


change againe,


changer againe. nscale
. Re-


Xxx ¥


of mes Ar, interchange, eset |


ones Ore ee ar


bof
eee be Pe Awe 0 - 3


a
à


R'E C
Rechanté: m. ce: f. Refounded, or fang, againe; af,


repeated, reiterated,rebearfed. ;

Rechanter. To fing, ring,or found, againe ; alfo, to re-
peat,reiterate, rebcarfe,

Recharge: f A recharge, furchargenew charge.

~ Ils cannonerent avectelle recharge. Their Artille-
rie went off {a ibicke togetber.
Par fa lettre il luy fit nouvelle recharge.He moned,
vrgéd,or folicitcd him anew by his letter.

Rechargé: m, ée: À Recharged,charged anew.

Rechargeoiier: m. A Spring ; the Ginne fet for Snites,
W'oodcocks coc.

Recharger. To recharge ; to give a new charge unto, a
fief charge on;te redouble a commi(fion,commaund,or
affuult; alfo,to refolicite,or to reply.
Recharger par deflus. To furcharge, ouercharge, 0-
nerlay ; alfo,to lay ouer,or =

Rechaffé: m. ée: f. Repelled,retorted,thruft back;cha-
fèd,or drinen from. .

Rechaffer. To repell,retort,thruft backe ; chafé,or drine
away from.

Rechatouiller. To tickle againe,

Rechaucher. 4s Rechaufler.

Rechauffé: m.ée: £ Heated againe;alfo,heated;Looke
Efchauffé. à f à
Rechauffement : m. Aheating againe ; afo,a heating,

or putting into beat.
Rechauffer. To beat,or warme againe; alfo,to heat, put

into beat, giue warmth vato,

Recha yn chien. To make bim luflie, or defirous

of the bitch ; to bring bim into, prouoke bim vnto,


luft.
Rechaule: m. 4 Chafing-difh ; alfd,hot coales,or embers
(ufed fometimes in flead, or for want, of a Chafing-


difh. “

Rechoutte : mée:f, New boféd,or [hod ; bofed,or fhod
againe ; alfo, couered (as a tree) at the root, foot, or
bottome. -

Rechauflement : m. 4 new fhooing ot bofing,a fhooing
or bofing againe ; alfa, a couering (or new couering) at
the root, foot or bottome. \

: Rechaufler. To beflow new bofe,or fhoves; on; (Se Re-
chauffer. To put them on or put them on againe;) alfo,
10 cauer at the root, foot;or bottome; whences
Rechauffer vn arbre, To lay new earth about the root
atree.


Recheance: £4 pofeffonin truft; the ufe or cuflodie of


a thing on condition,or with a ifo,t0 réflore it.
Rechef. De re. Acaine efrefogffoonts, ane.
Recherniner. To watke Ne CHR
Rechcoir. To returne, fall backe or againe.
Recasehe, & Rechercher. Looke Recérche, & Re-
-cercher, Wann) LS Lis
Rechevillé: m. ée : £ Pegged,or pinned anew,
Recheviller. To peg,or piine, anew. me
ES Nour rer rte a
Tore 5 € .
Rechiffrer. To make new ciphers ta recxamine by cipbe-


avt A En +


Maty
He:


PRE ON ee


+


rx


FAUNE


x
ps


ringsto cipher ower againe 2! 1
à Ra mA ie ring, parti, lt)
4 Rech né: m. ée: planes, ring, fore tings
| cence mi ms

grabbedor foure looke. ee


Rechigner. To frovone , lowre, powt,be furlie, looke ful-


Rechiné, & Rechiner, as Rechigné,& Rechigner.
Rechoir. Looke
Rechoifir. To chufe againe.

Recidive: £ 4 recidiuation,relapfe.

Recidivé: m.ée: f. Relapfèd, fallen backe,or againe.
Recidiver. To recidiuate,relapfe, fall backe,or againe.
Recimenter.Tocement,or parget ower anew,

Reciné: m. 47 after-noones nuncheon, or collation; an
Reciner. To feed betweene dinner and fupper ; to make
Recipé : 0. A Phifitions Receit;the bill,or ticket where-
Reciprocation: f, 4 veciprocation,returning,mutuall |
Reciproque: com. Reciprocal, mutuall, interchange-


Reciproquer. To reciprocate, interchange, returne one


Lin
Fe cs m, Arecitor, a repeater, a rehearfèr,a de-


= “fecuted, pur)


| or parfue bis villaine which is gone, without bis leaue,


REC


Len ore im dogged.


Rechigner


es dents. To gyrne,or grinne like a dog.


coir,


Aunders-meat,
an afternoones collation.
by be direéls the Apathecarie.
yeelding or interchanging.
able,one for another.


for another,
Recirer. To put new Wax unto,towax againe.
Recife. Hearbe Auens ,Bennet,or Blefed.
Recifion: f. Arecifion, cancelling, or cutting off.
ecit: m, A recital, rebearfall, aarngsion, declara-
tion.
‘Sans faire recit du demeurant, Omitting the


clarer.

Recité: m. ée: £ Recited,repeated,rebearfed.

SE : m0. .A reciting, repeating, rebear-
fing.

Reciter. ‘To recite, repeat, rebearfe ; to declare, or tell
ouer againe; alfo,to cite, adiourne, or fimmon the [e-
cond time.

Reciteur. as Recitateur.

Reclaim: m. Apraying in aid of a Superior; a petition,
or complaint made vaio a vibe paves alfo, as Re-

© lain; or,a bill of Complaint exhibited againfi a debtor,
who being bouad in an obligation under the Seale Roy-
all,breaketh bis promife. ‘

Reelain. s Reclaim ; or, a refifall tg pay the contents of
an obligation ; or (as in fome cuflomes) the fumme li.

, mitted by aSentence.

Reclam: m. as Reclame.

clamation: f A contradiftion,gainefaying or crying

-againgt; alfo, a challenge, ov demaund; a profecution,
purfiit.or fait in Law; alfo, an often calling upon, an

: earneft crying vnto. ; ‘

Reclame: f. A Soboe,or Heylarw; a lowd calling,whoo-
ling, or whooping to make à Havoke floope vato the

Lure; alfo,a clayme,or challenge... ;

Reclamé: m. ée: f Called often or inflantly, earnefil

~veryed unto ; alfo; ed, contradiéled, gainfayed ;
exclaimed , complained agaïnf ; alfo, fucd, pro-

riieds alfe demaunded, challenged ; ow-


Reclamer. To call often, or inflantly, to cry unto ear-
neil; alfo,torepugne, contradict, gainefay ; exclaime
vpn, complaine againfl ; allo, to.fue, purfue, or pro-
o\fecute in Law; alfo, to claime, challenge; demaund ;


~ One. 3 472 a
Reclamer fon homme de corps. 4 Lord 10 profecute


Re refide ina forraine Prouinct,or


ecliner. as Encliner. . u


Re-


Original from :


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


- =
“ai


REC


Reclorre, To fhut,or clofe vp againe; (alfo; as Biner, in
Languedoc.) ee à 3
Reclos : m. ose: f. Shut,or clofed up againe)
Reclouér.Tonayle againe. > Hs *
Reclus: m. use: f.Clofelp keptia,or fout up as à Monke,
or Nunne ; retyred, folitariez 1% 00e | à
Recocquebil + m, Ges f.Snackit;or whofe end turnes
upward, whente, 90 pe $ wat
Nez recocquebillé. whofe bridge is flat or hollow in
~ the mddeflyand turnes vpat the end," "7"
Recogneu: mi eué : f, Recognixed,acknowledged,cal-
led onto remembrance, \y OS ter
Recoguoiffance:f. À recognizing, agnition, acknow-
ledgement; alfo, a Badge, or Cognifance’; alfo; an ac-
knowledgementof tenure ,or that be holds bis land of a-
mothe yA EU ota es AA '
Recognoiffant: m. ante: & Recogaizing,acknowled-
ging; remembring;or calling onto mind.
Recognoiftre, To recognize agnize, acknowledge, ad-
| Kom, take notice oracquaintanceofs call ynto mind,or
© memorie ; alfo,to take a precife view of,looke efpecially
or diligently at ; alfo, to acknowledge atenure, or that
he holds etch ai :


Il fe recognoift à la Jangue'Italienne. He is well |


 feene or skilfallin the Fralian, **
C'eft 4, ake de (pervite ui ne recognoift
gue fon propre veau; Looke Batbarie. 196
olie faire;& folie recognoiftre font deux paires
de folie: Prov. To doe enill; and then brag of it; isa
double wichedneffe. ;
Se Recoibler. To withdraw,or to retire bimfelfe. >
Recoiffer. To dreffe or attire (as @ woman) ber bead a-
new, to put om her coife againe. » Riis a
Recoigné: m.ée:f. Knockedorwedged,in againe, |
Recoigner. To wedge,or knockejinagaine, \
ecoin: m, A corner,by-place,odde hole PCI


Recolé: m. ée: f (Tefmoings recolez) recaltedjand ;


reexamined,

Recoletnent de tefmoings. 4 reexamination of wit
nefes (efbecially when ‘bey bane not depofed fillypor
plainely, enough) before they be confronted with fuch as
they baue accufed : Tis alfo vfed, fometimes, in tryalls
upon ciuill Aëtions; bowfdeuer their former depofitions
are fri read unto them.

Recoler tefmoings. To reexamine witnefes,or fummon
them unto a reexamination,¢>c; as in Recollement.’!

Recollationné: m. ée:£, Reexamined by the Origi-


nal.
Recollationner, To take a new collation ; alfo,to reex-
| amine a copie by the Original, or one writing by ano-
ther, |
Recoller. To glue againe, Rat *
Recollets: m. A certaine upflart fett of Francifcan Fry-
ers.
Recolorer. To colour anew,to (et frefh colours on.
Recolte: f, 4 gathering,reaping barueft,
Les foldats 6nt fait leur rccolte. Haue beene a for-
raging ane got in their forrage.
Recombatte: To fight againe. é
Recomblet. To shee unto heape, to fill up againe.
Recoinfort &c. Looke Reconfort &c.
Recoinmandable: com, Recommendable,commenda-
ble, praife-worthie,
Recommandablement. Recommendably,commenda-
bly, praife-worthily, 0
Recommandaces: f Funerall prayers,or praifes,
-Recommandatif: m. iue: £2 tiue,recom-
‘mending. Boge 125) ob oot


need A Ogle


R EC


Recommandation: £ Arecommendation.
Recommandatoire: com.commendatorie,récommen-
R datorie. dé te
ecommandé: m, ée : £. “Recommended, prai
commended unto, x rss,
“Avoir vne chofe pour recommandée. To. have a
Care,to make account,of.
ecommander. To recommend,or commend,unto ; to
_ &iue one chargesto commit vato the care, of; alfo, to
Praife,or fpeake well of.
Ie me recommande à leurs efpaules. woe to their
Shoulders, for they ave fire of a cudgelling,
De prefcheur qui fe recommande en tout temps
bon heur nous defende: Prov. From begging Prea-
chers fortune ftill defendus: : ;
Recommanderefles:fswch women as by commending,
- and undertaking for ynaids, procure them feruices.
Recommandeur: m..\A recommendor, commendor,
pratfer, : À
ecommencé: m, ef, Recommenced, iterated, e-
newed,hegun againe, :
AT To recommence, iterate, rencv, begin
ajreji. . y x
Ce fcratoufours à recommencer, This worke re-
quires (0 manyrenewings, as it will neuer be done; or,
So may we toyle full hard.and be nowbirthenéerer, or
newer baue done, ne.
Recommendable &c. as Recommandable &c.
Recommuniquer. To récommunicate, reimpart, con-
ferrewith againe.
Recompenfe: f. A recompence,meed reward, cuerdon,
Recompenfé: m.ée: £ Recompenced, guerdoned, re-
warded remunerated. ;
Recompenfement: im. 4 guerdoning recompencing,
vemuncrating,rewar ding. TT
Recomp
reward. 103:
Recompenfeur: m.Arecompencer.
Recompofer. Torecompofe;to frame anew.
Recompter. To count or tell ouer,againe,
re ateur: m, A réconciler, pacifyer, peace-ma-
er. i
Reconciliation: f. 4 reconciliation, pacification, at-
: fonement agreement, ‘
Reconcilier, To reconcile, pacifie, attone, agrees make
eace, renew loue betweene, bring into fauor againe.
econcilier vne eglife, Fo férge,clenfe,reconfecrate
a Church by fafling,praÿers, crc. Li FE
Recondaniier, To recondemne, or condemne againe.
Recondit: m. ite : f. Hiddemconcealed kepefecrets
Reconduire. To reconduët, bring backe, lead or guide
| homeward againe. ee or?
Reconduifeur: m, 4 reconduétor; aleader, bringer,
guider backe,or bomeward againe. ’


Cr. Torecompence, guerdon, remunerate,


De mefchant hofte bonreconduiffeur: Pro, Looke |


Hofte. ;
Reconferer. To reconférre, or talke of the matter a-
gaine, :


Reconfermé : m, ée: f. Keconfirmed, reinforced, re


alfured.
Reconfermer. To reconfirme,reinforcereafure,.
Reconfeffer. To reconfe[fe,or conf againe.
Reconfiné: m.ée: f. Reconfized,banifhed anew,
Reconfiner. To reconfine.or banifh anew,
Reconfifquer. Toreconfifcate, or make a new feifuré
unto the Princes,or publike,vfe,


Reconfort:m.Great folace,or comfèrt much con{olation. .
Reconforté: m. ée: f. Much comforted, ~


Xxx iy ~ Res
1


3 [Le
ARTS
PAT AE Bags es


sale re à de


y


EL tx


Lo


4
4 À


“3
R E C
Reconforter. Te comfôrt, or (olace much: to cafe, or
checre vp,excéedingly.


Promettre fans donner eft fol reconforter: Prov.
Lo promifé onely does a foole much good ; or the foole 1s
fully farisfied with bare promifès.

Reconfronter. To reconfront, reaccoafi, compare once
more logether.

Reconfuter. To reconfutesor confute againe,

Recongreger. To reaffemble;to rally.


” 2


Reconjuré: m. ée: f. Reconiured.


Reconjurer, To reconiure,to coniure againe,


Reconnoiflable: com. Acknowledgable.

Reconquerir. To refubdue, reconquer conquer againe,
to recouer,

Reconquerre. as Reconquerir.

Reconquefte: £ A reconqueft; a recouerie by con-


quel.

Reconquefter. To reconquer, to recouer by conquefi;
to winne, get,or purchafe againe.

Reconquifter. «s Reconquerir,

Reconsé: m. ée : £, Hidden,concealed,withdrawne.

Reconfement: m. 4 concealing, biding withdrawing.


‘| Reconfer. To conceale bide withdraw.


Reconfiderer. To confider,or thinke, better of the mat-


ter.

Reconfigner. To reconfigne, reaffigne,reappoint ; veex-
bibit,vnto.

Reconfoler. To recomfort. |

Reconfolidé: m. ée : f. Reconfolidated, clofed-vp a-


gaine.

Reconftruire, To build NA againe,

Reconfulter. To reconfult of take new aduifé on.

Reconteimplé: m.ée: f. Recontemplated,reniewed,

Recontempler. To recontemplateyeuiew.

Recontefter. To reconteft; make new proteftation of,or
complaint unto.

Recontraété: m. ée: f. Recontraéted. ;

Recontraéter. To recontraét,or paffe a new contradt, ;


c


Recontraindre. To reconftraine,to compell againe. »*


Reconvaincre. Toreconuince,

Reconvenir. Te reaffemble, reunite ; agree anew; alo,
10 fit,or fuit paffing well ; alfo,torecommence a Suit in
La


Ww. ;
Reconvention: f. A new agreement; alfo,the reuiuing
of a Law-fuit.
onvertir, To reconuert.
Reconvié: m.ée: f, Reianited,
sn To ét FES
econvoquer. To rea or call to, againe.
Reconvoy: m. A reconuoy,or pr 244 5 4
Reconvoyé: m.ée: £. Reconuoyed,recondutied.
Réconvoyer. To reconuoy, reconduët; bring, or lead, a
returner onward on the way. :
Reconvoyeur: m, 4 reconuayer,a reconduétor;
Recopier! To copie out againe.
Recoq
_peart, in comparifon of that he was.
iller, To wrigle,wrythe,turne inward, or into it


| Self, like a worme when tis touched. a ceil a


ori
alfe, ta reuiue, ax lue, grow peart, a beat


Le


thread when tis broken ; alfo, to w


Sat


: VAT EIRE atgraffe. HS 2 1
Recoquiner: Te La begging, to return tobeggerie, |


vieu» GOCE


uillé: m.€e:f.as Recroquillé;al/o,luftiecranke,


vn livre, To rumple, or turneup, the


Record: m. A Record; « witneffe(that remembers well
the thing be witnelfes;) alfo,a teftification;alfo,arepeti-
tion,recitall,r (im Court)of things done.
Records, Two perfons whom a Sergeant vféd, here-
tofore,to baue with bim(or call unto him) when he ar-
refled, or ferued aWrit on, a man: ‘ the firft cafe,

ela them on the fhoulders he willed them to beare

witnelé what be bad done; in the fecond, they figned,
together with bim, the returne of the Writ ; or , if they
Gould not write be fignified in it their names, and pre-

: fence : Theft Records were to be fufficient,and well-

— ean e = Bers place;and neither kinfinen,
lyes, nor of the boufé the partie that i cd |
the Sergeant, mr ga La ao

EE f. i recordation,a remembrance.
ecorde: m. ée: f. New-firung; alfo,teflified; €-
peated, recited, related(as a nee oe seh
ret 7 Tiberi actin a pr
Exploié recordé. Executed by 4 Sergeant in the pre-
Stnce of Records, or two witnefes.

Recordeler. To firing anew;alfo,to tyne againe anun-
twifted cord,or firing.

Recorder.To put a new firing unto(or,as Recordeler;)
alfo,to teflifie; alfo,tovepeat,recite, relate vebearfe; to
report,certifie,notifie make a returne(as a Sergeant of
the writs deliuered unto bim,).. -

Serecorder. To remember or call to mind.
tm. A witnelfe; one that was prefent at th
deed doing and ve Sitwell. - =.

R é:m, ée: f. Recorredted,redrefed,

Recorriger. To recorredl, review, redrefe.

Recors: m. 4 Witneffé,a Record.

Recors. Remembring,mindfull of,pauing in mind,

abe re hoe Nu layed Gr put
ecoucher. To lye downe,or get tobed,againe.

Recouldre. To low ouer px à us

er, Torwnne;glide,or flide,backe. .

Recoulourer.To give new colour,to add a new dye,un-


to.
Recoupe. La rec. See Recou
Recouper. To cut againe; ap, to reply quickly and
Jharpély unto a peremptorie demaund, or quip; to re-
turne taunt for taunt pip for nip,gird for gird ; alfa, to
urge, or lay hard unto with quipping words, or quefli-


ons.
Reco : € Shreds,clippi irings ,chippings ;
à middle fort of Br Lippusgs, parings chippings ; al/o,
Recoupler. To couple againes
. Bending or bowing backward.


Recourbé: m.ée: f. Bent,or bowed backward,
Recourbement: m.4 bowing,crooking bending back-
ward,or againe. 2
Recourber. To bow,crooke, bend backe,or againe.
Recourir, To runne bafiily ouer; alfo,to refeue.
Recourir à To runne,recourfè,orbaue recourfe,unto,
Recouronner. To crowme againe, -
Recourquebillé. as Recocquebillé,
Recourroucer. To anger againe,
Recours: m. A recourfé,refiuge retreat, a returning un-
= to;(alfo,an Outer for goods or a letting of lands by Out
cry; Wallon;) alfo,a redrefe,remedie,belpe.
- Recours tie, Avouching ; a calling of a do-
~ nor, or feller to warrant, and make good, the graunt or
- bargaine which be palfed, cf
Recours refervé. 4 refermation of libertie for one
that is condemned,or caf in Law, to feeke bis redveffe
where he thinkes beft.
Monnoyede bon recours. That pafes were
Co


PCA


Recourfe : f. as Recours. |
Recourfer. To tucke,truffè,er turne up the garments.
ecoufu :m.ué: f. Sowed againe. —
Recoufure:f. A new/fowing,or flitchingup.
Recouffe :f, Areftue,recouerie,recouering ; a delinerie
from prefent danger. :
ouvrable: com. Recouerable,reftwable,reobtainas
ble;alfo, gettable, procurable,
ecouvrance: f, A recouerie, reobtainment , procure-
ment. :
Recouvré: mée :f. Reconered, reobtained, refewed ;
alfo,gotten,procured,
Recouvrement: m, A recouerment,recouering reob-
taining ; alfo,a getting or procuring.
Recouvrer. Torecouer,toreobtaine, to refèue,t get a-
gaine ; alfo,to get, or procure.
Recouvreur : m. 4 mender of flated, or thatched hou.
fes.
Recouvrir. To couer againe,
Recoux :m.oufe: £ Refewed, recouered from an imi-
‘nent danger.
Recoy :m. Reft,quiet,eafe.
Recracher. To pit againe.
ecrant.as Recreant,
Recreance :£. A reflorall, reftitution, giuing backe of;
alfo, a delinerie of poffeffion; and, a poffeffion giuenin
a fuit unto one of the parties who prowes that be en.
ioyed the thing all the yeare before) by Sentence proui-
Jonall,or vpon truft, untill the canfe be determined ;
alfo, wearine (fe, faintneBe, faint-heartedne[fe; alfo,a
refrefhinent,yecreation,reuiuing cheering vp,
L'Incident derecreance. A fait wherein the de.


maundant is bound to forfeit a fumme of | if the .


thing be fues for proue not bis; and the defendant like.
wifes bound, not 10 impaire it while the poffeffion is
bis.


Recreant, Tired, toyled, wearied, fpent, iaded, out of
beart,or faint-hearted,cleane done,

Recreatif: miue:f. Recreatiue, delight full, pleafant,
[port full merrie. :
Recreation : f. Recreation, paftime, port, a delightful

or pleafant exercife.
Recreativement. Recreatiuely, with recreation, to bis
recreation, (port fully delightfully pleafantly,
Recreer. To recreate, refrelb, cheere up, delight, fêlace,
veuine,pleafe,
Recremens:m. Excrements.
as Crefpu.
Recrespir vnemuraille. To new-parget a wall.
Recreu:m.eué:£ Tired,wearie,toyled,jaded, fpent out


” of beart, faint-hearted.
Jamais François ne furent veus recreus de bien
faire : Prov. Looke François,
Recreuë:£ A fupplie,or filling up of a defeftine compa.
nie. of fouldiers exc, 3
Rectever. To burft againe, 4
ecteufé: m.éc:f Hollowed againe,
Recreufkr. To bollow or make bollew againe.
Recribler.'Tojift ouer againe, :


Recrier. To crie egaine,gine a crie for a crie ET a=
lowd vatoa lon dersaund, < —

Recrimination : £.4 recrimination,an accufation of an
accufer,the retorting of a crime, ;

Recritniner. Te recriminate, retort a crime, accufean


accufer., Ait :
RARE as Recoquebillé ; or as Recro-
-


quillé,
_| Recroire. To beleene againe; alfa, to refeife,rearrep ;


ee gle


REC


— “Hoste reflore,deliuer or gine backe.
Recroifer, To crofe,or cancell againe,


ecroifet: mette: f. whence; Croix recroilette. A


, Grofle Croffet,or Croffelet(im Blazon.)
Recroi : M, A reincreafe ; anew,or fécond growth.
Recroiftre. To reincreafe ; to grow, or ring Up,acaine,
Recrocquebillage: rm. bookie crooking, bending,
bowing ; winding,or turning inwards,
Recroquebillé, & Recroquevillé, as Recroquiilé.
Re no ui :m.ée © faackit,
retorted; bowing, 4g, 07 turaing ; bowed, foule
ded, wound,or turned, eet, = eas
) t : m.A crooking bending bowing,ve-
torting,turning,winding or foulding jmpards,
Recroquiller. Toretort,crooke,bend,bore,turne, fould,
or wind jnwards,
Recroquillonné. asRecroquillé,
Recrotter. To bedaggle,or bedurtie againe.
Recru. as Recreu.
Recrudi: mie:£ Made,or growne,raw.
Recrudir. To make(or wax)raw,

Ctangle: m. A firaight,or euenangle; a corner whofe
lines ave ioyned {o,as no part falls out longer or fhorier
then other.

Reéte: f. Right, equitie,juflice, boneftie.(v.m.)
Recteur.(in Languedoc, as in France Curé)A Curate,
or Parfon.
Recteur de  Vniverficé, The Rector, the Vicechan-


celor.
Reétificateur: m. A Redtifier.
Rectification :£ A reétification,or a rectifying ; a cor-


rechion, purification, (eparation of pure from unpure
. Ll


_ fluffe,by a fécond diftiliin

re? m.ée: f, rar purified; twice
difiilled ; refined by a fecond,or by frequent diptilling.

Rectifier. Torectifie, correct, purifie, purge ; to feparate
the pure, fine,right, from tb'impure, grofe, adulterate
fiuffe,by diftillation,

Reétorerie: £, 4 Reclorfhip, a Vicechancelorfhip.

Reétorial : m.ale: £, Reéloriall, Retlor-like; longing
toa Reétor,or Vicechancelor,

Recueil : m. A colleétion,garering,reaping; alfo,awel-
come,or mtertainment,

Recueillant. collecting, gathering together ; alfo,inter-
eee welcoming,

Recueilleur: m. 4 Coleëtor, a reaper, a gatberer toge-


ther, 4

Recuciller. Te colle, reape, gather together ; alfo,to
welcome,or intertaine,
Grande moiffon lobeifsant recueille: Prov, Great
is fied Haruef} of th’obedient ; they that can yeeld will


thriue.
Recuiét :m. Cte: f, Againe,er often;boiled ; alfo,wyret-


chesn/erable,pigganalie picking pinching, paultrie,

ging.

Recuire. To/eeth often,or againe ; ao, to harden, as
with ouer-much baking, | |
Recuireles carreaux, Te blanch the Copings,or Plan.
chets whereof coyne isto be made,
Recuire lor. c’eft le paffer vn peu fur la braife,

Recuiffon: f. 4 new feething,or,a feetbing againe,

Recuit. 4s Recui&,


Recuitte de lai&t. whay thickned,or curded,by feetbing,


fleetings,wild curds.


-Recul:m. 4 recoyle, or giuing backe; alfo, the binder


part of a thing. : cnn
Reculade :f. 4 recopling,a going,or gining backe; alfoya
by-hole,a remote or fecret corner, : Re


R E C


Reculant. Recoyling gining backe; En reculant.Back-
ward,arjeward, i, :

Reculé : m. ée:£ Recoiled, vepulfed; put or drawne
backe; remoued,withdrawne, retired ; folitarie, all a-
lone, farre off out of the way, vf ,
Reculé de fon honneur. ae or bereaued of,
put or fallen from, the honourable place which be held,
Tuves trop reculéd'icy: Thou baft beene 100 long,or
too tt: om bence. ;

Reculée:f. A recayle,retire going or giuing,backe.

Reculement: m, A recopling, retiring, withdrawing,
a giuing backe , a going farre backe, or from, aremo-
ning; alfoarefiffing,denying delaying, drawing backe


om, à.

Reculer. Torecoyle, retire, gine or draw backe,remoue,
withdraw,goe from ; to deferre,delay, driue off ,runne
backe,come to no end,

Reculer pour mieux faulter. Looke Saulter.

Il le recula arsiere de foy. He negleëted him,refpec-

né bim not, caft bim at bis beeles, cared no more for
im,

De cheval qui recule au pluftoft te delivre : Prov.

Soone vid thee ofa horfe thats relie.

Pour neantrecule qui malheur attend: Prov. In

vaine he flinebes shat ill hap attends,

Qui contre efguillon recule deux fois fe poind:
Prov. He's doubly burt that kickes againft a pricke.
Reculons. ‘A rec. Recoyling, avfeward, giuing backe-

ward ; cleanc contravie,quile kamme.

Gaigner fa vied reculons. To line by going back-

| wards viz, by making of ropes. ;
Reculoruns'Arec.Backward,bebind,or behind-band;

alfo, forfaken, forgotten, left behind, folitarie, all a-

lo )


ne, TREE:

Recultiver. To till,or plough againe.

Recupercuté. @Rab, Looke Repercuté.
ecurer. To recure,to beale againe,

Recufant. Reicéting,refifing.

Recufation :f. Arecufationsreieétion,refifall; awai-
wing or appealing from.

Recufé: m.ée:f. Reiefled, refifed; appealed from

Recufer, To reieét, refife ; waiue,appeale from.

Recutir. To circumcife,to clip or cut about.

Recurit. Circumcifed; clipped or cut about ;»alfo, new-

| skinned: (Quandle prepuce eft trop reboulé, le
_ gland demeurant-defcouvert, on appelle vn cel re-


va F


a


+


it.)
ver, To tunne;or put into a fal,againe.
edaigner. To redaigne,to vouchfafe once more.
Redanfer. To daunce againe. ts
Redarder. To retortor throw back,a'Dart.,
Redargué : m.ée: f. Checked,blamed,reproued,repre-
. bended,controwled. :
Redarguer. Tochecke, blame, reproue, reprebend ,con-
trowle,
Redargution:£. A redargution,checking,reprouing,re-
et prete 5 AE
‘Redater. To redate,or anew date vnto,
Rede: com, as Roide :¢Gale, -
Reddition: f. 4 reddition ; a redeliuerie; 4 refloring,
nrendring, yeelding por giuing omer of.
tre, To redebate the matter ; 10 cauill, or brab-


D


Red Vv; Ne com, Indebted,in arverages,bebolden,or
Reda bvable dent, clo are, ail 1


: = +


cau,

Redebvoir: m. 4 double duetie; or as Redebyance,
Redebvoir. To owe doubly,toowe againe and againe,
Redeclamer.Todeclaime oncemore. =
Redeclarer. To redeclare,to reexpreffe,repeat, relate,


Redecorer. To redecorate,or bedecke againe,
Rededié: m.ée:f, Rededicated,
Rededier. To rededicate , to confecrate or bollow a-


Rededuire. To rededuét,rediminifh, reabate. -
Redefaire. To undoe, or defeat againe. 102$)
Redeleguer. To redelegate,reappoint, give a new come


Redeliberet, To redeliberate,redetermineof. 1:22.
Redemander. To redemaund ; recall, aske againe ear-


Redemanget. To itch againe.
Redemener. To ftirre, waggle, fig; toffe, tumble, a-


Redemeurer. To lay once more,
Redemolir. To redemolfh, refubuert, onertbrow a-


Redemourer. 4 Redemeurer.
Redempreur:m. A redeemer, aranfomer, a delinerer,
Redemption :£ 4 redemption,yedeeming ranfoming;


Redenoncé : m.ée: f Redenounced,
Redenonicer. To redenounce ; to publifh; threaten; or


Redent: m. 4 double notching, or iagging, as im the


Redefcendre. To redefcend,or goe downe againe,
Redesfetiner, Tu open once more.

Redesfier. To diftruft ancw.

Redesjuner. To moke,or cata fecond breake-fzf.
Redefpouiller. Againe 10 fpoyle defpeyle uncloth firip


Redevable See Redcbvable,
Redevaller. Loredefcend,let,putor tumble, downe, a-
Redevance. as Redebvance.

Redevenir. To returne,rebecome,or become againe.
Redevider. Torediuide,or make a new diuifion.
Redevoir. 2s Redebyoir,

Redhibition:£. À reftitution ; or, a legall delinerie, or


Redhibitoire. whence; AGion red.


Rediéte:f 4 Le. x qu rt


RE2DA


arrerage, of a debt ; alfo,an obligation, or bebolding -
neffe. Tet l bic
Redebvances. Cefonrles devoirs, ou charges
es quelles les proprietaires font tenus envers: uel-
que Seigneur feodal , cenfuel, rentier, penfion-
Naire,ou terrageur : Ra


.


liner. To redecline,to decline againe,
new,


miffion unto,
ne(lly,require often or inflantiy.


gaine.


gaine.


a délierie of,a pur chafing,or buying out of.


fammon anew.


teeth of a [aw.


or bare of.


gaine.


_ pining backe ofa thing unto bim that fold it.

An Aftion which

 driues bins, that bath fold a naughtie thing, to take it
backe againe.


er oe fas redicte: Prov.
Trutk delivered preuents replies.
Redi eo 4 IR flaunder anew.
Bed Looke Réedifer. ;
Redigé : mée: f. Reduced, brought backe, or into; di-
: peel areca CAM compelled unto,

wr


edigé par efcript, Couched, reported, fet dovone in |


ting.
er. Toreduce; bring backe, or into; vrge,or com-
unto; toranke, order, digeft; couch,or fet downe,


inwriting.
Redigerer. Tovedi(gefi,redigef.


Redi


Re.


nal trom


Ord
THE OHIO’STATE UNIVERSITY


RES


leading or fetching bomeagaine ; alfo, a recouerie,or a
de uefl ofa loft countrey,


ACL: m. A retrait,or fecret place of retirall ; alfa,
as Reduite,


uiét: m.ête : £ Looke Reduit.
ire. To reduce, bring backe, or vato ; alfa, to lead


R°E D


Redimé: mée:£ Redeemed.
Redimer. To redeeme,ranfome,recouer buy ont,


Redins: m. Redding clothes.

Redire, To repeat, rebearfé, recite, fay or tell auer a.
gaine.
I n'y aura que redire. L will find him worke ynough
I warrant bim. st s
Ou il n'y a queredire. Full, perfect abfolute, exqui=
Site; without fault without want,without lack; wher- |

im nothing is omitted,na more can be defired then shere |


eduire à fa memoire, To remember, or call unto
remembrance,
Reduire quelqu’un à memoire de, To remember,or

ut one in mind of.

eduire vn enfant gafté, To reclaime him,
Reduire en pouldre, To make dufi, or powder of; to
ep or doe into,to pewad or beat vaio, powder.

Reduifant. Reducing,bringing backe.

Reduit: m. Keduced, brought backe, of into; conduc-
ted home againe ; abo led forth 3 alfo,brought.
Reduit à l'herbe, In extreame want, molt bare of
meanes, ingreat ncceffitiez at a verie low ebbe,

eduit de livres en quatcrons, Extreamely waf-
ted,whercof at leafl three quarters be pent, .

eduit au petit pied, Looe Pied,

eduit au tapis. Cleane out of meanes, and imploy-
rs ie" at play) left a bareboord, whofe money is
all lo


Reduite: f, 4 Blockboufe,or little fort. |

Rée. 4 faultie,or guiltie perfon; one that is accnféd, or
arraigned ; a defendant in any fuit.

Reedification: f. A secdification, reedifjing, new.

uilding,

Recdifié : m. ée: £ Heed fd agène built,

Reedifier. Toscedifie,to build againe,

Reel :m. Amanner of catching water-fowle.

Réel:mielle: £ Reall,egential, ‘
Tailles réelles. #bich are impofed on,or due by reafon


is,
Tant redire ? what ! fo many repetitions ? [hall mine
cares be [lilt cloyed, {ball my head be ener beaten,with
one tale?

Redifner. Tadine againe.

Rediftribuer. To rediftribute,or deale backe againe.

Redite: f, as Redidte.

Redition : 6 4 reforing, farrendring, yeelding vp, gis
ning ouer of,

Redituaires. Moines red, A fei of Francifèan Friers,
which baue lands and reuenewes ; therein differing
from the Mendicanis,or begging# riers who are 10 pof=
Seffe nothing.

Reditte. as Redide,

| Redolent: m.ente : €Redolent, fragrant ,(iweet- finel-
ling odov ifer ous, pleasant,

Redompté : m, ée: f Refubdued,or tamed againe,

Redompteur: m. A refubduer cf.

On : m, A gift returned; or one thing giuen for ano-
thers alfo,the requitall of an ill by a good, turne, «

Redondage : m, Groffe,or courfemeale ; grudgions.

Redondanment. Reduadantly, excefiuely, fuper flu.


oufly.
Redonder. Te redound, ouercharge, fall vpon, returne
backe; light, fall,or breake out ; run ouer with fiullneffe,


abound in exceffe. f ofland; which fallow the land,
Redonner. To grue backe ta returne, potent clement. Really,in verie truth in-verie deed,


Qui du fien donne Dieu luy redonne:Pro,God re-
wardcth almrs-giuers, } fc?
Redonter. 2s Kedompter. ,
Redorer. To gild over anew. area a Ly
Redormir. To fleepe againe. :
Redormiffement : m. 4 falling into a new fleepe, a
fleeping againe. ATTS
Redouble : m.4 redoublement; double fould,or bonght;
arcdoubling, : oA?
Seoul : mu Ce:f, Redoubled; often repeated or
+ . eae


9 ens Diente
Rerehein, m. A redoubling, an often doubling.


Réement : m. ibe braying,or bellowing of a red Deere,

Reémeré. as Remeré, ’ '

Réentement; m. 4 new graffing, a graffing againe,

Réenter. To graffe anew,or againe,

Réenterrer. To reenterre.; to put into the earth againe,

Réer, To Lellow,to bray : (In tearmes of bunting we fay,
that the red Decre bells, and the fallow troytes or
cropnes) .: ‘

Réeftre. To be renewed,or be againe.

Refacon : f. 4fecond forme new fefhion reformation.

Refaconnet, To refirme, 10 make of a new, or of ano-


ther, fafbion. x £
Redoubler. fo redouble; to repéator double,ofien, | Refaiét: m.@te:f. Renewed,repaired,improned, made
Redoublepesimufvileubhe te dig .. TH anew amendedsalfesplompe, fattened. heh.fed; fk


Redoublure : f, 4 redoubling. rene
edoubtable: com. Redoubtable, dreadful, feare-
fill terribles vi eT

R té:méc:f, Redoubted, feared, awed ; drea.


ed.
Rédoubter:To dread,redoubt, feareawe, |
Redoubtillon : m. Dés co any denice wherwith
birds oe ighted away,
Reine A horfe to turne diners times with one
eal : ts
Redoutanti Redoiubting, dréading. jé
«tr 3 & Redoutillon. as: Redoubter, & Re-
D RP PS ROM Li
edrefié :1n.ce: sffraightened. + -
Redreffer, Ta rere rain fer make firaight,
à" correl;réforme,amend. x. diets 71
Reduction: f. A redultion,reducing, bringing backe,


len, puffed up,as par boiled meat,
M te cel Ademy refiét: Prov Looke


ju. \
D'unwilain refaiét Dieu nous garde: Prov. From
a churle growne rich good Lord deiiuer us. i
Refaillir. To faile the fecand time, “Riwohss
Refaire, To repaive,amend, renew, make new; aff, to
Parboyle,or make plumpe by parboyling, 1. Hint
Serefaire. To recauer bis health , t0 grow firong,
_ wholes well in heartyagaine, te ne
ire fon nez, To picke-vp bis crummes againe.
Robbe refait moult l'homme: Prov, Good clothes
doe much for amañ(that would be bandfome,
Refait, Looke Refai@. at sis vue ~
efarder, To paint often,or ouer againe,
Retafcher. To anger anew, esd
Refauché: m.ée:f Catyor. mowed, againg. i a
| : C=


CTS | Coe ee Pine rm


5


REF


Refaucher.To cut,or mowneerer,or ouer againe,

Refect. as Refaiét.

Refection: f. A refettion, repaft, meale; food »fufle-
nance,

Refections d'une maïfon. The reparations of à

boufe.

Refeétouër : m. 4 Re fettuarie, or Fratrie ; the roome
wherein Friers eat together,

Refendre. To cleaue,to cut againe.

Refendu: muë: f, “Clefii in the middle, or into balues ;
clouen afinder or in two,

Refente:f, A cleft, flit, or cut (efpecially) in the middle
of a thing.

Refente de fucilles. The line, or dinifion that runnes

along,or appeares in the midale ef, leaues.

Bois de refente. Cleft wood, fuch as pales, ec, are

made of.

Referendaire: m, The Lord Chancelor of France was
tearmed fo in old time ; Now the Referendaire is an
Officer inferiour to be Maifier s of Kequefis, for whofe
cafe it fecms,he dr bis copanions were, at the firfl,ordai-
ned, for they report unto them rb'effeét of Petitions
preferred vunto,and of Patents that paf ont of, the fe-
uerall Chauaceries of France ; and are met Lar=
med otberwife, Rapporteurs,

Referer. To recite, repeat, sdbbudirlntydiem

Referir. To fmite,or flrike againe.

Refermer. To clofe,or (hut up againe.

Referrer. To new shove aborfe... .

Refefler. To whip,ierke,or [courge againe,

Retefter. To make a new boly-day.

Refeftier. To féaft againe,

Refcftoycr. The fame, ‘

Refte. vne noix reffe, Am bard-fheld nat: EBowrb.  !

Refhron:m. The third gate of the wombe; or the mouth
of the matrix, which is cleft acroffe, and not length-
wife,as the Hymen, Fe.

Reffonder. Looke Refonders

Reftort.zs Raifort

Reficher, To faften againe, 21

Refier. To truft once more.

Reiger: rarefix,reclofes clot coagulate, or eme.
ther againe. :

Refiguré: m.ée:f. Reficured, WN i
Refigurer. To figure,or paint aner,againe, (9%)
Refiler. To fpinne;or twift anew. Satta
Saleem Tofimell,vent,or wind againe, …: ©

Tr. To retort, or beat wee 4 flame spe
dome backe,or caft backe flames.

Reflater. To flatter anew. - : 1 th OB} des

eee : M, An egregious flaterer, a palpable claw.


Reflechism.te: £. Reflected ; bowed, bento turned


Reflechir Torefleit; tobow, geo turne bac, I
chir. Thefame,
eurir. To flourifh


+
+


oe


serine 1
Éhoe i n #


after t ;
t e on sist:
RÉ on: 4 pinging


. (wimme abe
es againesalfosto “rts |R net rites erie salsa refleBing;


Reflux nthe ior binge tf w fern, |


os 54
209 |


bearten anew,
Refomenté : m.ée:f. Refimented,cherifhed againé,
Refomenter. To vefoment, to warme or cherifh againe,
efoncé: mée: f. Headed againe, as caske ; al/o,plun-
ged,or gone downe to the bottome againe.
efonder les def pens. To reflore, pay, returne, or gine
backe ,the cofis and charges,
Refondre. Te cafl aneve,to melt againe,
Refondre les gens.7o breed luftie bumors in PER
bodies,to make young men of old.
Refondrement,& Refondrer, as Renfondremenr,
& Renfondrer.
Reforgé : m.ée : f. New forged new made, wronght or
bammered anew,


: Reforger. To forge, worke hammer anew.


eformateur : m, A reformer corretier amender, :

Reformation : £ Reformation amendment correétion.
eformé: m.ée: £ Reformed correéied amended ; al.
{o,new-formed,or brought to it former fbape.
Reformez. Reformifls, an Order of Francifean Fry-
ers,

Reformer. To reforme, amendcorreëlrepaire bring in-
to better fafhion.

Refort. Looke Raifort.

Refouétter, To whip,or [courge againe,

Ketone, To fearch, feele, gvope; root, or dig for, a-


Refouir. To dig into againe.

Re + oc os of Dale blunted; obtufe ; rammed
in; troden downe, on againe ; alfo,tyred,wea-
Pe 0 à EME led #-

ulernent : m. A blunting, dulling ; ramming in,
treading downe; a tyring, foyling,ouertoyling.

Refouler. To dull blunts foyle, fivaine,vex,griene,tyre,

. with ouerlabouring ; alfo, to tread upon againe,
Refouler le dos d’un cheval. To gall a horfés backe.
_Refouler aux pieds, To flampe on, ar tread under
+ foot.


alt la pouldre. To ramme in the powder.
Refouller. as Refouler..
Refouloir: m. The Rammer bea; wherewith powder
is rammed into a Peece,


Reboittis. Torefibifh, repolifh ; to father fleeke: up
Refournir: To


fiernif anew
ect To furre ; alfo,to sora in cn pri
To miftake,roue rre,firay anew
eee com, by y fubborne lf, obfii-


chaghonr® us reboun
Refrain d’une balade. The Refret,burthen,or downe of
a Ballade. A
Refraindre. Loo Refréindre. CH
Refrainte:f. A ridling.yefrayning,refiraint, '
RER ie: fe Refrefbéd, refrigerated; renew.
Refraihins to refeflceesteftgeate, recreatesrts
ewer Viola Gan Pata!


Refranchir. To leapeor skip ouer againe,
éesf


. Strucke againe; alfo, refletled,
_ veuerberated.


‘ova reuer
Refiapper. Toreturne blowes fer blowes,to  firike ott
againes alfo,to re “tué to rer chan


: M 45


R indre, To isin cnn a ee
backes.s 3
€


e under pull


Original from 1


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


ROE FS


Se refreindre;To reffaine, forbeare,temper maifer,
moderate,himfelfe, ‘

Refrenation -f. A reffaining; a bridling,refiraining.

Refrené : m. ée :f. Bridled,maifiercd, moderated; re-
frained re ftvained, kept fhort,beld in. :

Refrener. To bridle,vepreffe,maifter ymoderate,refirain,
bold under, keepe fhort,pull in. j

Refrequenté : m.ée: f.Refiequentedirehaunted.

Refrequenter. To refrequent, reifit, rehaunt svfé, or
fall to,a former aunt,

Refrefchir. as Refraifchir.

Refrefchifferment: m. 4 refielbmentyrefrefhingrefri-
geraling,recreating ; renewing, \

Refrefchifloir : m. 4 fmall fontaine,

Refrcloté : mée:f. Frixled,curled,

- Refreter vne navire. To new-rigafhip.:
Refricafler. To rte againe.
Refrigerateur :m. 4 refrigerator,refrefher,cooler. |
Refrigeratif : m.iue:f. Refrigeratine, cooling, refrefb-


ing, \

Refrigeration : f. A refrigeration, cooling, refrefhing.

Refrigeratoire: m. A refrigeratvrie, or cooler ; the
part of a Lymbeck wherin water is put to hecpe the ret
from being too bot. ’

Refrigere: m. Cocleneffe,arefrefhment.

Refrigeré : m.ée : f Refrigerated, cooledrefrefhed,

Refrigerer. To refrzgerate,coole,rcfrefh.

Refriquer. To rub againe ; to renew an old griefé,torub
an old fore.

Refriquer vne chofe iugée, To renine, or fet on foot
an(old) adiudged fuit; to goe about with a matter a-
ezine, ,

Refrire. To frie againe. A

Refilé :m.ée: f Frigled, curled pranked, tricked up.
anew, +

Reftifer. To ftizxlecurle,pranke,trickevpjanew, —

Refriflonner. 70 pers pes rire

Refroidi:m. ie: f. Cooled ; flackened.

Refroidir. To coole , or take away thebeat of; to flac-
ken; 10 calme,

Serefioidir. To wax cold, grow calme , become lefe
vehement or earnefl in. :

Refroidiflant. Cooling; flackening.

Refroifler. To breake afunder againe,

Refroncé : mée: f. Redoubled, much gathered ; alfo,
exceedingly wrinkled crumpled, frumpled ; & thence
allo, frovening,

Refiongnant. en ref. Frowningly, frowardly, fallenly,
with a fower countenance. uaa

efrongné:m. ée sf. Frowning, furlie, fallen, of a
| _ fower looke, . ;

Refrongnement: m.4 frowning,lowring, fullennefe,

| 4 flcrneneflesor fowernelfe of countenance,


» 1900 4


Refrongner. Te frowae,lowre, looke lernely, fullenly,


_ ofowerly on it, |
Role Te rub againe.


Refu :m, as Refus; 4 refifall; a, the refife of any


thingn sian be
RCA RE à oan pe er
Refuge: fige belpe , fuccour, a Sanéluarie,
forowd, fhelter; aplace to flie vnto a place of fafere-


trait.


Refugié : mée fled, um; reforted'unto fir fuccour, | R
Metro) : Oo.


and affiftence. oak pet steb iy a
> Rs eerie
Refui: m.uic: £. Fled froms or fled backevnte, wa
Refuiant. Fling, founning,auading. — nih


R'E G
Refuir. 70 flie backe; alfo,to flun,auecid,efthew, forfake,
run from, ;


Refüir fur (oy. À Deere to make backe into the conert;
4 vermine to ie vato,or kee pe within,bis earth; (their
Arengtbes.) ,
efuite :£ 4 flight or courfé;a running or fhing,backes
an euafion,or auoidance,

Refulger. To Shine ,glifler glitter, looke verie bright,

Refumer. To dung ouer againe,

Refus: m,A refitfall repulfe,deniall,
Qui rome derefus. The refife,outca(ls leanings of bet-
tert INGSe ~

Refulé: m.ée: £Refifed, denied.yeietted,repulfed neg.
lected, forfaken,
. 7 refife,denie reieétyepell; caft of yenounce ,

or fake,

Refufeur sm. A refifer; deniers arcieéter ; forfaker,

: “Abon demandeur bonrcfufeur : Prov. Looke De.
mandeur,

Refutation:£ A refitation,a confistation.

Refuté: m. ée:f. Refited,confüted yefelled,conninced ;


da

Refüter. To refute confute,ye fell,re prone conuince,con-
found by reafon.

Refuyant. Flying, fbunming sfchewing,anoiding.

Regabeller. To double atax,cuftome, or toll; 10 impofe
auwew one,

Regager. To regage,or wage againe.

Regaigner. To regaine; alfa to gaine doubly.

se Regaillardir. Looke se Ragaïl!ardir.

Regain: m. A later math, or lateward bay; th'after
graffe,or after crop of bay. ;
egal:m. ale:f Regall , Royall, Princelie, Sone-
raigne.

Repale whence, Droi& de Regale. The Soueraigne
Patronage of the Archbifhoprickes Bifhoprickes, Aba
beyes , and other Benefices of Royall foundation; due
unto the King of France, and inherent unto bis per-
on, in the right of bis Crowne, and there fire not to be
transferred, committed, or aliencd unto any other :
Hereby bee bath the profits of them duging vacancie:
and the pronifion,colleétion;and prefentation,of fuccef~
Sorsuntothem, At this day onely three Archbifhop-
rickes, and 32 Bifhoprickes,ave fubieét unto it; the reft
baue beene, at feuerall times,exempted by fpeciall pris
niledges : In Normandie when diuers Lords ave at
Sisit for the Patronage of a vacant Benefice, the Ki,
by this right of Regale, enioyes the profits of it umill
the fait be ended,or they agreed. A


: La Regale de Theroanne, ‘The’ on ,or go- |


» wernment of Theroanne, Fithe who one.
“path bigh, meane, and low Juflice within it) is the
tempora Lord, 2 St ha ,
Ficfen Regale. 4 zoble Fief, beld immediately, and
in Capite,ofthe King. “Ee
Regaletnent. Regally ,hingly;royally,


Regaler. (Inthe cufiomes of Arthois; Senlis ; & Val. |


lois) c'eft quand le Seigneur feodal prend, &apf
» plique à fon profit, les frui&s des heritages de fief,
ou Cottiers, à faute de les relever, & droiéturer.
se Regaler. To make as much account,and take as great
acare,of bimfelfe,as if he were a King.
cgales destey. The mufical inftrument, called Ri.


ols.


fle: The fame. we a
Regalifte :m. One that enioyes or flands fora Benefice
shat is fubieét unto the Droi@ de Regale. à | ey
| egar ;


CAR AT": 2: ;


«
==
in


D


RU E.G!
Regimbeur : m. A winfer, kicker, [purner.


Regime : m, Regiment yule,commaund, fway, domini-
on, autboritie, gouernment.
Regime de vivre. An order of diet prefcribed.
Regiment de gensde guerre. A Regiment of fouldi-


R Ei Gi


Regard: m. A looke; view, fight, afpétt ; aneye; alfa,
~ an eye vato,or eying of; a regard, re/pect, confiderati-
onyof; alfa,tve head of aconduit. i
Pour monregard. Fur mp part, as forme ; alfo, for
my fake.


/ Regardant. Seeing eying;bebalding, marking, beeding ; ers. : 3
| alfo,warie,circum|peéi,vigilant, that lookes narrowly Region :£.4 Region ,Prouince,Realme,Kingdome ,coaf),
tovenerie thing, | countrey, quarter,part place.
Regarde: m.éc:f.Lycdyviewed,looked at bebeld mar- Earegion du coeur. The fite,or feat of the heart.


ked,regarded. e
Repardeinent : m.A looking, (eeing eying viewing, be-
bulding , marking, /pying beeding,vegar ding,
Regarder. To lookeèye, fée,view, bebold; fpie, toot at,
beed,rezard.
Regarder de gros oil; &, Regarder de la queuë
de Focil. Secke Ocil,& Queuë.
De ferviteur qui fe regarde donne toy foigneufe-
ment garde: lrov, Tbe feruant proud,and of bimfelfe
vefpettine, is in bis duetie oftentimes defeéline.
Quand d'autry parler ru voudras regarde toy, &
wutairast Prov, #bem on another thou would{igladly
rayle looke well into thy felfe,thy tongue will quaule.
Regardcur : m,.A looker, pectator,viewer,eyer, bebol:
der.
Regardeure : f. Alonke, fightsview, afpett,
Regardure, as Regardeure.
Regarnir. To regarvifh,to new-furni{h.
Regafter. To pill or fpoyleagaine. os
Regazouiller. To reportor to record,as birds,one ano-
thers warbling, I |
Rege: f. Ameafüre of three foot and a balfe, vfed by
Surmeyors in the countrey about Bourdeaux.
‘Regeance :f. as Regence, ;
Regeiner. To retorture,toracke once more.
 Regclé :m. ée: f: Fraxén or onergrowne with ice, à:
aine, A
Regeler. To frecxe againe,
Resence :f The Regencie, or Protecior{hip of a king-
dome ; alfosa teaching infiruciing moderatings'eading
.…unto;in Schooles; alfa,a forme,or lecture, of Schollers.
Regenner. To imitate;or counterfeit jeerely. |
Regent: m..4 Kegent,Proteclor,Vicegerent,or Gouer-
_ ont of a Kingdome during: an interraigne, or the mi-
novitie,or abfence,of the Prince; alfo;a Regent, Rea-
der, Teacher, Moderator of a forme in a Colledge. :
Regente :f The Regeutefje, or Proteétreffe of a King-


Regir. To rule, gouerne, fway,mailter command, Seig.
nori'xe ouer. 4

Regiffer. as Regir.

Regiftration :f. Aregifiring,a recording,

Droid deregiftration. Looke Droiét.

Regiftre: m. 4 Record, Regifier memorial; abooke of
remembrances dayes booke ; and (more particularly) a
booke of Entries, Aëts,Orders,or Decrees, 7
Droi& deregiftre: & Droit de regiftre ou Con-
tenror, Loeke Droiét. 3 alin

Reglacer. Tofreexe againe ; alfo, to feta neweloffeon,

Reglaner. To gleane ouer againe. |

Reglement. See Reiglement.

Reglifle: f, Lickorice ; Looke Rigalifte,

Reglifler. Toglide,er flide backe.

Regluer. To glewagaine, : ‘

Reglure: f SeekeReigheuree = =,

Regnant : m.ante:£ Kaigning ruling ,gouerning ; alfo,
lying about,

Regnard: m. A Fox, ;

Regnard de mer, The fea Fox ; a long-tailed, and

. vanke-fmelling fifhwhich in time of danger fwallowes
up ber young ones, and the feare being paffed vomits
them up againe.

+ -Baïbederégnard. Goats-thorne, Tragacantha; the

Shrub that yeelds Gum Dragagant.
La parole du regnard. ind ofcharme.
Queuë de regnard. Fex-taile , tailed wheat ; (an
bearbe ) alfo,as under Queuë.

~ Raifin de: . Garden Nightfhade; alfo, the
bearbe Paris, One-berrie,Tiue-loue.

© Touxde regnard. A fetled,or old-growne cough,that
flickes by a manas long as be lines.

Vin de regnard. Such wine as being much drunke of
Sharpens the wit, & makes the drunkard crafter then
be


| Was, ‘
\» Coudre lapeauda regnard à celle du Lion, To
proceed bei era and violently; both by firatagems


e


Regenté: m.éesf. Ruled,gonerned: alfo,taugh _ ant firength; of to attempt that by craft which be can-
derated,read intojin Sehooles, = Te. 21g 2 not obtaine by force,


." Crietau repriard l'un fur l'autre. To raile extream-
ty one upon another,
7 Efcorcher le regnard.Tofpue, caf, vomit ; (efpeci-
‘ally vpon exceffiue drinking;) either becanfe in fpuing
Lei sie no A 23211 - one makes a noyfe like a Fox that barkes; or (asin Ef-
ont againes. 5 )
Regetter. Looke Rej ig


| corcher)hecaufe the flaying of favnfauorie a beaft will
2 si SY et] ere ena a £ od
; Sapa s ra rate fovayed ten Fey ey on Ga Sard. To loofe bis time, or


Legenter. To rule; or play the ‘Regent ; to gouerne
_. Kingdome during an interraigne, or im the minoritie,
er. abfence of the Prince; alfo, to teach, read, or mode-
rate,in Schooles,  ” Cia \
ercer. as Rejarcer. !
rmer. To bud,or


:


Tirer auregnard. To caft,vemit, fpue, 15
Reppars qui dort la matinée n’a pas la langue
3 “ep éek Prov. Morning pps ibriués]
| Regnard qui beaucoup tarde attend Ja proye:
Prov. when Foxes tarrie long they bope for par-
chafe. wh. j ough
£ e


PY


MALE OO: gle Fee THE GHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


REG


Leregnard cache fa queué:Pro, The craftie knaue
bides that which woul, bewray bim,
Leregnatd ett devenu hermite : Prov. The Fox an
Hermut is become, (beware your Geefe good bufivines)
appliableal(o, when a crafiie or naugbtie fellow re.
mes himfelfe,and growes truely religious,

Leregnard eft pris, lafche les poules: Prov, Fed
when any dangerous knaue is intrapped, or clapt vp ;
ufed alfi,in mockerie of a common woover > which ba-
wing deceiued many widowes and maids in bis time, is
at the length ouertaken,and caught by one thats worse
then any of them, -

‘A regnard regnard & demi: Pro, Let craft meet,
or be matcht | with cunning:

“A regnardendormi rien ne chet en la gueule:
Prov. Nothing à got by drow/inel[e; preferment mul}
be watched, Siught,and fued ‘for; ic falls not into idle
bands,or flecping mouthes.

‘A Ja fin le regnard fera Moinc: Prov, Looke

Moine. TU

En fin les regnards (viz, their skinnes) fe trouvent

chez le pelletier : Prov. The crafiie are at length

Jurprifed.

” In’y a route que de vieux regnards: Prov. There
% no chafe like that of the old Fox 3 Or, no tract fo cer-
taine as of aged craft ; no path well beaten but by old

À experience. à

Regnardaille: f.The generatié kind,or brood of Foxes;
alfo,a knot,or crue of fubtill knaues, {

Regnarde:£. 4 bitch Fox,

Regnardeau:m.A Fox cub,a young Fox ; a littlé Fox,

Regnarder. To play the Fox to fleale, flip, or flinke, a:

fide,vpo a guiltie confcience,or feare to be Lin the,
maners al/o, toperuert a truth with fhifis, trickes, or
Subtilties, die

| Regrarderie :f. Slineffe, crafiineffe, wiline fe ; alfo, a

Stealing, flipping, or flinking afide, vpon approach of
» danger or guilt of confeience alfo, a Pernerting of the
truth with fhifis or craftie lyes. ]

Regnardesques com, Craftieswilie,falfe, Fox-like full
of fleights, ) 1

Regnardiere: f. A Fox-furred gowne,or garment.

Regnardife: f, Fox-like fubriltie, Jinefe, wilinepe,
crafiinefe, falfeneffe, |

egnateur :m, A raigner, gonernor, abjolute ruler,

Regnatrice : f, 4 Queene,a Soueraigne Gonerneffe,
an abfolute Mifireffe, | oie

egnaut +m. The language,or barking, of Foxes,

~ Parler regnaut. To feake through the nofe,

Regne:m. 4 ‘Realme, or Kingdome ; alfo, a Soue.

raigne rule; Dominion ; Gonernement ; alfo,: (the


RE G


4 fhip ; alfo new fetyor flarched,as a vuffe.
Regoldronner. To pitch,or tallow,to make tight,a ip;
afo,to fet a ruffe band,againe,

CROIRE : f. An ouer-fiull gorge ; alfo,a vomiting,or pice
king up thereof,
Teleur en bailleray à reporge. 1 will ouerglut them
with all;1 wil feed tbem,or cramme it into them,untill
they (pne againe. igh

Regorgé: mée:f Ouer-glutted, 109 fall gorged, whofe

Jlomacke is ouer-charged ; alfo,vomited, caft, or ‘[pued
Up,as an ouernfull gorge.

Regorgement M. An ouer-glutting, or ouer-charging
- of flomacke ; any Paperfluitie, one: flowing, ex-
elle,


c
Regorger. To ouerglut or ouerchar gé the flomacke ; to
Permis sue the bankes thas [pue. see
caft,an ouer- full gorge. $ é
egoubillonner. To mate areare fupper, fleale an af.
ter fupper; banquet late anights 3 alfo, to be frolicke,
blithe,iocond in a mesrie mood.
€gourmer. To curbe againe,
Regoulter: To taft better ,often,or againe. ;
Regrabellement : m, A curious, and reiterated fifting
of oF fearch into,
cRracié * m. Thanked , or thankefully acknowled-
ged,
Regraciement: m. 4 thankefilnefe, or thankefull ac-
kaowledgement. “i :
Regracier. To thanké, acknowledge thankefully, yeeld
thankes vato, ;
Regraing, as Regain,
Regraisser. To greafe ouer againe, |
Lg Son im. €€: fDrefféd, fiirbifhed, féowred or tric-
ed up, , |
Regratement : m. 4 drefing, [cowring; fürbifhing,
mending , or tricking up of old things for fale; huck-
7€, :


Regrater. ‘To dreffe, mend, feowre, Sarbif, trintme ‘or
tricke up,an old thing for fale.
egtateur: m. An buckPer ; mender dreffer, fcowrer,
trimmer-vp of old things far fale.
Regratier : m. as Reprateur ; whence ;
egratier de fel,de vivres, &c, 4 RKegrater,or In-
g70sser of falt ce. > f
egratier. as Regracier 5 To thanke. 2.
Regratiete:f4m Huckllere(fe; alfo,a Regratere(fe.
RegraversTo grave anew; Ries
Regravir, To climbe,or creepevp,againe, d
Reyredillé :mée: f, Frigzledcrifped, curled, intrame
melled.


Regrediller ‘Toftixxle,or curle the baire, re, with a


continuance ; or manner of that Gouernement) a t yron. = RE
aigne. ; Regrédillonné, &Regredillonnet, as Regredillé,
© eval deRepne.A courfer of Naples, CORRE rs
Regné. Raigned,ruled,gouerned, . Mo | Regrés:my Arefignationofa Benefice, upon condition, |
Regner.Toraigne,rale.pouerne,fway, Seigniovize,domi- that if during the Refienors life it become voyd by the
» meereytobern King, wield a Scepter, baue Soueraigne | tion ‘or death of the Refignee, it fhall returne,
- authoritie oner, without further induEtion, or inflitution, unto him :


_ La Terrace tegne tout:a-lentour du logis, “rhe
tervace byes, goes, or is contrined , round a out the
avial, :


_ (But <this \Condirionall Refignation , bherélofore in
| Vfè, isnot at this day allowed of; in France.) y
Regret:m, Defire, will, affection, flomacke, or bu.

aoe s'griefe, forrow ; repentance, forthin-
Si JOIN 3) :


Pa Gree te Eat = ager

: Re nicoles: com,Thattuallinhabitants,or inhabiters
| ~~ a Kingdomeaÿs 21 0 Sate) 2: Jos sie
|| Regnure. Loofe Renures.


ina pleafant bumor in a merrie mood, oe:


| odronner. as Regoldronner, : %2/1 | Regretable : com. Deflorable bemonable,bewai bles
| Re roun mée :f, New pitched, or aloedss Fitebe repentedor lamented. oe
: cs


* É ! Ty}
Digiti ‘à | Go gle ‘ * THe OSTA 7 UNH


“A regret. Loathly , cnwillingly ; with an ill flo.
macke, bardly, manger bis-bead , full fore sun bi
ill <


a ns samme OP RS CS Oo


R E G R E I


Reheurter. Againe to dafb, bit , but,.or knocke a-


Regreter. as Regretter.
ain, …..,
Rehoc hé: m.ée:£ Shaken , wagged , or iogged a


Regretté: m. ée: f. Defired,affetted wifhed for; alfo,
bewayled,lamented,repented.

Regretter. To defire,a fect wilh for,looke or long after ;
aife, to bewayle, bemoane, lament, grieue, (orrow,re-


aine.

ee To fhakewagaon iog,againe,

Rehonnir. To fhame,or difbononr once more.

Rehouément: m. 4 new digging about the foot of a
vine ec ; or(more generally)a new digging.

Rehouér. To dig anew; to alter ground by ofien digging
it; alfo, to dig or open a plant at tbe root a fecond


nt,for.
Regrez. as Regrés.
Regrifler. Toclaw,paw, feratch, againe.
Regriller. To breyle anew vpon a Gridiron.
Regrimper,To climbe,or crawle vp againe.
Regringoté. Chaunted,quanered ofien,
Regringoter. To chaunt,warble,or quawer often,
Regripper. To gripe,gra/pe,or ‘fnatch againe.
Regrissé, as Renfrongné.
Regrouvi : m. A flarueling,wreckling,writling.
Reguarir. To recure,to recouer,te beale againe.


time,
Rehoufer. To pull on boots once more.
ufler. To couer with a foot-cloth once againe,
Rehucher. To whoope,or call backe from.
Rehumeété : mée:f. Moiftened, or bedewed once


more. .
Rehumeéter. Againe to moiflen,or bedew.


Regue. as Rege. eCter. « 1

Reguerdonner. To reward plentifully, guerdon abun- Rehumé : m.ée:f. Againe fupped up.
dantly. Rehumer. To {up vp againe.

Reguerir. To recure,to reconer. Rehurter. as Reheurter.

Rewuetter. To watch verie narrowly, Rejalir, #s Rejallir.


Reguinder To hoyfe,or lift up on high againe; alfo, to
> are roomewat dor make backe againe.
Regule d'antimonie. 4 kind of Tine; or, as Eftain


)
Rejallir. To rebound ; to leape,skip,iert, (purt or (prowt
(as water)backe,vpwards,egainft, or againe ; alfo, 10
venerberate,or to reflect. |


dé glace. Rejalliffement : m. 4 rebounding; a leaping, ierting,
Regulier: m.ere: f. Regular, canonicall, lining under (purting backe, or up, againfl a thing ; alfo,a re fletit-
prefcript rules. on,or a reuerberation, '


Chanoines reguliers. Regular Canons; tyed unto
greater attendance, and firicter obferuances, then o-
thers. "
x Regulierement. Regularly, canonically orderly,
Regurgitation: £ An ouer flowing.
Regurpiter, To over flow.
c Rehabilitation:f.4 reeflablifbing;reinnabling,refloring


Rejanner. To flowt, coffe deride,ride.

Rejaper. To barke often, or againe,

Rejatcer. To rine or cleaue,anew,

Rejaser. To babble,or pratile extreamely.

Rejauger. To newagage caske.

Rejaulnir. To grow yellow againe. |

Reject: ms reiedtion, arefifall; alfo, a new putiing


unto former abilitie. bese cafting out agame ; alfo,as Rejet.
Rehabiliter. as Rabiliter. ejecta arbre, A young Poser fucker, ringing oat
Rehabitation: £ 4 reinbabitation, reinbabiting; are- ee the reot,or foot of a tree.

turning to a former habitation, ejeét defemme. A diuorfe from, or putting away


Rehabiter. To reinhabite, or dwell againe in.

Rehabituer.To /ettle againe; to begin to vft accuftome,
enure unte againe.

Rehacher. To backe,or chop againe. ’

Rehair. To hate extreamely,oragaine,

Rehaiter, To reuiue, reioyce, cheere up exceedingly,

Rehaler. To bale, or pull againe,

Rehanter.Againe to baunt or frequent.


of, awife.

: Rejcét de folsé. The banke ofaditcb. —
Fueille de reject. The leafe that fucceeds in the
place of another leafe , whichbath beene plucked,or
beaten downe. j

Rejeétable: com. Reieétable,refifable.
Rejcété :m.ée:f. Reiedted, expelled,r ed; abando-
ned, forfaken ; caft off; alfo, retorte or caf backes


Det t 2 ji en tae


Reharceler. To barrie,turmoyle,vex againes alfo,confuted ; alfo,newly put,or budded,out.

Reharier. as Rehar er. 4 4 Rejettement tm. A Yeiedting, expelling , driving.or

= Rchafarder. To readuenture , to baxard yet once chafing out, putting or caflingoffs refisfing, forfe-
more, 3; king, abandoning,renouncing; alfo, a Yetorting, or


throwing backe 5-4 confisting , a refelling ; alfo, a
new budding , of: putting out, as of trees in the


Spring.
Rejecter. Tordeëtsexpell, or caft off; dtine or cafe


Réhafter. To reaccelerate , or gine new wings vn-


to. ; . ;
Rchaulfé : m. ée :f, Set higher, or'abour; alfo, re-
aduanced ; alfo, raifed, or vpheld al, (in pain.

5


“ ting , re) reborfed ; or beig) ao; imbof= out; torefife, abandon, forfake, renounce ; alfo,tore-
fea. ‘1 Re ATARI tort or throw backe; alfo, to refell, or confite ; alfo, 10
_ Tapifferie de fayere-rehauffée de foye. whofe | - MT cece as
ground is [ay,and worke filke. 0: timber Gc,in wet weather dc.
Réhaulle ement:m. A readnancing; alfo,araifitg, a Rejection sf. reiettion; or as Rejcétement. J


| ati higher abou arche eg


a Bsa ig fom


root,er a tree,


demouches à miel. -.4,/warme of Bees,


sr
277207


Rehaulser. Te readuance ; to reife or fet bigber,toplace | :
 abone ; alf, (in nr oocjtacchore bodeaal to |»Rejet : m. The brimme of the louer-of à Done-coat,
ibe Dae RS Pde ge swbereon the Pigeons alight ; alfo, theitrt. ginen by
| Rehauffé, & as Rehaullé,&e. +: _ aborfes legs when he yerkes out bebind 5 alfo, as Re«
Rehennir.To neigh,or whinnie often, = j it


ote)


es, + | Rejettable. a Rejeétabl
= Reherler Tobarrow over agaies remand LT EEE er as Rejeétable,


ejettal: im. Ax Engine wherewith final birds are
canght, Re.


Diatizer ty, GOeQIE = RS fom


HIO/STATE:UNIVERS


RE I


Rejetté,& Rejeter. 2s Rejecté,& Rejcéter.

| Reifort. as Raifort.

Reigle: f. A rule,canon,order ; precept, inflitution, pre-
S{cription,inftrudtion ; alfa, aline; (quare, forme , pat-
terne; method maner, fafhion.

Mieux vaut reigle que rente: Prov. Good gouerne-
ment is of more worth then gold,

Reiglé: m.ée: f. Raled ordered gouerned, moderated ;
directed held in forme, kept in fafbion.

Reiglemént: m. 4 ruling,ordering,direétion, guiding,
difcipline,gouernment,gouerning, alfoya rule ginen by a
Judge in a caufe; aid, the draught of lines by the
rule,

Reiglément, Regularly,orderly; moderately; formal-
ly,in good fafhion.

Reigler. To rule, order, gouerne ; temper, moderate ;
guide, fquare,direët ; to doe things by line and lenell;
alfo, to decree, eftablifh, determine, ordaine; and, to
gine a rule in a caufe. :

Reiglet : m, .4 little rule, or line ; alfo, a Carpenters
Squire.

Regleur : m. A ruler,orderer ; moderator ; direélor:

Reïgleure : f. as Reiglement ; or,aruling,or drawing
by lines ; a proceeding by rule and line,

| Reiglure. The fame.

Reilhage : m. c’eft le charriiage,letrainage, & fuite
de disme,
Reimber, a Redimer.

-Reimportuner. To reimportune,or toreimportunate,

cimpofer. To reimpofe,to recharge. x
Reimprimé : m.ée : f. Printed againe,
Reimprimer. To veimprint,or to print againe,

| Reimproperer. To exprebrate;reupbraid, reproach,or
blame againe. si:

Reitnputer. To laya new impatation om.) |,

Rein: m, The kidag.

Reincifer. To make a new incifion into.

| Reincité: m.ée:f. Reiacited ; reinuited,

Reinciter. To reincite; reinuite,

Reincliner. To bend,leane,or incline,againe.
Reincorporer. To reincorporate, reintegrate; refiore
unto the bodie a part they eof. \

Reinduire. Toreitduce, :.,
| Reinc:f. 4 Queene ; Looke Royne ; alfoya Frog; alfa,
the reine of a:bridle, )

Reineux:m, eufe:£ Luflie, able-bodied, frong-bac-


hed pauing rong reines ; alfo, of, or belonging to, the


reines ; ce; ‘
| _ Maladiereineufe. The running of the reines.
| Reinfecter. Toren. FI
| Reinformer. To reinforme, to prefent with new infor.
mations, à
Reingerer. To reinfinuate,or thruft in againe.
Reinhumer. To burie againe,
Reinjurier. To renile,or to wrong againe. .
| Kemnoyer. Te veinnowate. :
Reins: m, The reynes, ind ts Beat
Bander aux reins: To bend a croffebow backward,
Reinfer. To reinfe,to wafh.
Reintegrande:£ An AGion,or Sentence, for the ref
torall of a popeffion, taken from a man either by force,
|» fraud,or any other indirect meanes; And thisbath an
‘eafie Gr fpcedie paffage, how vniuft focuer that poffesfi-
onwere ; for no man isto behis owne carne, but mult
recouer bisright by Law; (This word was deuifed
by the canonifit, bolle ams hates
Reintegration : f.4 reintegration,reeRablifbment full
veftorall unto a former eflates..<.., \adiee


R'E Is


Reintegré: m. ée :f. Reintegrated, reeflablifhed in,
R filly veflored unto,an effate, pt).
KCintegrer. Toremtegrate,reeflablifh à
R whole eflate, eaten
eintegrer lesfrui@s. To make veflitution o ine
fatisfatison for,them ; 10 make _ ea in
eiterpreter. To reinterpret,reexpourd.
Reinterroguer. To reinterrogate, reexamine aske new
queftions of.
Rei nviter. To reinuite,oy bid once more,
Rejoindre, Toreioynereaffemble,vally.
Rejouér. To play againe,
ejouir. To reinioy,repoffefe,baue againe.
Rejouiffance:f A reinioyment, repolfeffion, reinioy-


ing.

Rejoufter. To iuft againe.

Reiponce : f. 4 Raiponce.

Reiftre :m. 4 Reifier,or Swart-utter; a German hor{e-
man; alfo, a fefbion of long cloake, vfually worne by
one of them.

Fai& à la Reiftre. Made after the new cut,or fefhi-
on(efpecially if there be any grofeneffe init.)
elteration : f. 4 reiteration, a frequent repetition.
citeré : m. de: f. Reiterated, ofien repeated, oftenre-
membred. \ |


Reïterer. Toreiterate ; (often) repeat , rebearfe , re- |


new, remember.

Rejudication:f. À reiudication, aveadiudaing vnto
(c'eft quand la chofe quiaefté vendué & adiugée
publiquement,eft derechef mife en criées, & read-
Jugée.)

Rejurer. Tofiweare againe, to offer a new oath vn-


to,
| Relabouré:m. ée :f. Tilledor plowed ouer againe.
Relabourement: m, 4 fecond tilth, earing, or plow-
ing. É
Relabourer. To plough’, till , or eare the fecond
| time.
pe tm. Whey.
| Relaier. SeeRelayer, _
Relais: m. 4 feat, or landing fir fuch as bold Chiens
derelais; alfoyas Armaire; a bole, or box contrived
&” againft,a wall,
-hamp de relais. Fallowes or a fallow field; ground
thats fowed but euerie other yeare.


Chevaux de relais: Horfes layed in certaine pla- |


ces on the bighway , for the more hafl: making , or
the eafe of thofe one hath alreadie rid hard on: (In
trauelling moft of the bightwayes of Fraunce, you may
(en payant) baneat enerie fenen or eight leagues end
frefh borfes ; [0 that you leane behind you thofe you laft
ds qu on, and.

dthèm : Andthefe.aremofhpropesly tearmed, Che-

+ vaux de relais): i} Me 2 oS on yo
Chienside relais. Dogs layed for a back-fet; fuch
as are.beld by the fide: of along courfe , to.bee
mune after a Deere valreadie. purfued by other


logs. FIAT,
‘A telais. Spared , at ref; that à not wed; |


or as ; .
Parrelais, By turnes,by change of hands ; one refting
while another labours, one running while bis fellow


2 efsa’y gate : 1D VE tue
‘| Relaiffer. Tolsaue, relinguifo, forgoe againe; alfo, a |


Hare 10 fquat.-.° i ‘ aa)
Relancé : miée:f Flune,.darted, hurled, backe,

afo  imprimed 5 as a Decre; reconeved , as a

Hare. é


thew a ticket from the place where pan |


dut ds à :


° “ae


ey:


i) bts 1er a CRE ? PeLE ARRETE oh amines


RE L


a


Relancer. To fing,dart, hurle backe,or againe.
Relancer vn cerf. To smprume a Stag.
Relancer vn lievre. To reconer ber or put ber off tbe


Reclame: ms Mufinefé, fifinefe, rankneffe, dankife


neffe.

Relant : m.ante :f.Mwflie, füfliesreflie, reafie, dankifb,
unfauerie,

Relanteur : f. as Relant: m,

Relantir. Te /mell muflie, grow füflie, wax reflie,

Relaps: m.fe:f Relapfed ; fallen into an errour which
be bad recanted, or fickneffe of which he bad recone-

d.


rea.
Relafche : £4 relaxation ; eafe,refi,repofe,rcfrefhment,
recreation, (after labour ; ) truce,refpit, a ceffation,in-
termiffion, vacation; alfo,a flackning ,looffing,velenting,
letting goe. .
Relaschede pendu. 4 gracelefe rakehell, or crack-
rope ; one for whom the Hangman wauts,the Gallowes
grones. ;
Relafchement:m. A repofing, relling, vefrefhing; a

leaning of worke, a making vacation; alfo, a relea.

fing, looffing, inlarging; alfo,a velenting, or flacken-


img. |
Relafcher. To flacken, looffe, inlarge,let out; eafe, re-
frefh;, remit, veleafe ; alfo, to gue backe, forgoe, let


goe,
Relaffer. To wearie extreamely,ot againe,


count.rehearfe ; alfo,10 new-lath a building,

Relateur : m. 4 relator,a reporter a rchearfer,

Relation -t.A relatson,report,recitall; alfo,the Returne
of aWrit; the report made, or account given, by an
Officer, of the feruing ov executiont bereof.

Relaver. Te wajh againe, or often oner ; alfo, to wah
(with colours.) :

Relaxation : f. 4 relaxation; difcharge, inlargement ,
releafing,acquiting ; relenting.

se Relayans l'un l’autre. Refreshing, or eafing one ano-
ther by turnes.

Reliyer. Tofucceed in the place of the wearie; to ve-


tayke. ;
Relayer coche, & chevaux. To take new, or efh
horfes «nd coach,
Relecher. To licke ouer againe.
Relegation : f. 4 relegation,or exilement,a peeking or
finding, away inte banifhment. :
Relegué : m.ée:f. Relegated, banifhed, exiled.
Releguer. To vélegate,banifhyexile,
Releu : m.cuë : f, Red omer againe, À
Relevailles d'une femme, Th’uprifing,or vpfitting, al-


: fo,the cher leony a woman, :
À Relevé: m. ée: f Raifed, lift, or fet vp, againe ; re-


» beened, veuiued, fly reflored; alfo, difcharged, freed,
or quit of; alfo, that hath payed bis Reliefe.

Appelrclevé Sued out ; and whereby a fuit is remo.

_ uedyby Writ, from one Court unto another.


re. “0
‘Femme relevéc. (hurched , or got out of the


-  quiaché, drconvenu, eft reftitué enen-
tier par lettres interinées en Iufticey
* : ‘Mineur relevé de

= Jeve le fief de fon Mitieur ; du Seigneur dont il eft
|  cenu. Sa à
CUP ET = ;


Relevée : £. Th’afternoone,or all the time betweene din-


Relevement: m, A raifing, lifting up ; releeuing,reni-


Relever.To raife or lift vp,to fet on foot or afoot,againe;


Relater. To relate, report, utter, deliver; torecitesre-
Releveur: m.A raifer,or lifier vp; a fetter on foot or a-


Relevoifon. Droi& dere]. A peares rent payed unto


frefhyrelecue,or cafe anotber-by an undertaking of bis


relevé. well raifed , or bigh be.


; Mineur televé. C'eft quand le Mineur de 2$ans,


C'eft quandle bailliftreré-


REL


Vne Sain@te relevée. whofe Reliques, or bones are
inclofed and dalofi,in a fbrine,

Relevé du fumier. 4 dungbill Gentleman.

Ila efté bien relevé. He bath beene well chidden, or
(as we fay)taken vp for baulting.


ner and tb'euening; alfo,a womans Churching ; alfo,
full vecouerie of, + uprifieg afier,a ficknef[e. ai


uing refloring; alfo,a womans Churching,


alfo,to releeneaffifi,rcuiue,veflore. :

Relever vn a. To fue or take out,an Appeale; te

bring the caufe before the Judge appealed unto.

Relever droiéture.To pay the Reliefeyand rights due

by a tenant vpon bis firft entrie.

Relever vn efteuf. Looke Efteuf.

Relever vnficf. To pay a Reliefe; and doe homage

for an inberitance; 01,10 auow, and acknowledge a

Landlord upon any change of Lord,or of tenant,

Ce fief releve d'un tel. 1s held of fuch a one,

Ce fief releve felon la couftume de Touraine. The

Reliefe, right,and dueties thereof are done, payed,and

ee mag according to the cuflome of Touraine,
clever les vieux foflez. To cleanje , or fowre

them,

Relever du ferment. To acquit, or difcharge of, an

oath,

Fort eft qui abbat, & plus fort qui fe releve: Prov.

He that, being felled, gets up of bimfelfe, does more

then be that flabim, '


float againe; alfo,areleeuer,afjifler ; alfo, areuinor,a
renewer,


Lords, upon euerie change of tenants, Cenfiers,or for
any ¢flate (intheland they hold) procured by them-
ee This is moft commonly tearmed, Relevoifon
a plaifir.
Relevoifon du denier fix. Six pence for each penie
af their yerelie Cens, payed vpn euerie change as well
as the former.
Ventes & relevoifons. C’eft quand le nouveau
vaflal releve de fon feigneur feodal,& luy paye cer-
taine fomme taxée par la Couftume : €Ragueau,
Reliage : m. A binding or booping of caske,crc.
Relicher. To licke often,or ener againe.
Relié: m. ée: f. Bound,booped; bandfomely packed, or
com; together,
Relief: m. Relief ; or areleening; tbe raifing of à per-
+ fonsor of a thing, fallen; and (particularly) tbe remedie
granted by the Letters Patents of a Soueraigne Prince
unto a fubieét incommodated,or fallen into an mconue-
mience, by the fentence of a Fudge, or ill dealing of o-
thers ; and bence, Relief d'appel; &, Relief pour
minorité : Al/o,a Reef sagas die, o7 profit accru-
ing, to a Landlord upon certaine changes of bis her edi-
tarie tenants;(Locke Droit derelict uncer Droid )
alfo,a place,oy thing,raifed:e>(parti ular ly) raifed, or
 gmmboffed work:e> that which Imbroderers teavme,lee-
> wing; alfosrubbidge,cr the ruines of overi browne ken-
Kt aes effalls,of meat leftatameale.
orb: ad An Appeale fued out by Commiffin
from the Chancerie,and frem the fuperior Court appca-
led unto,e> direéled unto the Judge, ov lord Fufiicer
of the court appealed fiom, ther by to imtimete the juit,
ceeding thereof wnto the partie, in refjidl cf
whofe late recouerie th’ Appeale is brought.


© NE aes REMY


Lord feodall Fons im that maries amaid, or widow,
penn Fief by anydefcent,or donation; notwith.
Slandingt
fate was liable ;the veafon isthe busband comes in as
» afiranger ; and fomufl boib pay a new Reliefe,and doë!
| ew homage as for bis owne Fief: In fome places ano~
ther Relicfe ts al/oduevpon the death of the busband.
Relief de bouche, The acknowledgement of a vaffall,
or tenant Cottier,that he holds bis land of a Lord.
Relief de Chambellage.A Reliefè due bya busbaud
Sor an inberitance falling 10 bis wife during ber mari.


») Age, 10/23 é |
Relief de fief, Th'acknowledgement of tenure yeelded
. bya new fubiett or vafficllyunto bis bards: à + 2 il

Relief ? merci. One yeares profit in threes dneby the

‘ local cufiome of S.Piat de Seclin fous Eiflé. ore) ::
Relief pour minorité, Looke Mineur relevé (under.
Relevé.) ire fl
Relief de plume. A rent Capon,Cocke, HennejorPul
~ det, giuen in fome few places. in liewof a Relief, >
clief de rente, Due to a Lord vpon the: death of bis

_ tenant Cottier. : 37
Droiét,ou profit derelief. See Droi&.

Tels cens tels reliefs. À whole yeares Cens due for a

© Reliefé ; oner and befides the Cens it felfe when it ac-
crues.

» Bas relief. Gentilhôme de bas relief. thred-bare,
or fiagle-foled Gentleman; a Gentleman of low degree,
Demy relief: à demy r. Halfe Reliefe,balfe round,

Plein relief, de plein rel, Imbofjedor fet of in it fall
| proportion, - ‘ iva
Relier.To biad,or to compact things hadjomely together ;
alfo,to boope,as caske, :
elievement: m.as Relevement; alfo,a relief,relee-
Ving, fisccor sor money giuen for the relie fe,or fuccor of.
Relieur de livres. L4 Booke-binder,
Relicure de livres. Booke-binding,


| Religieufe:f, 4 Nunne,


Religieux : m. 4 Monke or Frier ; one thats entred into
 areligious Order.
Religieux feculier, a: Oblat.
Religieux: m.eufe:£ Religious; addiéted, confecra-
ted,or belonging, to religion ; bolie,godlie deuont,
Religion: f. Religion, reais bs pietie, godlineffe ; the
mor(hip of God,or of things held facred; a reuerend,
‘and gon{cientious affection vato them,or feare of offen.
ding them; alfo, a Religious boufe.
Kelimer.To file, férape, or fhaue often,or unto a finooth-
neffe; alfo,togleeke againe and againe at,
Relinquer. Torelinquifh;leaue quit abandon, fèrfae,
Relinqueur:m, A relinguifher, leauer, quitter, aban-
doner, forfaker. a9
Reliqua : m. The refsremainder ouerplus,arrerages re
> liques,remmant, fragments leauings of. À
Lereliqua d'une eboere.T6¢ vemaines,or grudgings
of am Aguesafier it hath feemed to leaue one,
Reliquaille: fi An old remnant, frasment,monument.
Reliquaire:m, 4 coffin,casket, or shrine wherein Rea
liques be kept, ns
Reliquataire: com: In arrerages , bebind-band; in
wohofe bands there's yet fomerebat to be paiedsalfoseft,
refling,remaining, +. 5
Reliquateur: m. One thats bebind-hand, or in arrera.
ges; ane that yet hath fomewhat to pay,
Reliques:f. Reliques, Et
Reliques font bien perdués entre les pieds de


Go gle


Relief de baile yeares profits or value, due vnta&! | —. pourceaux : Pro, Reliques trod on by hogs are quick-


| bogs;( Aid may not one in


hat fhe befere their mariage baue bothpaied


the Reliefe,and performed all dueties whereunto her. ‘ elite. Zo read ouer-againe,


 Rellet: m, The name of a tart apple that bath partie-co-


| Re . Tolodge againe,


| T9) iÿ
Si


# -


Wy loft; or, Reliques are quickly loft among the feet of |
? Erk Pi om ry Bp ma
R tthe bands of fuch bogs as now-a-daies keepe them?)


To redeliner,


Relots::Droid de relots. Twentie pence vpon euerie
pound of Lods and Ventes, due untoa Landlord in
*® pafchafèsmade of threfates: of bis tenants Cenfuels;
C’eft aufsi dix deniers pour livre (enla Chaftelle.
~)'mi¢de Monftrereau reflort de Meaux) quand le
vendeur doit avoir fon'argent franc.
Relouër. Tobireagaines +”
clui£ter, Towrafile, friuc,or contend againe.
Reluire. To foine,glitter,glifler, yeeld a radiant or bright
= A


fier.
Réluifänt: m.ante: f ing;radiant,glittering, glif.
tering, yeelding a bright lufter, —
emaïller, To peece “= Ken coat of mayle sor net with
new linkes or mafbes.

Remaindre, (4 Verbe Imperfonall ; whence the Pro-
uerbe ; } Beaucoup remaint de ce que fol penfe.
Much is bebind of that a fèole accoñts ofia foole comes
ener fhort of bis intentions ; fooles thoughts are full of
wants,of imperfections,

À ee Remaining, remained, left , bebind, lefi be-
ind,

Remandet: To remaund,or fend for backe againe,

Remanent: m. 4 remnant refidue,refl,remainder,

Remanger. To eat againe,

Remanier: To bandle,or take in band againe.
manoir. To remaine,to reff or flay bebind. -

Remanfilles. The Yemnant , remainder , or lea.


nings of.
Remarchander. Tobarraine anew,
Remarcher. To march againe,or march backe againe,
Remarier. To remari¢,or marie againe, +"
gen Ta : com, Remarkable, fit or wortbie to be
marke à
Remarqué: m.ée:f. Marked,noted,beeded,regarded
atlentinely ; alfo,marked,or flamped on anew,
eimarquer. To marke,note, beed, regard attentiuely:
alfo,to fet anew marke or flampe an, a
Remarqueur im. A marker,or noter of things,
Remafe é:m,ée: £Ruminated; againe or oftenchaw-
‘ ,


Remafthement: m. 4 ruminating ;a chawing often,
or againe. RES

Rematcher. To ruminate; to chaw ofiensor againe,

Remafcheuttim. 4 ruminator, .

Remaflonner. To build anew.

Remaudire. To curfé againe.

Rembade. as Rambade, |

Remballer. To repacke,or pache vpagaine.

Rembarquer. Toreimbarke,to put into a {hip againe,

Rembarré : mée:f. Bard up,kept in, flopped, reftrai-
ned ; alfo,knocked, thumped ; repulfed, repelled,beaa

° ten “à drinen backe ; alfo , confated, refétled > Con-
winced, ,

Rembarrer. To reffraine,barve up,or keepe ins alfo, to
knocke,thumpe ; vepulfe,repell,beat or drive backe; al-
*fo,t0 confiste,refell,difproue,conuince. “pal

Rembaucher. Toreftore a thing unto it right place, to
Set itin order or into it owne flandingagaine. R

: |


Mop 5 4 * É . _ Es
SS


Remeré:m. A redeeming of things morgaged,or fold. |


Remboifter vn os. To ent or put it; sinto ioyns a-
: | Grace;ou faculté deremeré. Is due unto, me 5


gaine,


Rembouër : m. 4a agin wherewith fi # pete ed bye feller mens tea u
d b 3 . To redeeme,or thing fo
Rembourer. ru up.againe with flockes: Remefler, To mingle a :


Rembourreur: m. A mender of unpuffed faddles.

Rembouts. as Rembourfement,

Rembourfé: m. ée : £. Reimburfed ; repayed.

Rembourfement: m, A reimburfemenit,éreimbur[fng
arepayment ef money borrowed, or fpents +

Rembourfer. To reimburfe; to repay, reflére,or giue
backe money fpent,&rc.

Al les ‘Ge rembourler, de tous leurs: iatpnbfis: He
 payed'them for all their loflés,or barmés. 00 |

Iln'y a rien àremboutfer toureft à, boire HE
icaftingly of a fart let in compänie,

Rembourfeur :m. A reimburfer; a repayer. 1e

Rembrafer. To rekindle, rein flame, ei now » pu
10,

Rembrafler. To rcimbrace.

Rembre, To redeeme né word endyei wed by
fame countrey Clerkes Wii

se Rembrider. Cheval qu 2 ou Aibocteeias
armes,or defends bimfe ray upantbe brealt Coy clapping
the branches of bis Bit agatu(t it.)

Rembrocher. To {pitsorputon a hit againe,

Rembrouiller. To reintangle.

Reinbroufler, Looke Rebroufler.

Rembufché : m. ée:F. Reimbufheds lodged, or rp 4-
mong bufhes ; alfo, layédior ing, in a pl
bufcadoe.

Rembufchement x ms 4 reimbufiment 5 tiple
wherat wild beafis enter ntoa thicket afier vid a
haue preyed,or pafturéd. «x -

Rembufcher. To lodge a wild beaft among bufbes 3 10
driue bum iato\a thickets aosto lay,or make a new arn-

 cadoe, 41

Remede : m, A remeilie wredrelfe, medecine belpe ; al-

à that allay which Goldfmishes, Jewellers, and Mo-

Ronan permitted to adde unto allowed im.

bafement of gold,or filuer ; as where with 4 filuer peece
of eleuen pence value there is a twelfih part of copper
allowed to be mingled , the remcde is about two

_graines ower and, befides that twelfth, This aduan-

tage they baue gotten upon allegation, That they cannot

mie resp ov infily keepe, the féantling required of


Remediement :m. Aremedyings redrefing, healing


belpi

‘terete To remedie,redreft peale,belpe,

Remembrance: € Aremembrance, or es

\ alfo,a caufe of remembrance ; a refemblance, or image
of; a thing that beaves the former us in mind, of
another thing.


Remefüurer, To meafure ouer againe, JL
Remettre, To renew, repaire, reuiue, veflore, fa wi a-
gaine;al{o,to refer,comit or put untosal/o,to remit, fir-
“Fone perdus actu releafe, unto; alfo, toflacken, or |.
‘ i ai H'extreitie ofsalfito deferve,delay provogue,


‘Rooneteeic Wousenvous:: Clase agiidesitijiblrae ;
“\againe into,your (elfe; bring your felfé bome againe.
Se remettre AT fa premiere befongne.To rciurme, te
fy fil, {et,or gine bimfelfé, unto his former imployments.
Ils'y veut remettre. He will toitafrefb, be ad ae
» \boptit againe, \
Remeub fen To nevw-fianift witl mouables,:
emiiner. To mine againe, .
Reminifcence: £ Remembrance (of things ohltbtlere
-\wace before in the mind.)
Remirer. ‘To view » feeseyesbebolds aime,or lewell atpfe
tenor. againe. u
Remis: m.ife :f Reflored,reuined, renewed, repaired,
Set up a m4 vhs ar or put; alfo,re-
mitted, forginenjacquited,releafed ; al deferred, pro-
rogued,put ouer or off,unto ; alforemiffe, cold »flacke,
Loo dull, careleffe,or negligent,in,
finremis vn peuen foy. Being come gaine unto
“bimfelfésor hauing fomewhat recouered bimfe/fe.
Remife: sha vefloral,renincment, reconerie, fitting vp
Nagaine; alfo,a remitment, acquiltance, releafr; alfo,a
reference,referring, or committing unto; afo, a flack-
ning,de ferring,prolonging,or(asin Law}a delay,or pute |
ting off of a caufe by confent of parties, “and fora cer-
taine time; alfo,tb’alighting of fovele after their [écond
flight; alfo,the manage, tearmed otherwife,Paflade.
Par remifes. By fits, by turnes,but now and them. ©
Remiffible : com. Repittablespardenabe, forgincable,
releafable,
emifsion:f. Aremiffion, or forginenc fe; 3a pardon far
an offence which,by the Law,brings death: And bere.
of [ome French Lawyers make foure kinds ; viz.
--Remiffion de droi@, ou deluftice.. 4 Pardon of
conrfe is granted by tb'inferior Chanceries (yet in the
Kings name) fir Manflaughter fe defendendo, or by
< chance medley, and fenseher ac offences as the Law |


pardon," =
“Remiffior onde: grace. APardon of grace,or bis Ma-
- \iefhies moft gracious Pardon (for Homicides, exc, of a
more bainous kind) muft bee procured from the King
bimfelfe.and rs of the great Chaunceric.

- Remiffion (ou Abolition) generale. À generall
Pardon(with exception) verie ia which à gran.


Remembré: mée: € Remembred,ca ed to memorie. ted imth end of our Parliaments,» *

se Remembrer. Terenpabery to call unto mind or mt. Remiffion(ou Abolition A fpeciall Par-
marie. 2 5 de don by the King sei Povfon (in

- Keimemoration: ance,or a remeniring, maner,or by what meane 1) off enain

Rememores mée: Rome d,recorded, > | Remiffionaire:com. whofe offence is remitted. 4


+ Torecor d'remember call unto mind, 1
ctnenacer. To threaten againe,


Remanent,
ieee
merciant. + h


Remmailloter. efertbe,pr ‘frwaddleagaine,
Reminalicer, To grow more fpight fill, or malicious,
Remmancher. To put on a new baft,er belue.
Tomocke,or flewt againe; alfo,to ss
 vefell at the lerne of another.
Remolin: m. 4 feather ; a little circle of retorted, or
peony haire, onthe firhead, creaft,or any other partsof


Remo mi jue: f, Mollifjing, fofiening,


Re-


Lary


+ packets


RE M


Remo uer, To draw,or get, off the ground, or ont of
ao she DY er, To lay downe a feame,to turne in a bemme(in


' 15 Im the later fence. 0.»
Remonce. as Remonttrance, A LUN
Remonftrance: £ A remoa|trance warning, admoni-

tion, reafons ginen,or fhemed. ns os 2

emonftré: m. éc:f. Warned;adaiféd, admonifbed;


Jhewed by reafons,or inflances ; al/o,chidden, rebuked
ba CU $4 ) or’ WIS:


\eproued. 35%,


Remonftrer, To mari adsl nerfs to
ey


few vntajar for before the eyes’ alfoyto checke
‘rebuke,reproue, Ÿ oF


Remontages:d' ‘artillerie. Cairviages for great Ord. R


nance, : OU bin
Remonté sm, Remounted, ov new-mounted,veadian:
(Ged, reliened,raifed up againes\\w\\nr.% Wy) 9)
: Apres que lamarée eft remontée. Atalow water ;
when the tyde isveturned,or gone... 51 oui nas
Monter. Fo remount, reaftend; readuance s climbe,
tiles loft,raifeyops fet, or.geton horfebacke,againe;al-
[o,t0 relieuesreflore vato;or fet injarformer efares —
Remordre Ta bite againe; alfo,to carpe ator find fault
with. a. te
Remordu: m. ué: f Bittemegaine ; alfo,carped at,or
found faslt with; ane
Remore: € The Suck-flone,or fea-Lamprey ; a little fi,
which cleauing 10 the keele of a fhip, binders shecoufe
of it. 191 5306)
Remorfondre. To take,or grow,cold againe, ::: :% ;
Remorquer. To hale, or tow alongya fhip ces alfo, ai
Remolquer. ri) } Biwi
Remors : m. Diuels bit Forebits an bearbes Sic“
Remors de confcience, Remorfe,the worme,or fling,
of conféience. w\: dames 11 >D719/1
4 Ramet de l'eftomac. ‘The vpbraiding of the foi
macke, - is pak


aoe m,ote:f Remote yemoned ,withdr avone fered


ty


Remoucher: To wipe againe. os
Remouillé:m. é¢:£. Wet, or moiflened againe. >.
Remouillement:m. A newsor fécand moiflenings » À
Remouiller.To wet,or moiften, once more.
Remouldre: Togrindagaine,

-Remouvoir. To remous, retire, withdraw, fet afide, put
away ur ET
Rempant: m, ante: £: Creeping; crawling, or trayling
along ; al/o,climbing, ; rH Det

Ligne rémpante. Par vneligne. rempante. By 2


* léuell,ora well-leuelled line. hi


empaqucter.Fo reimpacke ; to make vp into anew
empar: m, 4 in ier s the mall of a Fortreffe. :
Remparer. 70 fortifies toinclofe with a Rampier.:


empart. as Rempar, :


| Rempennervne fleche. To new-featber an arrow,


, Looke Ramper. “ae

Remplacé: m. ée: f. Reimplace
gaines fet in the place, or in ftead, of another, js

Remplacement: m, 4 reimplscing, or new placing, a
laying or fetting in another place; al/o,a putting inthe
place,or flead,of another, - i

Remplacer, Toreimplace;to lay, or place anew;to take
out of one place, and fet im another ; alfo, to put one
thing in the place, ‘mtroduce one thing in the flead,of
another. Anes te TRAE BIT. "ta : 7:


lage: me À lingo fing ps replenifing,


Remplir Filed del fimifud.


, placed anew, or a-


MEM . …


| Ts one rempli leur céreeau, Of isi is, ;
Sarcells are bard fer. (Of mued: lihohes)their


sete Ree + <
Lit.To fill,or fiuffe with: tore 3 throughly t
fürn mr pli ae °


age A oA ar ch as pert :
€ de Vins? ; 1
is + sll after M tebgees. oe feet
empliffement. 2s Reniplage,
pe “A filling, fupplying,or furnifhing of an
ace.
employ: nm. Areimployment,as of money, made of one


R thin 507 another,

employer. Toréimphaÿs" = >

Resta feather anew,

: Te'metremplume. 7 begin ‘to recouer my bealth,
wealth,or authorities 1 Picke,orgatherop my crummes
againe, ryctheatiae

Rempoipet: To lay bands on againe,

Rempoisonner. To poifon,or inuenome anew,

Rempoiffonner. To fiirnifh againe with ff. -
emporte: m, €e: f Carried or borne backe, brought
or got away. as oc aca

Remporter. To carrie or beare backe > t0 get or bring
away from. eV TH ‘4

Remprifonner. To reimprifan’; to caft into prifon a-
gaines si v ,

Remprunter. To borrow againe. y

Rempfon. as Rengon. (v.m.)

Remu. O&roier remu. (Inthe auncient Cuflomes of
Britaine) to giue, or agree-vnto,a delay ina fuit.
emuance: f, A remouance ; a frequent mouing, ftir.
ving,itching, figging ; vemouing.

Remuant: m. ante: f, Often mouing, flirring, figging;

* Ginelie, nimble, quicke; often remouing, ener fitting,
neuer fiill or flanding,
emucrés : m, Fufline[fe ; or mouldinefte.
emué: mée:f Moued, fiirred ; remoued,

Remuë-mefnage:m. 4 flirring, turbulent, vnqnier,


Seditious perfon; one that affefteth change, nonelsies, |


inñnoualions.
Remuément: m. Amoning, firing ; remouing, :
Remuér. ‘To moue, flirre, fig, fidge it; to remoue, or fet
away. :
pau les mains. To fight bard, lay about him luf
tily, at
\ Remuér contre. Looke Mefnage,


Remuër toute pierre, To attempt all meanes, prone |


all courfés,try all wayes.


Remuërles ferrures. To bewerie bufie, rokeepe an |


old coyle bufiling, fire. …


: De chofe perdué le confeil ne fe remué: Pro. see
i Confeil. > BST BA chats Ns ( à \


‘Qui remué les pierres fes as caffe: Proy, He
that remoneth per crufbeth EX ais x be that puts


them (into hot, 9x) wnto bard things (burne, or) bini- |


Ses them.
Remuéur: m. 4 mouer ; aremouer,
Remuéur de mefnage. as Remuë-mefnage.
Remugle. Muftie,or fiftie. -
Remuneration: f. 4 remuneration, remunerating, ve.
compenting, rewarding. °


Retnuneratoire: com, Remuneratorie,remuderating. |
Remunerer: To remunérate, guerdon, recompence, re-


ward, Ye
Rernufleau: m, 4 bottome, or clue of thread, yarne,
oy L : x


Does Go gle


FE, + SCT


a


meee 3 hove


err ee ee


m. A proper name for a man ; and particularly,

the name of a Saint, which was the fixteenth Bifbop of

Rheims,and baptifed Clouis the firft Chrifiian King of .

France : be died ia the yeare $45.

ny. S. Remyes day;the firfi day of Oto-

ber, kept bolyday in moft parts of France.» .\\

er. To fwimme backe.

ance: f. 4 new birth, -

Renaiffances de forefts. Young trees t
after a felling,ov cutting of the old ones,

Renaiffement: m, as i


Renaiftre. To be borne anew ; 10 rife, grow, (pring, or


Renal: m. ale: f. Ofor belonging to,the kidneyes.
Artere renale, À branch of the great arterie, which
enters into the kidneyes,and brings unto them the
fitie of the arteriall bloud.

Veine renale. Seeke Veine. :

Renaquer. To fiveare horribly or moft idly,to blafpbeme,
or to renounce, Almightie God,

Renard. A Fox; Looke Regnard,

Renardaille: £. 2s Regnardaille,

Renarde: f. 4 Bitch-fox.

Renardeau: m. 4 Fox-cub,or young Fox.

Renarder. See Regnarder.

Renardefque: com. 4 Regnardefque.

Renatdier: m. ere: f. Ofjor belonging t6,e Fox.

Renardife: £ as Regnardife,

quer. Looke Renaquer

Renavigé:m. ée: f. Kenauig

Renaviger. To renauigate, fayle backe, or fayle ouer a-


ance; or, a being new


Rencontrer. To incounter meet,occurre,with; to come


Rencufer. To deteël,appeach,bewray,betray.


Renavrer. To wound,or burt againe.
Renaut. Looke Regnaut, ‘ oe HALL
| Renchainer.To reinchaine;to chaine,or bind in chaines,


g

Renche. Looke Rang. .
Rencheoit. To fall againe.
Rencheri: m.ie:£ Growae

held or come to a greater rate,then it was at.
ncheri. He keepes off, holds aloofé, makes
it daintie, feemes coy or fqueami 7
lifh, froward , barfh, vatra


herir, To raifé the price of, to make deerer then it


deerer or higher prifed ,


was.

Rencheute: £ 4 recidiuation, or new fall.

Renchier: m. A Rayne-Deere,

Renclorre. To reinclofé. _

| Renclouër. To nayle againe.

: Rencocher, To nocke the fecond time. —
çon:£. A ranfome; that which is payed for

bertie of a prifaner of warre.; alfo, corne giuen backe

by a Miller peat whence, Tel Mrs prie mau-

Is not fo much grifi, or makes not

Be haut 0 f ”


ranfomer; and thence, 7
exattor hard or fore PO bik:


& troopes, which on afi J i 1


Cheval derencontre. Ahorfé of féruice, or theva-
_ lue of one,due by a new vaffall unto bis new Lord,both
falling out to be fo by the death of their predecefors
within one yeare. à ren :
Mor de rencontre. An apt or unpremeditated icaft,
ec, as before in Rencontre. .: Tha
Nom derencontre. A good, acceptable, bonef?, or
happie name. .
Rencontré : m, €e: £. Incounteredmet,occurred with, |
bit,or light upon, |
_ Voilà bien rencontré. À good and wittieieafl, a fit
and quicke reply,beleeue me.
Ils ont rencontré chauflure à leur pied ; Looke


Chanflure. -


to,or light on,cafually ; alfo, to fpeake merrily, witrily.
prettily,unbappily, proper ly,or to the purpofe ; to bit up
on a ieaft,to make a wittie incounter.
Deux hommes fe rencontrent bien, mais iamais
deux montaignes: Prov, Two men may fometimes
meet, but mountaines neuer. 3
Rencontreur: m. .4 mocker, flowter, giber, ieafler,
pleafant companion, facetious perfon,merrie man.
encourager, To remcourage. ot


Rendable: com. Rendible,renderable, yeeldable, refio-
rable,
Rente rendable. 4 rent-fecke or charge, which may


be extinguifhed,redeemed,or bought out.
Renan a A rendering, or peelding; a refloring, or
giuing backe. ;
Droi& de rendage de chafcun ouvrage. Looke un-
der Droiét, 7 1 :
Se Rendebter. To runne or grow in debt againe.
Rendement: m, Arendring;retribution,refloring-yeel.


ding backe,
Rendestes Toreindent,or fet new teeth unto.
Rendez-vous: m. A Kendeuous ; a place appointed for
the affemblie,or meeting of fouldiors,
Le rendez-vous d'un’ affaire, The end, or fcope of
a matter, the drift, or purpofe whereto it is direfted, —
Renditer. To reindite, or frame a new Judiftment a-
gainft ; alfo, to demonfirate, manifeft, or point at, a-:


gaine.

Rendon: £. Randome,uncertaintie; or, as Randon.

Se Rendormur: To fall afleepe againe.
Rendormiflement: m. 4 falling afleepe againe,
Rendouble, as Redouble.

Rendouër: m, Aretributions or the time, or vefell, of


2 igs Rab.
Rendre. if render, yeeld, gine, or pay, backe; reflore,
make reflitution unto; alfo, to yeeld, gine, affoord, af-
e,unto; alfo,to caufe,make,effett,or bring to paffes
alfo,to vomit, fpue,or caft vp againe ; alfo, to ramne,as


ne Oe. aa!
endre les abbais, ou abbois, To hold the dogs at a |
bay; a defence made by a Deere, when he can runne no
longer; by a Boresat bis firfiraifing,and before be begin
torunnes >
_Serendre à. To meet with, or at; alfo, to vefort, re-
aire,come, or get bim,unto. :
d ux feva rendre au cerveau.tt reaches,rumes,
or goes from the eyes to the braine..
Ou rendre, ou pendre,ou mort d’ enfer attendre: |.
Pro. Keflore, or bang,or met tobe onan
-Au er ange, au rendre Diable; &, Au prefter:
au rendre fils de putain : Prov. ps
when they would bane come, fpeake faire, but ~—
= Je)


gas Lo


sad


a de Let >


RE N-


Xthey fhauld pay coyne, (pit fire. 10 © -
Qui a appris a prendre (gait tard que c'eft deren-
dre: Pro, Thofe that can take bel} reflore worft; or,
chofe that are biftie to take are (low to reftore.
endu: m.ué: f. Rendred; yeelded or giuen backe,re~


él Stored; alfo, yeelded, giuen, affoorded,unto;alfoymade,
{ effeted,ar brought to palfe; alfo,vomited,{pued,or caft
UP againe,
+ Renduire. To reannoint or befineare againe.


Readurci:m, ie: & ‘Keobdurated; made more bard,
fiffesor objlinate,then before,
Rendurcir. To reobdurates to make more bard,or obfii-
nate,then before.
Reneau: m. as Bocque. i
¥ Renegat: im. A renegadoes one that abiures bis religi-
ne. on,or forfiveares bis profeffion,
Reneger. To fuow againe,
Renes. Looke Reines.
Renette: £.4 Game at Tables of fame refemblance with
J our Donblets,or Queenes Game; alfo, the apple called
i] a Pippin, or a kind thereof,
enettoyé: m.ée: £Clenfèd againe wypedyor feowred
anew. 4
Renettoyement: m. A newor fecond,clenfing.
nettoyer, To clenfe againe, to wype or fcowreoner,
anew,
Renettoyeur: m. One that wypes, clenfes,or (covores a
4 thing often,anew,or ouer againe,
i Renfardeler. To packe vp againe.
enferiner. To fhut up againe,
me Renferrer. Today new yrons on; alfa, to firike, or thru
through,azaine witha fivord oc.
Renfefter vne maifon, To put new ridge-tyles on it, in
3, Leu of theold ones; or tomew-roofeit. © \
1 Renfierir. To pr flatelie, furlie againe.
| Renficr vneaiguille. To thread a needle againe.
Renflage : m. 4 great,or new, felling.
| Renflainber. To reinflame,
LA” y Renflammer. The fame.
% Renflé: mée:f. Swelled anew or againe, greatly or
doubly fwolne.
Renflement: m. Anew,or double, fivelling.
Renfler. To fivell anew or againe, greatly or doubly to
H.


{we ;
Renfoncé: m. éc : € New headed, as Caske; whofe bot-
tome, or bead is new fet in; alfo, hollowed, or funke
im,
| Renfoncement : m. 4 new heading of Caske.
enforicemens.( I Painting )hollowings or fining
Sr qui femblent eftre reculées,& enfoncées;)

Or jaa SI" ? :

Renfondré: m. ée:f. Sunke againe ; al, darke,ob-
fèure,ouer-fh1dowved,low-feated;as a bolow bottome:
cnfôndrement:m. A fhadowing,or ouerfhadowing.

Renfondrer. To replunge, or finke againe ; alfo, todar-
hen,ob{cure, (badow,ou ‘ , 1

_ Serenfondrer. To fuke in againe.

nts. 4 Renfoncemens.
- | Renfontere To driae; thruff, or force backe unto the bot:


tome sti farre into againe. :


the force,or, ite
Se ren « To gather firength, redouble bis force,
recower bis for LS 1.95 virus

Renforci: m. ie: €. Reinforced; flrengthened or forts.
| fed,animätédorinconra ; vato force


or Vigor. ribextri


fo; LES
| Renforcer: To reinfèrce, on firengthen againe; to doublé }


| Reng: m, A Yanke, dre; as Rang,


Reniement : m, 4x earnef? denying, difawowsing,dlifaf.


min
Renie


R EN


Renforcir. as Renforcer,
Renfort: m. Aide, Supply ; abundance, plentie.
Renfouir. To dig againe. YS
enfourner, To put into the Ouen againe.
Renfrongné: m. ée: f Furrowed,as an angrie brow;
_ wrimpled, crumpled, puckered ; frowning, lowring,


Scowling.
SeRenftongner. To frowne lowre, feold.


Se Renfüeiller. To get new leaves, to grow leaned a-
gaine,


|


ager. To reingage.
seiner. To fheath,or put into the fheath againe.
R enge: f. Aranke,rew, range,
Rengé: m, €e: f. Ranked, ranged, ordered,arrayed,
Rengée:£ 4 play with a ball at nuts, placed on à
row


Rengelet: m. The name of a yellow, and fiveet apple.
Rengendré: m. ée: f Reingendred,new begotien.
engendrer. 70 reingender,to beget againe.
Rengendreur : m. 4 reingendrer.
Renger. Toranke;range order crc; as Ranger.
Rengette. ence, Se laiffer aller à la rengette. To
gine her felfe a wboorifh fcope, to Suffer ber fhove to goe
Rengier: m. 4 Rayne Deere.
engigner. To bewitch,or deceine,againe,
Renglacer. Againe to take cold, be cold, thicken,or con-
R an re ie
engloutir. To reglut, reingulfe, fivallow-vp a aine.
Rengluer. To begin or Her nya Er
Se Rengorger. To bold downe the bead, or thruft the
\ \ehinne into the necke, as fome doe,in pride, or to make
their faces looke the fuller; we fay,to bridle it,
engouffrer. To reingulf. |
Rengouler. To redeuoure.
Rengourdir, To benumme,or aflonie anew.
Rengourmer. To curbe,or keepe in firait fubiottion; al.
fosto cuffe,knocke,or pafh on the mouth ; whence ;
Tete re ourmeray bien le groin. 1 will pummell
thee foundly ; I will make thee bold thy bead full low,
engraifler. To fatten againe,
engraver. To reaggrauate; reinforcé,renew, :
Rengregement: m, Aw exaggeration, aggrauating,ex-
alperating exulcerating. é te
engreger. Toagerauate, exaggerate, exulcerate.exaf.
PSE wworfesrub or m4 the fore of. by:
Rengrenement:m.4 reingraining; a new firnifting,


or’ filling, with graine.


fo


Rengrener.To reingraine; againe to fermion fill with |


ame,
eather roffir. To wax grôfe,or great againe.
Renhanter. To néw-bead a Pike, Et. %
Renhardir.7¢ reimboldenreincourage, ’

er. To put on the [pit againe. '
se Renherber. To°get mew graffe, to become graffe a-


Aine
Reshaemer. To reinhort,readuife,require,wnto,
er. To oyle oner againe. ‘
Renjabler. To new-rigoll a peece of caske.
Renyatiter: ro put new [pokes unto a wheele, !
Renicher. To nefile'anew, to returne unto bis owne


firming, abiuring; an ordinarie frvearing, or bla{ÿbe.


ee
| To dene ifly, difafime varneftly, difduse: |
‘sie, ar A Er |
À 3 01 Aj.


pi lu | 22 a ai


i


ordinarily) to blajpbeme God.
enieur: m. An earacft denyer, difaduower, abiurer,
fiivearer sf; alfo,a blafphemer,or an ordinarie fwea-


Renifles, To fiuffie,or {nifter often.
Rejoindre. To reinioyne, reordaine unto, reimpofe vp-


Renitènce: f Refiflance; a bard tbrufling, or indeuon-
ring againfl.

Renitenc: m. ente: f, Refifling;indenouring, labouring,
or thrulling againft.

Reniveler. Againe to meafure,or lay euen,with a lenell ,
againe to found with a plummet.

Renn-fane. The Standart , or Cornet of a troope of
borfi.

Rennuyer. To remole/t.

Renogle: f. The little greene Frog, or Toad,

Renoiant. Faife of promife. (v.m.)

Renoircir. To blacke ouer againe,

Renoifer, Againe to brawle,or contend in words,

Renom: m. as Renommée.

ge oe ge To number, count, veckon,or tell oner,a-


Renonankc m,ée: £, Renowmed, famous,of much note,
of great name, reporied or bruited all abroad, excee-
dingly fpoken of.

Renomimée:f, Renowme, fame bruit, report, reputa-
tion,eftimation,a great name.

Bonne renominée vaut mieux que ccinéture do-


more worth unto ber) then any garment.

Se Renommer de quelque va. To profèfe, report, or
giue out, that he belongs unto, or depends vpom any
one,

Renoncer. To renounce,abiure, forfke abandon forgoe

Y ewer,

es PO f. À renunciation, renouncing, abiu:
«ring, forfaking.
enoter. To renote,remarke, to note or marke,againe,

Renovation: £4 renouation, renewment,repaire,

Renouée: f Knot-graffe,Swines PER,
Innocents hearbe,

Renouër. To tye,hrtit,or linke together againe.


on foot an old
ted fuir. :


 peeccr or patcher up of ruinows.caufes.

Renouille. (Sometimes vfed) es anne Frige
enouveau : m. The Springs... ee:
enouvée: £ as Renouée. lente

Renouyelant. Rerewing.


up; repeated,begun againe. : : Son


Ren eas thie nen Une.


rée: Pro, 4 good name graces a woman more (ors of


Renouér yn procés, To renew, reuine, patch up, fet
ae: beaten,moath-eaten,or disieyn-


Renoücur de vieilles caufes. 4 mre of old, fits; a


Renouvelé: m.ée:f. Renewed ; sn dete or rind


Renouveler.Torexew,repaire,nemw drefe or trims Ds


ean notes muse ‘
‘aig ein petri.
TeHIUINg, VegINAING AL, Srosin »f1-|
[Remove ri m. Arenemer, dans
Teuinor ,beginaer att ©
Renouver: ft dp ti ies


ball ; alfo,t der made thereof. Lies |:
nude | Rentraidture: f. The laying in ‘of afcame withibe fn-


Mae Tha le Se h
D AL


R E N


Rente: £ Rent ; reuenue.
Rente à l'appreci. Rent corne, payable in fo much
money as it might baue beene fold for,on any of the
om market dayes, next before the day, whereen it is


Rente cenfive, 4 Cens,or quit rent.

Rente conftituée fur heritage. 4 rent-charge, or a

rent-fecke, raifed upon, or yeelded out of; an Fube-

vitance.

Rente conftiruée à pris d’ argent. Am anmuitie, or

rent,vpon a morgage, a rent raifed upen,or bought fir,

moneys ( The rate whereof is mofl commenly, Au denier
ouze.

Rente courante, # Rente volage.

Rente fonciere, 4 rent-féruice,rent-charge,or fee-

firme rent ; an accefion unto aCens,or chiefe rent ; a

fècond charge layed on land vpon a fecond graunt

thereof; called thus, becaufe it euer followes the foyle,
and is due unto the Lord thereof.
Rente hereditable,ou hereditale, heritable, ou he-
reticre. À vent in fee fimple.
Rentes à heritage, The rents payed out of the Kings
demaine in lien f ibe Inberitances, Cenfuels, ou Ro-
turiers which haue beene annexed vate it.
Rente noble. A rent thats due ont of a fief.

ente proprietaire, as Rente fonciere; tearmed by
Ciutlians,Reditus folaris, fundariusve.
Rente rendable. Looke Rendable.
Rentes requerables, which, as all vents (not otber-
wife agreed upon) muft be demaunded on the ground,
or at the place, for which they are due.
Rente roturiere, Looke Roturier,

: Rente feiche. Rent fecke ; tearmed fo, not (as ours)

becaufe no difireffe is incidentvnto it, but becaufe it
yeelds no profit unto the Lord of the foyle out of wbich
it iffnes fc Car c’eft le penfion, ou cens annuel,que
le fubicét impofe fur fon heritage mouvant 4’ au-
cun Seigneur foncier ; ) So that st is as well a rent
Reve as that which we call Rent feck.

tolerable. 4 rent,or auncient rent,wbich
cannot ra à bought out, but muft be indured, and payed,
by the tenant.

: Rentevolage,volante,ou vollant. A Rent fecke,or a
Rent charge ; any rent thats raifed of or purchafed for,
money

: Mieux vaut reigle que rente: Prov. Beiter be wife
then wealtbie,bonelt ben ricbsgood rules to be preferd
*fore great renennes,

Renté: ne Bien swath. Well rented, of good li-


{ ones greatxenenue.


ol il eft renté: Pro. A good Trade is


Renker (for Rec Réenter) tograffe againe,
pr vn homme. Te gine him vants,ergesialictest


ead a el we roi with
Rabélensis: A va that payes rent, cr (as me

me ou
| La coin


gers; alfo,a drawing of rent cloth; adearning:
| Rentraieur: m4 Scomficr;or Draweryer ‘Dearnersa
- mender of rents in linnen, or woollen clothes,
Rentrainer. To traile,or draw,backe, x
| en.


FAE-OHIO STAT E-UNIVERSITY


2


3 RE N . «REP |


Rentraire. To lay in,or'lay downe,a feame;alfo,to draw, .


dearne, or fi up a vent in a garment.
Rentrayeur, 2s Renwaieur.
Reñtré: m,.ée: f. Reentred , returned in, gone in-a-
gaine, |
C’eft bien rentré de picques. To the purpofe 7 war-
rant you. (fronically.)
entrer. To reenter,to returne in,or goe in againe; alfo,
to{peake merrily,or unhappily ; fuddainely to come out
with a pleafant or wittie conceit; to light on aieaft; al-
d,as Rentraire. :
entrer en mefme bourbier, To fall into the fame
error againe.
Rentreur:m, Adrawer of cloth,
Renvahir. To reinuade, ;
Renveloper. To reinuelope, reinwrap.
Renvenimer. To reinuenome.
Retiverfe: f. Coup donné a la ren, 4 croffe blow.
Tomber à la renverfe. To fall backward.
| Renverlé : m. ée:f. Ouerturned,onertbrowne,
infide out or upfide downe; peruerted.
Anguille renversée. An £ele opened all along, and
turned infide out,then well wafbed bound vp,and boy-
led in red Wine,and ferued cold, with favoce made of
Ginger,(ynnamon,Cloues,Graines Wine,Vineger, and
Veriice, :
Raifin renverfé. Garden Nightfhade, pettie Mor-
cell. É
Yeux renverfez. Eyes flanding in the head,or decay-
ed eyes.
Renverfemént: m, Aa ouerturning, owerthrowing, e-
uerfion, fabuerting ; alfo,an inner fion,or turning infide
0


out.
Renverfément. 7nfide outward, vplide downe, topfie
turuie,backward. : '
Renverfer. To overturne, euert, ouerthrow ; turne vp-
ide downe ; alfo, to inuert, or turne the infide out-
| — ward,
| Renverfure : f. as Renverfemént.
Renvier, To reuy, at play. |
Il yrenvioitde fa refte. He fet his wholeveftsbead-
:-hentured all bis eftate,vpon it. )
Renvoy: m. 4 fending backe, a difiniffion ; a referring
fem one unto another.
envoy de prifonniers. 4 fending of prifoners from
one Indge to another, or from a Court of Parliament
unto (ome inferiour ludge.


!


one that being appealed, or called before a fuperior
ludge, requires to be difmiffed to the profecuting of bis
Suit alreadie begun, before the inferior (bis ordinarie
Judge : Another kind of Renvoy (tearmed hero
Congé de cour) & graunted vnto fuch asare appea-
led, or called before Indges that baue no néon de
uer them. | 193
Faire renyoy. To di/miffe,or fend backe; toreleafe;to
. difeharge, "1" tings ait 945%
Favedss renvois. À Diftionarie trc,to referre you,
in ae word,unto another by the tearmes of ,Looke,See,
Seeke, coc. +. ae m2" A3
Renvoyé: m. ée: f..Difmiffed, fent backe;remitted,re:
: faced returned ; referred, Ÿ i


a


Renvoyer. To difmiffe, remit, remand returne, fend
back, refirre pi. nother. ‘ sideoanteo

: Serenvoyer leefteutlvna l'autre. To -fhiftoff,or

.\poaftener ja thing one to the other;:or ;to ferme one ano-
thers turne withall, En
Cela nous renyoit au devin. That puts uso


Simplerenvoy. À fimple difimiffion; graunted unto


pren ; or, weknow not,on a fuddaine what to make
of it


Renure: £ Laren, d'une poulie, The bellow,or furrow
wherein the rape runnes Sa #. re <

Reofté: m. ée : £, Taken away againe.

Repaire: m. A lodging or baunt ; the place whereto one
ufually repaires ; alfo, the denne, or couert wherein a
wild beaft lurkes; alfo,the dung of a Hare.

Faulcon derepaire.A Hagard which ewer keepes one
certaine fland at night; and bence;
Cet oifeau n'eft de long repaire. Kefarts not much
to,or flayes not long in,one place.

is repaire, A place wherein pirits baunt, or
walke ; alfo,an apparition,or fpirit.

Repairer. To haunt, frequent,lodge in,repaire vnto,one
certaine place,

Repaifaille: f. A feeding, a repaf.

Repaiftre.ro a 3 to gine or take food,
no svieluals.

Repaiftre debayes, To feede with trifles, or vaine
hopes; to intertaine with fibs,or friuolous tearmes,
Repaiftre en Commiflaire.see Commifaire.
Repailtre les corbeaux, To feed Rawens , become
Rauens food,bang in chaines.

Il faut que I’ herbe foit bien courte quand on ne
trouve que repaiftre : Prov. The graffe had need be
verie fhort where nothing’s to be nibled.

Mal de tefte veut repaiftre : Prov. (The bead
Jinarts for the flomackes emptineffe;) beadach refetion
cranes,

Repaiftri: m.ie: £ Kneaded oùer againe.

Repandre, Looke Refpandre.

Reparable: com, Repairable,amendable,recouerable.

Reparateur: m. A repairer,mender, renewer of.


Reparation: £ A reparation, pre hee 0


couerieof decayed things; alfo,a full reffitution, dr fa-
tisfaËion.
Reparations. The repaires,or the reparations of hou»
fts,oe 3 whereof, (ayes a French Lawyer,there be three
enerall) kinds ; viz. les neceflaires, without which
thing bad fallen downe, or been much the worfe;
les vtiles; by meanes whereof it is greatly improned ;
& les yoluptuaires,ou de plaifir; éruing onely for ar=
nament,and the tenants delight,
Reparations viageres. Looke Viager.
Reparé: m, ée: f:Repaired amended renewed,reflored,
recouered, cee
D run : f, The bearbe called Beets,
: Noire, Blacke Beets.
Reparement: m, 4 repairing,amending renewing, re-
‘couering,r ele Se aaa
Rqua Torepaire,mend,renew; recouerrefiore,
vneiniure, > or gine fatis-
,for a wrong done.
Celar bien vn homme quand il parle bien.
pier eset improue, grace, or fet forth, aman very
Rep . Looke Refpargner. "
Reparler. To (peake PE
Reparoïftre. To neappeare. me
E Fe leferay reparoiftre.1 will make thee pay [und
) PT 2 UNIT use 20 ! ELLE
Repart: m. A redinifion,or fubdiuifon; alfo, a reply.
Repartager. To-make a new partition of , to dinide a
new. À : TRE ene
Rep ter ; a ode dea ji ing :
a debtors eftate, or of the money made of it, among


Re-


2


; Go gle


oa 4 =~ _


. As bax
—_—


JE


ht (RER


err 2
he de 1


rer nt


TROIS Lis


ris


REP A


R E P


Reparti:m. ie: f Subdiuided,redinided; or diuided in


‘to many parts; alfo,replyed ; alfo, parted againe (as a
borfe) from the band,
Repattie: £ as Repart; al/o, an anfivering blow, or
tbruji (in fencing rc) and thence, areturne of, or an-
fer in (peech; a reply.
Repartir. To rediuide,or fubdinide ; ao, quickly to re-
turne a thruft or blow;to.anfwer a thruft witha thruft,
a blow with a blow, in fencing, exc; and bence,tore-
py des fpeech ; alfo, a borfe to part againe from the
and.


Repas: m. A repall,meale, refection.
Ra de chien: Pro.Hounds fare;notbing but bread
ana waler,

Repaflé: m.ée: f Repafed;palfed or gone ouer againe;
(alfo bealed,recouered ; in old French.)

Repañer. To repafe; to paffe,or goe ouer againe;alfo(in
old French) to recouer,or grow well againe.

Repateliner. To flatter, footh, cog, or collogue with be-
yond meafure,er againe,

Repatrié: m, ée: f Repatriated, reflored unto bis me
home ; alfo,reconciled, or made friends with,

Repatrier. To repatriate, or to reflore to his owme home ;
alfo,to attone,reconcile,make friends againe,

Mais c'eft Je repatrier trop loing.But fo we fetch bis
pettigree too farre.

Repeigné: m. ée: £. Often combed, or combed ouer a-
Laine. rat

Repeigner. To combe often,or ower againe,”

Repeindre, To paint againe.

Rependre. To bang à againe, |

Repenté: m. éc : £ Serioufly confidered \aduifèdiy
shang of; reuolued often , difcufjed much, in the
thoughts,

Repenfement: m, A férious confidering, earnep) thin-
king of; a frequent reuoluing, pondering,or examining
in the mind. :

Repenter. To thinke much mufe earneftly confider adui-
sedly, of; to examine ferioufy ponder duly,often reuolue
in the itp infin
Mal penfe qui ner e: Prov. Hethinkesi

bel ibankes ils area Weseliny cal

Repentailles: £, Repentance; or the accidents,or fruits


thereof. À ry
Fiançailles chevauchent en felle , & repentailles


"+ encroupe: Pro. Repentance waits full clojé on mari-


‘age. ;
Repentance: f. Repentance; peniterice. .. -°
i ‘pented yepentant,


Repenti: m, ie: £ Re repenta penitent repen-


ting. Ags op |
Ss Filles repentics. An Order of Nunes, which baue


beene profeffed whores...


Repentin: m, ine: f. Suddaine ; vnleoked for, una-


‘wares. ”


spr $m. Repentancee. ni ce
R M Vs nc trop tard: Prov, Too
~ Tate a manrepents when the hangman attends bim,.


De court plaf long repentir: Pro, Leoke Pla
Fa . es DRE


| CARE. : | yat!
Replancher. To planke,to floore or feele with planes,


Prov. Too late the Rat cryes bad-1-wift when the (at
pawes her. ,

Repentivement. Penitently, repentingly, with repen-
tance. a ey

Repercer. To pierce againe, !

Repercher. To fét on the pearch againe.

Repercuflif: m.iue: £. Repercuffine, repelling, beating
2 driming backe; reuerberating, rebounding ; re(oun-


tng.
Repercuffion: . 4 repercuffion, repulfing, beating or
R: rcing ects; a reflettion,reuer beration,rebounding.
epercuté: m.ée :f.Repelled,repulfed,beaten or (ruc
man refletted, reuerberated. ie
rcuter.Torepell,repul[e; force beat,or firike back:
à lo dé ou refound. dé is
Repercutif: m, A repercutine ; a medicine that repells,
sé driues, paine from the place whereunto it is apply-
e


Reperdre, To loofe againe,

Repermis: mise : f. Repermitted; fuffered, or tolera-
ted againe; alfo,newly licenced. |

Repestible : com. Which may be found, getten, recoue-

red.


Repertoire: m. 4 Repertorie, Lift, Rol,Index,Innento=


rie,Regifler. ;
Repefché: m.ée: £Fifhed; or fetched out of the water,
Repeleher To fifb,or fetch out of the gaine
epeicher. Te teh out 0 water, û
Repeter, To repeife,tovveigh againe, g 4
ir. To knead againe. . 2
Repetafler. #5 Raperañler. . re!
Repeté: m.ée:f. Repeated yehearfed; alfo,redemaun-
ded, asked or called backe, required, acquired, or fêt-
ched,againe.
Repeter. To repeat, or to rehearfe; alfo, to redemaund,
require, aske, or call backe; alfo, toreturne, vecouer,
: take,or fetch,backe againox °
Repetition: f. A repetition, a rehearfall ; alfo, a ree


demanding ,asking,or calling back; a recouerie,taking,


or fetching,againe,
epeu: m. eué: £ Fed, filled, fatisfied.
Repeué: £. A meale, repaft v8 feion; alfo,a bait (or bai-
tag place)inan Fnne,erc. my


epeuplement: n1.4 repcopling,repopulating,new flo-


R ving with inbabitants,ec. PRE ‘a
eupler. To repopulate new-flore with people, firni
pp pr op v eee’ Pi


Repeytet: m.Fe#erwort,Earthgall, Centorie the leffe,


… conimon Centarie, finall Centorie.
Repicquer. ro pricke,thrufi, plant againe ; alfo,to ride,
(or fpurresbacke, (TO
tpigcohnement: m,.A budding or fprouting out, a
. putting forth againe. \ ; }
Repigeonner. To bud; fprout ont, put fortb,anew.
‘Repiler. To pownd,bray beat (in a mortar) againe,
R à 0 pinch. againe. : +.


A à She yo


Repionnet. as ner; or t0 yéeld, er put forth,
To piffe againe. ae


c


Lageines SV Minis

Replantable: com: Replantable. LAE aed
Janté:m. ée::Replanted, fèt or planted againe,
lantement: m..A replanting ; a mew, or anosber,


Replanter.Toreplantor fe againe, 2


R‘E P


R'E B


| Replaftrer. Toplaiflersor dawhe oner,anem

Replat: m, 4 flat,or botiome; the flat part of any thing;
alfo,the alley betweene tivo beds in a garden; alfo, the
brow of a mountaine, or that part of it which bangeth
ouer the ref. : > ¢

Replet: m, ete: £ Replete, full; fat, plumpe, quarrie,
cor fie


Repletif: m. iue: £ Repletinesreplenifhing, filling,
Repletion: £, A repletion, replemfhing, filling.
Repletivement. Repletiuely, fully.

Repleurer. To weepe againe.

Repli: m. 4 fold, plait, or bought ; a foulding, bowing,
winding,or turning in and out,
Replidelaiambe. The bamme.

… Le repli d’une lettre. The fould in the bottome of a
Decd whereon we figne and whereinto the labell is put
for the feale, !

Les replis d'une Riviere. The manifold cranklings,
or wriglings made in and out by a Riuer is it courfe.
Replié: m. ée:f. “Much foulded, often bowed or plai-
ted, redoubled, turned or winding in-and out many

wayes,

Replietnent:m. 4 redoubling, much foulding, often
plaiting er bowing, manifold winding or turning in
and out, |

Replier. To redouble, to bow, feuld, or plait into ma-
ny doublines ; to make to turne, or wind in and out
werie often,

Replieur: m. 4 redoubler. :

Replieure: £. A redoublement,a redoubling; or, as Re-

| _ pliement.

Replique: £. A reply; fecond anfiwer; new confirmation

of former affertions. .

Chofe bien dite n’a replique,ne redite: Pro.Sownd


sf fpeech preuents replyes.
| Repliquer. To reply,or anfiver unto. à
5 Repliffé: m.ée: £ Redoubled,much foulded often bow-
ed,manifoldly plaited,or plaited againe ;-alfo, puckred,


or fhrunke.
Repliffure: £. as Replieure.
| Replomber. To lead; folder ; or found againe,
Replonger. To replunge,to ducke,or dine againe.
Replouvoir. Taraine againe. }
| Reployement: m. as Repli; or,a foulding,
Repluiner. To plume,or plucke the fecond time.
Reply.as Replis aff, the voiding of the excrements at
thé mouth; a difeafe called,Miferere mei,
indre. To pricke agaize, ‘Ss
| Repoifler. To pitch ouer againe.
-Repolir. To repolifh,new-furbifb.
Repolon. The Jouldiors manage ec; as Paffade,
_Reponce. Rampions ; Looke Raiponce, }
 Reponcer. To pounce againe. Lim
eponchon. as Raiponce.
| Repondre. To lay egges againe,
Repontique. Looke Rheupontique.
Reporthatm. ée: f, Carried backe,returned,brought.a-


gaine. 7 i
Reporter. Torrecarrie, beare backe, returne ; remit,


| referre,
ae


R

Repofade: £ 4 t x \s

Stn ela, few it downe, or take our

| €a) i wihh & \

Repofe: £. ASémibreefe Refiin Mujicke. 5,
{é. R ? fed, : s while ; 2

Sper cee ae


iz ao dea gle


ai


‘ay Repofée: f.as Repofade ; alfo,the lodge of a Stag,érc.
| Repofément. Repofedly,quietly, Willy, flayed ™


eb Tree pamfé, vefhsor flay; to beat quiet, to
ofer fon vin.To fleepe after hard drinking ,todi(-
: et drinke by ries ds nn |

i es vin boit il fe repofe:Pro.Good wine breeds


uiet ref,
Qui va il leche,qui repofe il feiche : Prov. The flir-
‘rer thrines,thelaïie boufe-Done pines,

Repofitoire:m, A florcboufe, wareboufe, eupboord,
counter, place takeepe things in.

Repofoir: m. A lodge,manfon; fanding ;refling place;
alfo,aStue for fifh. °
Les repofoits d’un efcalier. The refis or landing pla- |
ces of a balfe-pace flaire; euerie fift, or fixt oc flep,
much broader then the ref.

Repofouér. as Repel

Repoft. En repoft. Clofely, biddenly, fecretly, or as a
thing thats well layed vp.

Repoulfé: m.éesf, Repulfed, repelled ; foyled ; thruf?,
or driuen,backe,

Repoulfement: m. 4 repulfing, repelling; foyling ; a
thrufling, pufbing,or drining,backe,

Repoulfer. To repulf, repell; file; thraflypufb, force,
or drine,backe.

Repoulfeur: m.Arepulfer,a repeller; a thrufter,pufher,
driner backe.

Repoulfoir. Looke Repoufloir.

Repous: m.A pauing; pargetting,or filling with rubble,
7ubbifh,erc.

em Repulfing, repelling ; pufhing or forcing

che.


ai

Repouflé, & Repouffer.as Repoulfé, & Repoulfer.

Repouflearias Repulleur. a :
epoufloir: m. A repulforie;a thing that repulfeth,dri-
ueth backe; or pufheth out; and hence, the yron taole
wherewith woodden pinnes are thruft out ; alfo, the top |
of a Pitfall,or Trap fet for Foxes,cre.

Repratiquer. To praétife,or contrive againe,

Reprehenfion:f.4 reprebenfion reproofe,rebuke;a bla-
ming, checking chiding ; a controlling.

Repremiation: £. A repremiation,a remarding,

Reprenant, Reprebending, reprouing. à
eprenart: m. A reprebender, reba; reproner, car-
per,checker, find-fault,controller.

R re. To refumereceiue,take backe,or againe;al-
50, to apprehend, flay; or bold, a fugitiue, exc; alfo, to
jar me blame, checke, rebuke, reproue, carpe, con= |

otros NA = ay

: Se reprendre. To clofé, ieyae, or knit againe;alfo,to |
ee breath a little,and after breathing,to begin,or

: is alfo,to take, hold,or get life,as a plant
Reprendre le criminel. (In Law) ne s'entend faire
vnnouveaupracés cri y ains reprendteceluy |

uieft defiafai&.
eprenons noftre chevre à la barbe. Let ws backe
to oxr matter againe,

Repreneur:m. es Reprenart,  . 1, Sulzorqga fl

Reprefaillesfi 4 taking, , or feifing on, for

a difireffe, or pledge; alfo, a prifé, or a reprifal ;

: CAA! t UT sr I
Droi& dercprefailles, Power given, or lsaue graun-
ted, untoa private manswbichhath beene (or feares to |
be)robbed,imprifoned,ranfomed or otherwife wronged,

be foraine peopte a vghtor provide fr) nef
upon them, or any of their countraymen. 0.
ZRX Lettres


= 0 © —_- à — a


REP R EP?


Reproduire. To reproduce, to yeeld or bring forth a-


gaine.
Reprovisionné: m.ée: £ Furnifhed with new prouifi.
"+ refurnifhed, farnifhed againe. oT
Reprour able: com, Reproucable, blameable, condem-
nable. |
Reprouver. To reprowe,chide,cheche,blame, cond.
ind fault with difallow. ET vo,
tile: com, Reptile,creeping crawling; as vermine,
Plants,roots rc. +
Republique: £ The Commonwealth,
se NS com.Repudiable ,refit{able,reiectable,for-
fa


Repudiation: £. A refifall à ne
Repudié : ie ée: pr à pa PE 0

ned,caft off. ne
Repudiement: m. A refifing, forfaking, abandoning, |

reiecting, #3


Repadies To repudiate, refufe, forfake, abandon, re-
zebt. i DGS


Repudieur: m. 4 : À à
Rue. Late Ronee di


Repugnance: £ Repugnancie,contradittion, difagree-
ment,


Repugner. To repugne, crofe, thwart, impugne, re,
ubané on Zainefay, difagree "boosbe 244
fite unto. J x
Repulluler. To reburgeon,or bud out againe,
Repurgé: m. ée: € Repurged,clenfed anew,
irs tm, A new purging, a frequent or itera-
ted clenfing.. ;
Reputation: f. Reputation, efleeme, regard, account;


Lettres de reprefailles. Letters (Patents) of Mart,
or Marque ; letters authorizing reprifalls; or per-
mitting a priuate man that hath beene wronged by
forrainers to right bimfelfe on them, or theirs as be
can,
Reprefentation: f. 4 reprefentation; a fhew, refem-
| biance,likeneffe,apparance; alfo,a flanding for or a be-
ing prefented in the ftead of; and bence,the kindred.or
neerencfe of achild unto bus father, whofe perfon be
reprefents, and in the right thereof is to inioy that in-
| _beritance which,bad be lined, fhould haue beene bis,
Reprefenter. To represent, refemble, expreft imitate,
aét; al{o,to preuent,offer ,exbibit, fhew forth.
Repreflailles. Reprifills ; whence, Droié de repref-
Sailles ; for which looke under Reprefaille,
Reprefler. To prefe againe.
Reprefter. To lend againe. 3
Reprier. To pray often,defire earnefily,require againe.
Reprimende:f. A checke, reprehenfion, reproofé, re-
buke.


Reprimer. To reprefft, quell, tame, containe, keepe

faa hold under; to bridle, moderate, refraine, re-
raine,

Reprimeur : m. 4 reprefer queller,tamer;bridleryno-
derator,refirainer,

Reprin: m. Branne; or the courfeff of meale.

Reprins: m.in{e: f. Refumed,recouered taken backe or
againe ; alfo, veprebended,reproued rebuked, checked,
blamed ; al(o,clofed,ioyned,knit or fet together, againe;
alfo,taken or held; alfo, returned unto after a paw/e,
or breath-taking, 1

Reprinfe: f. Orpine,Liblong,or Line-long am bearbe; al.


a refiamption repetition yeiteration; a taking backe, fame ,bruit,renowme,a name, -
a bringing, or comming, in againe; alfo, a clofing, ioy- Reputé: m. ée: f, Reputed, held, efteemed, reckoned,

I ning,or knitting together of distoynted things ; alfo, a accounted, ; 4
holding taking,or thriuing uf tran(planted plants, and Reputer. To repute, bold, eflecme, reckon, account, ‘:
the fruit or increafe yeelded by any feed or plant ;alfo,a | Requamer. Teimbroder. +104
new homage done upon the change of Lord, or Tenant; | Requarreler.SeeRecarreler. . À
alfo,a turne in the dauncing of a Meafure, dre, Requart: m. The fourth part of a fourth ; a8 of 16 4,0f
Le comptable fait reprinfe de telle fomme. Theac- || 4 1. spout kia À

- comptant reimbur(es; payes,or allowes, back vntobim. | Requerable. Searchable; requirable, demaundable, or
Self {uch a (umme. ; . which muft. be demaunded ; whence; à.
Repris:m.ife: fas Reprins, | Rentes requerables. Looke Rente.
Reprife : f A re{umption; repetition, ee; as Re- Requerant: iligentl fearching, or feeking ; alfo, re->
pin e. ; à LT ‘| quefling,or befeeching. Hae i!
rifes de pierre. Demting peeces of flong. Vn chien requérant. .4 well-noféd, or cold-nofed, |
Ba ble reprife. Doubly hooked; crooking,bending, | hound. #7" US Shak
ee or turnd inwards,on both fides. ;  Requerir. Diligently to feeke, fearch, looke for, bunt
- ‘A plufieurs reprifes.Sundrie,or many fenerall times; | afier ; alfo, to requeft, imtréat , befeech 5 im-

TE fündrie, or manie feucrall efforts ; falling oftenwmio || plore, imporiune, earnefily to require, pray, or fue |

re that which be formerly left ; beginning oftem there || unto. "1 ot

= where before be had giuen ouer. er a Qui plaifir fait plaifir requiert: Prov. He that |

É Reprifer. To (et a newrate or price on,to prize againe, does a pleafure lookes to be pleafured ; one benefitex- |!


Reprochable: com, Reproachable, opprobrious, igno- __ peéteth another.
Reproche: £. A veproachydi ace,defamation, ation ina

tion ; a blemifh, crime, at red faults pe un
… ding;twitting,or caflin in the teeth a difabling of; an
R Seton ten t found with, Lg


pore a Rowe ee Te ee à E
equelte:f Ar , petiti pere in wre
Tits tke ce) Mes eet i —
| tie, prayer. imuecation, implorement ; al
mor ROSE? 4 | er: aad or baniog, joes
:m. Ge tome Aired onion | orbooke,againe. — Sag |
ce avded twitted or caftim the | : Requelte d'artiés. À publike challenge. eu |)
Pont Lee stain pie es À Requefte civile. .4'Kéwiew, Repeale, or Arreft |
Reprocher. To reproach; difgrace , blemifh, taint; | of Judgement ,graunted by Letters Patents upon’
Obie unto, charge or upbraid with, lay || fugpeftion, in the Chauncerie , that the Juages Laue |
inones dif, caft im bis teeth, a fault or error commit beene deceined by falfe allegations, forged cuiden-
ERE ES > SOM SR AR alata ces,periured wilne(fes; or otberwife abufed by thecun- |
D pe pe = ie op por ex- |! ming.and Shifts of the adnerfe parties Som
be x pial mart ee eee Requefted'un Oye, The Gooft giblets. 9
Le: Maiftres


| SeRcquinquer.ro {prucifie,finug,or tricke up bimfélfe.
4 Pic.


| Requifition: f. 4 requifition, requirall,demaund; re-


RE Q! RES
Maïltres des requeftes. The Maiflers of Requefls ;
‘ai fir(t there were but two, an Ettlefiaficall,and a lay
man; afiermards they came to be fut; two affiflants 1
the Chauncellor,and three Pétition-veceiuers (whereof
See more in, luges de la porte, onder Iuge.) Anno
= 1342 they grew'to be fix; and Anno 1408 they increa-
Sed unto eight; which number Henry the third dou-
bling,made them fixteene, They be Confeillers of the
bodie of Parliaments, and of the great Counfell, ouer
= which,in the abfence of the Judges, they prefide;as they
doe alfo atthe Seales of all Parliamentall Chaunceries,
where they heave the reports of the Referendaires;
They alfa take notice of the falfification of Chauncerie
Seales ; and iudge (en premiere Inftance) all contro-
uer fies arifing about the Titles of royal! Offices.
Aller aux requeftes. To goe,in time of warre, to im-
plore the protection of fome great perfonage, upon a
Stare of being vanfacked by the common foldiors:(a ru
ticall so MAT À: SN
Cela n’eft plus en requefte.1s0m0re fought or ta-
red for,no more asked or inquived after.
Requien: m, 4 certaine rauenous, rough-skinaed, and
wide-mouthed fifh,which is good meat. ;
Requinqué: m, ée: £ Tricked, fprucified,or finugd,up.
Pic. ‘ my
Camus requinqué. whofe flat nofe-end is turned
v


Resbaudir. To glad,reioyce exhilerate,
esbaudir vn chien. To incourage, or cheere up a
dog with clapping, whooping,ere. *
Refchal: m. Yellow wyre, {ich as netting for windowes
& made of. 3
Refchapper d'une maladie,To efeape or to recouerjofa


fete .

Refchaud: m. À Chafing-difh.

Refthauftévin-ée: €. Heated. or warmed againe,
Des vieux choux refchauffez. 4x old couple newly
married, > \\

Refchauffer. To warme,or heat againe.

Refchauffoir: mila chafing-difh ; alfo, a Warming.
panne, or Fire-panne, fuch as is ufed in Barbers

Se (ure ‘20178

Refchault. 2 Refihaufoir. Mae

Refchiers Tofhift, or take out of one thing to put into a-
nother, Le

Reftindants, A contratl which bath been made void
yp law, SP !

Refcindé: m.ée:£ Cut, or payed off: al, cancelled.
quafht,annulledrepealed, ren hs F 6

Refcinder. To cut,or pareoff alfa, to cancell,quafb,an-

. nibilate,annull,repeatle, fordoe.

Refcision: £ 4 veus cutting,or paring off; a can-
celling annulling ,annibilating.

Refcifoire: m, The execution of a Refcindant.

Refélairci: m. ie: f. New cleered up, clarified or fined


againes
Requint: m. The fifi part of the fift pennie for which a Renfconcer. asReftonfer,
fief bath beene fold(as of an hundred foure)duebefides efconfé: m. ée: f, Hidden, concealed, withdrawne,
the [aid fift,unto the Lord feodal,and payed moft com- clofe layed vp. ;


monly by the purchafèr. * Refconfer, To conceale, bide, withdraw, lay clofe, put
Requiper. To arme, equip, frrnifh, or make readie, a- s $
aime, Sey
Requis: m.ife : f, Diligently fought, fearched, looked for
hunted after ; earneflly required,befougbt,or intreated
for; alfo,requifite, fit, meet, a


up.» >
Relcouahe com, Ke/cuable, recouerable, redeeme-
able. © ?


Refcourre. Torefeug, take from, free, redecme,recouer,

eliners sv. . : 3}
Refcourfe vnererré. Toredeeme, disingage, or buy
backe,a peece of land. }


quefi,befeeching, fuing,or feeking to.
i : Bien a crié le loup qui fa proye refcoult: Pro, See


Requifitoire: m. À requeffor fuit,vato. j
cquifitoire: com, Inquifitiue,or full of mquiries;alfo,
requiring,tequefling,éc ; whence ;
Lettres requifitoires. (Oppofed vato fuch as be man-
datarie,or ofcommauad)lelters of requefl,or intreatie,
Requoy. Looke Recoy.
Rete. Ta bellow as a Stag,to trout as a Buck.
efief. as Arriere-fief.
a)


Rere-vaflal: m. 4v pau to a vaffall; a vaffall that


Loup.
Refcouffe: £. Refèue,redemption,delinerie yreftons ; the
vefcuing,or taking of an ingaged thing from. ~~. ~
efcouffe perpetuelle, Reachet, ou moyen de ra-


voir,a perpetuité,
Refcoufe e derente. An extinguifhment,redemptior,
or buying out of a rent charge. +E
Ou iln’y a plus de refcoufle, Defperate, lofts gone,


holds of a mefñe Lord,or of a vaffall. paft hope or belpe.without recowerie. =
Rés. Looke Rets, & Rez. Refcoux: m. oufle: £ Refewed; redeemed, recouered ;
pce Ta ane - freé ae from delivered, ©. Sue |
efaigner. To let ‘another veine, ente refcoufle, Rent extinguifhed,or bought out,
Refaillir To flart backe. » | Refereer. Looke Recreer. c'A


Refaifir. To refeifé,to lay new hald ony 11: +5
efaisir, & fournir la complainéte: C’eft obtenir |
lettres pour la remener à effect fur les lieux,
Refaler. To falt,or feafon,againe, eo
Refalucr. To refalute,
er,& Refapper.To oo tpt ge underfet a wall;
… Lo repaire it at the foot,or after it hath beene undermi-
d. s


Refcript:m. A refeript ; a writing backe ; an anfiver gi.
uen i soritings hence, the anfwer of a Petition;the
veturne of a Writ. :

Refcription: £4 writing backsan anfwering by letters,

Refcrire, To write backe ; to returne an anfiver in wri-
ting.


:


ned. SEEN SMS Writ; or to deliner in writing bow be ferued. it; and!
Refarcir.To mend,reforme,repaire; al/o,to make amends | what fucceeded thereon, REA |
5 AUDE NAN SERA 1} Refcrit.asReferipe. TRES
Refarcler, To weed ouer againe, | Refeant: m.ante: €Refiant,refident,continually dwel-
Refafler. Toft againe, — 3e rity’ ling abiding, biding by it ; Looke Refleant. + _
Refavourer, To taft,e(fay, trp, fawor of once more,or a=: UsmyNerworke, | LTD
gaine. nyo | Refecouër. To fhake often,or againe. Selene
: ; : , ZAR Re-


ie BY CO gle + THE OHIO SATE ARVERSILY


DEEE > 6 lu


Refcrire defon exploi&. (A Sergeant)toreturnethe | —


AT


ML :. 2


»


| RES


Refeétion: £.4 refection; a cutting,paring,or [hredding


off.

Refée: f. A Pur/e-net.

Reféeller. To feale againe.

Refeicher. To dry againe,

Refeigner. To let bloud againe. i,
Refeimblance: f. 4 refemblance;a likene(fe,a counter-


feu.
Refemblant: m. ante: f. Re/emblins,reprefenting,like
unto, !
Refemblement: n, A refembling, reprefénting, coun-


ter feiting,
| Refembler. To refemble, counter fit, reprefent, be like


Unto,
I! femble à yn Jarron que chafcun luy refemble :
Pro. A theefe imagines euerie one lookes like bu.
Les paroles du foir ne refemblent pas à celles du
matin: Pro. Looke Parole.
Toutes les femmes fe refemblent: Pro. Au women
are (in fome thing or otber) alike.
Refemer. To fow againe.
Se Refentir, To bane a great fmacke,or taftsor to be fen-
fible of; Looke Se Reflentir. ;
Refequer. To pare, cut, or clip off; to fhread, or take,
cleane avay.
Referener. To cleere vp againe.
Referrant: m.ante: f. Rejfiridline, flipticke,clofing,ftop-


ping, binding,

Referré: m.ée: f. Clofed, flopped, fhut vp; firait,refirai-
ned,hard bound, prefed,or thruft together;alfo, flayed,
fober,temperate that keepes within due limits.

Referrer. To clofe,biad, flop, or out up; alfo, to preffe,
‘fqneere thrufi,or flraine bard together ; alfo,to flay,re-

vaine, reprelfe bold under; alfo, to reinforce it felfe ;


as in; oF

‘A la S. Pierre l’hyver s'en va ou il referre: Prowin-

ter either goes or growes on,at S.Peters tide,
Refervatif: m. iue: f. Referuatide,referuing.
Referve: £ Store; or a referuation,or keeping of fore;

alfo,a reuerfion.

Chofe de referye..4 fhare thing; a'thing that is more

then we need, more then we muft (of neceffitie) ufe;

whence ; : .

Le temps de referve des principaux affaires. The

time of bis vacation,ox [uch time as be could fpare,from

important affaires.

Oifeaux de referve. Fowle mued up for the prouifion


of a houfe.

Mettre enreferve. To lay up for another day.
Refervé: m.ée :f. Keferuedexcepted, foreprifed; alfo,
referued,kept or layed up, for flore ; alfo,wifedifcreet,
frayed, fetled, warie,or clofe, im proceeding,
Refervéement. Sparingly,moderately; with reféruation
of, euer excepted,erc.

ver. To referue, faue, preferne, lay by; keepe for
prouifion,lay up for fore; alfo,to except out of a claufè,


fi
int ee aan laedup,
A 0. Networ Merling. | à i
& enc : €. A refidence,abode,or flay ; a continuance,
4 dwelling, at one certai 37


farplufugesarrer age.


su) GOrgle |


Refifiefme: eee part of a fixth ; as of 36,6; or of


or bargaine ; to forprife.
. Re j Rs al a ¢ et
ir: m, A Clofetjor Storeboufe ; j
2 Tag See Pee Pr en Plus ee |


Refdu. Le res. rhe redue, ref, uerplus,remainder


Ref : me Arefigner.


ignataire : com, A réfignee,or the partie to wbom a
RS tn rs
efignation: £ A refignation, refigning,vefignment ;
Ji endring or eelding vp. dr. tn "


Refigné: mée: £ Refigned ; furrendred, yeelded or gi. |


HER UP. ,


Refigner.To refiene, furrender,yeeld up, gine ouer ; be-


queath unto,

Refiliment: m. 4 leaping,skipping,rebounding,backe ;
a ne of bis Deed, Will, Gc; a going from bas
word.

Refilir. Te leape,skip,rebound,backe;not to ref onto flep
or goe from; to renoke, or difaduow; to forgoe, or gine


ouer.

Refiné: m. The inice of Grapes boyled to a confifler #0
boney, and ginen to childreg, as our honey, read MA
bread; or ,as Raifinnée.

Refine: f. Refi.

Refine Colophonienne, Dry clarified Rofin; fuchas

we rub Violl-flacks with,

Refine de Cypres. A kind of liquid Rofin that refem-

bles the ordinarie Turpentine of the Larch tree ; and is

in taf verie flrong,and biting.

Refine d'Efpagne; frite; & de Grece. Dry, and cla-

pre ag Fa |
efine de Lareze. Common,or ordinarie Turpentine.

Refine de Lentifque. Maflicke.

Refine liquide. Liquid Rofincommon Rofin, Rofin of

the Pine tree. ;

Refine de Meleze. Turpentine. —

Refine de fapin, Frankincenfe; alfo, the liquid Ro-

Jin thats (erronionfly) called in Shops, Venice Turpen-


Turpentine. :
Refineux: m. eufe : f. Full of Rofin,
Refiniere: f. as Raifiniere.
Resjoui: m. ie: £ Reioyced,gladded,delighted,cheered


up.
Resjouir. To reioyce, gladden, delight, exbilerate, make
merrvie,cheere >
Celuy de bon fens ne iouit,qui boit,& ne s'en res-
, jouit: Pro, The man is fencelefe and balfe mad, that
mé Wine,and yet is fad.
Resjouiflance: £4 reioycing; ioy,glee,mirth, gladne|fe,
p eran nefesiacondnefe,cheertfallne : :


Resjouiffant: m, ante: £ Reiaycing,delightfome,plea- |


Jant,merrie.

Refipifcence:£. À returne to-underflanding; a repen-
tance for,an amendment of,an error; a Second thinking
wifer then the


6.1. ;
Refiftance: f.Refflance, jon, impugning,withflan-
dings eon min a Seg ier
Refifté: m.ée:f. Reffed,withfiood,impugned,oppug-


ned, Oe ig ee
re ae re Me:
““Aquoymon coeur refifte. which goes againft my
> beart,againft which my flomacke rifes.
Rice Reine. oe |
ixiefmement, By way of a fixt part out of a fixth.
Refize. Hem itse,bemeses BAT 3 de
Refler. To thaw. :
R Toread ouer againe.
Refne: f. The reine of a bridle. R
€.


=


Original from
RRE-OHIO STATE: UNIVERSITY


»


time.
Refine de Terebinth®, The bef, and trueft kind of


ee


J


r


tae


: PO ON ae ee ee ee ee ee ee ae JET EC .
LL mm
RES | R E S


Refolu: m. ué: f Refolued, decreed, determined, con-
cluded; filly purpofed ; wholly bent vato; conflant in;
alfo, refolute,hardie,valiant, ftout, undaunted dread-
left, couragious; al/o, diffolued, looffed, untyed, vn-
bound,vndone. :
Refolu comme Pihourt en fes Heteroclites, Said
of one that in a learned companie is forward to fpeake,
or will come in with his vy(as one that would [eeme to
underfland fômewhat as well as others, or cares not
how little he vader {land himfelfé, fo be be not vnder-
flood by others:) For this Pihourt,a Ma(on of Rhenes,
fiading at Chafteau-briant (whither be came to con-
fult,about the making of a Cafile,witk others)the chiefe
workmen of France, who talked of nothing but Obe-
lisques,exc, (which be underftood not}to be euen with
them, fayd that Sans &c,l'Oeuvre ne peut proceder
felon I equipolation de fes Heteroclites ; and fv,
as be thought,did put them all downe.

Refoluble: com. Refolueable ; alfo,diffolueable,

Refoluément. Kefolurely, bardily, yaliantly, determi-
nately with fall purpofe, from a great courage.

Refolutif: m. iue: £ Refoluing; diffoluing untying,un-
loofing undoing ; alfo deciding or determining.

Refolution: f. 4 refolution, opinion, decifion, fentence,
decree ; a fill purpofe, a fetled intention, deliberation,
determination.

Refommeiller. To flumber againe.

Refommer. To fumme, or to fummon, againe.

Refomption: f Arefumption, repetition taking backe,

aGuming or beginning againe. :

Refonder,To found againe.

} Refonger. To dreame againe, : ‘

Refonñamment. Refoundingly,lowdly, fhrily, melodi-
oufly,with good corr efpondence of voices; Eccho-like, +

Refonnance: £ A refounding; ringing ; melodious Ec-
cho,rebounding found; a recording,as of birds; alfo,an
accord,agreement,confent of harmonie.

Refonnant: m. ante: f. Refounding, lowd recording,
found-reporting,Eccho-making.

Refonneinent. a Refonnance.

Refort: m. Power totake notice of Appeales;or as Ref-
fort.

Refort de ferrure, The fpring of a locke; See Reflort de
fe .


errure, de
hing To ifue,or goe forth, againe, arc ; Looke Ref-


ortir.

Refouffler. To blow againe.
efouhaiter. To wifh once more.

Refouldé: m, ée: f. Twice foldered ; foldered againe,

Refoulder. To folder againe,

Refouldre. To loofe, difolue, untye, unbind; fcatter ;
melt,refolue,thaw ; alfo, to decree, determine, delibe-
rate, pi er pofe fil. :

Refouper. To fupagaine, ;

Refource:f. À new fource, or Spring ; a reconerie, vp-
Yaifing vifing againe, Looke Reflource. at
Refourdre. Te (pring, rife, grow, or get vp, againe;
to amend ; reconer, come to it former ¢ftate,or vigor, :

Refours: m.fourfe: fRaïfed,reconered,got vp againe,

Refouvenances: £ Memorandums, remembrances,

Refouvenit. To be mindfüll of,to remember againe.

lent: m. A /pilling, fhedding, powring out,


Cattering or cafling à

Refpandeur: m. 4 ra (piller.

Fr Tofhed, (pill, powre out, fcatter, or caf a-

Refpandu: m. uë: £ ‘Shed, fpilt,pmvred out, feattered
or caft abroad.


Boite Go gle


Refpardre. To featter againe.

Respargnant: m, ante: f. Spariag, pinching; varie,
thrifue; miferable,bardneere.

Refpargne: f. 4 parcimonie, (paring, thrift, warineffe;
neerene|[e bardnefe miferte.

De refpargne. Somewhat neerer, fcanter, or fhorter
. then needed,

Refpargner. To fpare,or faue.

Re im, Refpect, regard,account ; comparifôn, con-

idetation,

La Chaire de refpect. The Chaire of Eftate.
Refpettable: com. Refpeétable,regardable ; worfhip-
‘full,of note,of accompt. |

Refpectatif. as Refpectif.

Respectif: m. iue: f Refpeétine, beedie,warie, circum-
fPect, aduifed,difcreet.

Refpectivement. Re pettinelymutually interchange-
abs on both fides, with regard bad of one to ano-
ther.

Refpeffir. To thicken againe.

Respi: m. 4 respite,a delay, atime, a pawfing, or brea-
thing time,a tearme of forbearance or leifure ; alfo (in
Law) a Protection of one,three, or fine yeares, praun-
ted by the Prince, or Magiflrate unto a debtor, vp-
d re: made, and caufe appearing, for it ; Looke

efpit.

Refpirs m. A breath,vent,refpiration,blowing.

Respiration: f. .4 refpiration, breathing, drawing ef
breath,venting,blowing.

Refpirement. as Refpiration.
espireur: m. À breather,a refirer.

Respirer. To breath,vent,galpe;take breath agaïne;alo,
to pawf;refl,ot take his eafe.

efpit: m. A refpite ; a delay, atime or terme of fir-
bearance; a pawfe,breathing fit; leifure  csas Refpi.
Acceptation de relpit ; &, fe mettre en fesrefpits.
Is ri (in fome cuftomes) of the fealtie,or dutie of a
vafjall,

Trois iours de refpit vallent cent livres: Prov. 4
three dayes respit's worth a bundred pounds.

Refpiter. To re/pit; prorogue or put off for a time;to for-
beare,to delay.

Refpiter de mort, Torepriue, faue, or deliner, from |
eath. | ;
Refplendeur: £ Refplendencie, fplendor,brightneffe; a

cleere bue, {bining glofe,radiant lufire,

Refplendir. To fhine, glitter, glifler, ftreame, blaxe ; to
caft a radiant gloffe, to yeeld a gallant, or great


lufire. .
Refplendiffant : m. ante: f, Refplendent,fhining, gli-
tering, radiant, glittering. . as
Refplendiffeur. as Refplendeur. =
R A To thicken againg,
esporice.asReponce. … :
R ae t: na sale
Respondement: m. An anfivering; alfo,a matching,
agreement, corve/pondencie; a likenee, conctirrence,
equalitié, gts bib
Refpondre. To anfwer ; torefolue a doubt or demiaund;
to undertake, or be furetie for ; alfo,to match; agree,
concurre,pold correfpendencie with.
Refpondre par attenuation. C'eft quand vn accufé
refpond aux conclufions contre Juy prinfes par fa
partie civile,& par le Procureur du Roy,ou du feig-
neur lufticier, lors qu'il eft befoing prendre droi@
ar la confeffion de I’ accufé; laquelle auroïr efté
communiquée à la partie civile ; Ce qui fe fair
quand le Cas n’eft fuie& à peine corporelle.
_ Zach Refpon-


Originalstrom


THE OHtO: STATE UNIVERSI EY


Spb RLS Lits a


ae - À


e/g ieee, LE Ar anil “sbdl 71 RUE a à


| FORMES


Refpondre entre deux & az. Looke Az.
Qui mal entend, mal refpond : Prov, He that mif-
takes the queflion cannot fpeake to purpofe;be that con-
‘ cetues amilfe anfwers amiffe.
Refpons: m, The anfiwers made by the Clarke,or people,
in Seruice time.
| Refponfadoux, The ea-fifh called, a Heauen-gaxer;
| = (defcribed in Tapecon.)
| Refponfe: f. An anfwer ; the refolution of a doubt, or
| _ demaund; alfa,a furetifhip,or undertaking for.
| Refponfes: f Rampions (a fallade root.)
Responfif: m. 4a Anfwer to a Law-bill ; or,an anfiver
a Law, ‘
Refponfif: m. iue: f. Refponfiue,anfivering in an/wer,
iuinc, or making an anfwer.
Refpon fion: f. A Suretic or Suretifbip ; an affurance.
Respoufer. To ¢fpou/é,er marrie againe,
Reflaper. To repaire a wall, @rc, that hath beene under-
| _ mined, or brokenat the foot.
| Reffafié: m.ée: f. Filled,glutted, faded, fatisfied.
Reffafier. To fill, glut, fade, fatiate, fatisfie.
Reflayer. To reafay,reattempt, proue once more.
Reffeant: m. arte: f. Refiant,refident ; abiding, dwel-
ling continually in, ! :
Exoine de mal reffeant. An effoine, or excufe for the
abfence,or not apparance,of one that lyes ficke.
Reffeantife: f Refidencie ; a continuall dwelling, or a-
biding in one place. c
. | Reffemblable: com. Much like vate.
Reffembler: Looke Refembler,
Reffemer. To fow againe.
Reffentiment: m. 4 full taft, a true feeling, a fenfible


apprehenfion,of.
SeReflentir.To taf fully, feele throughly baue a fenfible
apprebenfion of.


Se reffentir des faveurs de, To be fenfible of, or fare
the better for,the fauors of.
Se reffentir d’une inture. Fo remember ; to be fenfi-
ble, or defire a veuenge, of; to find bimfelfe agerieued
at,a wrong,
Il fe reffent encor de fa grande perte. His great loffe
bath bitherunto flucke by bim ; be fmarts as yet,he is yet
- the poorer,by it.
Reffie: f, An afiernoones nunchion or drinking,an Aun-
ders meat,
Reffimer. as Renifler.
Reffiner:To make a drinking or collation,to takeia repaft
or (natch inthe afternoone.
Reffize. as Refize.
Reffoigner. To awe, fiare,dread ; af, to care, carke,
| take thought. fete 2
Refforé: m.ée: f. Parched,fcorched,dryed,or burnt vp,
by the Sunne. a
- Reffort: m. The authoritie, prerogatine,or iurifdiElion,
: of a(Soneraigne) Court; alfo,the extent or circuit of a


© anis may repaire,or appeale unto it; and thence;
. Droi& de flore Abjolute power to take, and deter.


countrcy wherein it hath jurifdittion, or whofe inbabi- '


! En fer reflort. Fi » without further ap- |
IN 1/77 Ee
Reffort de ferrure. T/


RES


bigher,from a weaker to a fironger, from one to pass ex


hence,to appeale unto; and, to be remoueable,out of an
inférior, into a fiperior Court.
Ces chofes reffortiffent iugement par devant vn
fage, Thefe matters are to be determinedly a wife
mai,

Reffource: f.A refource,new {prin g,reconerie,uprifing,
or raifing againe ; alfo,refitge for fuccour.
Eanes befte n'y a point de reffe@urce:Pro.Looke


Befte,
Reflourdre. as Refourdre.
Re uccer. To fucke vp,or in,againe.
effuit: m. itte: £ Dry or dryed, hard or bardened ;
without any manner of {ap,or foftnefe,
Refluivre. To follow againe. ;
efluy : m, The leere of a Deere; the place wherein he
“à to dry bimfelfe after be bath been wet by the deaw
Ce
Refluyé: m.ée: £ Dryed,or wiped off againe.
Refer. To wipe,or dry ‘tome |
Reftablir. To reefiablifh,reconfirme, fettle anew insalfo,
torefiore, giue backe, make good, or make falisfuétion
for, a thing taken.
Reftabliffable : com, Reefablifhable,
Reftabliflement: m. 4 reefablifhing, reconfirming;
Setling anew in; alfo,arefiorine, gining backe, making
good,of, a fatisfattion made fr: a thing which bath
R ic taken. “ Ge
citaioner. as Croupir; (in the laff fence.
Reftarcher: To er sé ph ?
Reftat: m, 4 remainder, Surplufage ouerplus.
Reftats d'eftar. Looke Eftar.
Reftaurant: m, 4 refloratiue.
Reftaurer. To reflore to reneve,to repaire,to veinfiall.
Refte: f. 4 ref; refidue, remnant, remainder, furplu-
{age ,ouerplus ; alfo,a Reft at Primero,erc.
“A toute refte. Extreamely, vehemently, with all bis
forcesout of all meafure ; alfo, whatfoeuer it coft bim;
bow much foeucr be hazard,or lay,on it,
Faire fa refte 3.(In tearmes)to handle rudely or deale
roughly with; to giue a man a heating.
Renvier de fa refte. Looke Renvier. *
Voici,ou vousvoyez,la refte. (in anfiver to,How baue
you done a great wbile;) you fee alk that is left of me.
Refte. Except, fauing,befide.
Refteindre. To quench,or flake,againe,
Re . To reextend,or to reinlarge, :
Refter. To ref, remaine, fuperabound; be bebind, {upers
fluous,ouerplies,or more then ynough,
Le fol refte apres la fefte: Pro. After a feaft,a foole,ts
. made; wife men (pend not their meanes in feafling,
ernuër, To fnceze againe, :
eftibule. Champ res, as Retouble,


Reftif: m. iue: f. Refie, go iat backward, É :


tbat will not goe forward.

Chien reftifi A hound which feeing his game once
bearded, purfues it no firther, but fezyes untill be be
beaten on. STE ieee RE


€. Thats fowed, or beares finit,


€ Awag of Law ; a putting in 0;
Dir docs of fi ane Ss


ge, or g
C


Attn.


| an ;
TR ipuler. To wage Law (as in Reftipulation.)
| Reftituer. To reflore,returne,render.yeeld or gine back;


 alfo, to repañe, fet in bis former e


e or place, make.
whole againe, — Bi


Re-


Original. from
PAEOHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


2.


i.


€
PS


ee ee RS ASS LS Ne eae fre Be eh ee Te een
3 72% | Se 4 ¢
RES


R ES


Reftituteur: m. A reftorer ; yeelder or bringer backe,
repairer or fetter up againe. "5

Restitution: 4 re/litution, rendriag , yeelding or gi-
ning backe; alfo, arefloring, repairing, (etting up a-


gaine,

Reftivé : m. ée : f Made or growne reflie ; forflow-
ed.protracted; flopped or dravene backe. |

Relivement Rellily, Pubbornely, backwardly, floth-


filly.
Reftiver. To flop, draw backe; flruggle, be flubborne,
play the reftie ade,
Je ne reftiveray point. 1 will be forward ynough, 1
_ will not lag it or be lefi behind,
IIne peut reftiver au deftin. In vaine be firines a-
gainfh,or thinkes to withfland,bis deflinie.
eftor : m.Areconerie,or remedie againft a Vouchee,or
any one by whom a man is damnified.
Reftouble. as Retouble.
Reftouper. To flop againe,
Reftrainét: m. Ge: €, Reffrained, abridged,or fhorte-
ned of hbertie, fhut or kept vp,held or chfédin.
Fief reftrainct, 4 Fief that wants, or is not capable
of, Farifdittion,
Reftrainéte :f. A reftraint, reflraining, (hortening or a.
bridging of libertie,holding or keeping in.
Reftrainétif: m,A refiriéhuea flipticke or binding me-
decine, or plaifier ; and particularly, the white of an
egce beaten with Rofe-water, and applied to prenent
the fwelling of a part which bath beene drie-beaten,
Reftraindre. Torefraine, firaiten or bind in, abridge
or fhorten of libertie, fhut orkeepe up, bold or clofe
a, .


Reftrangler. To firangle againe. :
sarin 2 To firaiten, reftraine, fhorten, centraft, a-
rage. à He x À

Reftreciflement: m. A (fraitning, refiraining, con.
trating abridging. : ayer

Reftriétion:£ A reflriftion, moderation,modi fication;
a refiraint of ageneralitie.

Reftriller vn cheval. To currie him ower againe.

Reftrinétion. a Reftri&tion.

Reftringe. The Lentiske, or Maflicke tree ; called fo a-

* bout Montpellier.

Reftudier. 70 fludie againe,or ner againe, :

Reftuver. To five ; foake or bath in liquor, warme, a=


gaine. .
| Reftuyer. To fheath,or fhut vp,againe.
- Resvanouir. Tofowne againe.
Refudant: m.ante :f. Sweating; alfè,pithie,
Refudation :£ A refudation,fweating,or fiveatie drop-


ping.
Réfudé: m. éc :f, Sweated, fivet out of, come from as,
or in afweat, '
Refüë : £ Anaunctent tax, or impofition of foure pence
in the pound for marchandife,and 10s. Tour. upon e-
, merie Pipe of winesbrought into,or fent out of the king-


Refveil:m, 4 Hunts. up,or Morning fong for a new-ma-
ried wife,the day after the mariage,
Refveillable: com. Awakable >
Refveillé:m.ée: f. ed (in a morning; ) rowfed,
. excited, fir: à ,


Refveille-matin: mT Adarum of a watch,or clacke;

- alfo, the hearbe called Sunne-fpur ge, Time-tythimale,
‘and Wartwort, iy ‘
Refveille-matin des vignes, Pertie Spurge, called

., alfo Wartwort , and like , in leaues , unto Sunne-
Spurge. ;


Beauté de femme fafcheux refveille-matin : Prov.
A womans beautie reaues ( fond ) man of refi.
Refveiller. To awake ; raie from fleepe x voufe , excite,
irre up.
efveiller le chatquidurt, To rub ahiddenfore;
tokindle a fire that was necre quenched, flirre up a
mifchiefe that was wel fetled ; mention an enill that
was almo|t forgotten,
Tant dort le chat qu'il fe refveille: Prov. So long
the cat fleepes that at length fh'awakes (ap phable tra-
ny thing which after long (uppieffion burlietb out.)

Resveilleur : m, An awaker ; and particularty,a com-
mon Bellman which in the dead of night goes round a-
bout a Citie,tinkling,and tellirig of the boures.

Refveillon : m. A meale made late in the night, or long
after fupper. !

Refüuër, To feat againe,

Refver. To raue, dote, peake idly, talke like an Afe.

Refverie:£. A rauing,idle talking dotage, trifling, fol-
lic,vaine fancie, fond imagination,

Ceftresyerie. Tisa dreame, fable, mockerie, icaf},
idle tale which you deliner.

Refveur : m. A dotard,or dreaming fip, a rauing, tri
fling, fond,or idle cokes, seein

Refuiivi : m.ie: f, Follewed againe,

Refuivre. To follow againe.

Reful. as Refeul.

Retultat : m. An ifue, or fucceffe ; alfà, a refülution ta-
ken,or agreement made, vpon a conference, ec; the
fruidl,or that which comes, thereof,

Refulter. Te rebound orleape backe ; to bop, skip, mone
nimbly backward ; alfo,to rife of , come out of, [pring
or ine from.
efumer, To refume ; to repeat, to take, or beginue a-


gaine.
Refurgir. Te rife,grow, (bring vp againe ; torecouer a
former being ; to liftvp his head once more,
Refüurreétion:f.Arefinreéiion, a rifing againe,
Refufcitatif: mue : i Refifcitatine,reniwing, raifing
KA from death to life, Ki eg
Refufciter. To reuine,raifejor fet vp againe, =


Refufciteur : m4 rewinor,a raifer,or fetter vp of things


decayed,or dead,
Ret :f..A net ; Looke Rets,
Retail: m, 4 fhred, paring, or fmall peece cut from a
thing; alfosbalfe an Oxgang,or Oxgate,of land.
Retaillat. circumcifed : Rab. .
Retaillé:m. 4 fbred,paring,odde end, peece cut off; 4
Real ae bred, percé eh : of
etaillé: m. ée +f. Shred,pared,clipped,cut off.
Retaillement: m. A fhredding, clipping, faipping, pa-
ring ofien es. +
Retailler. To fhred, pare, ip, cut verie often,
Retailles.s Retailleures; alfo,the fpalis,or fhards ;tbe
pecces which flie from flone in the hewing therof,
Retailleures: f. Shreds, clippings, {nippings ,parings,
Retaillons. as Retailleures: >
Retaindre. To put inte a new colour, tore-dieordiea- |


Retalionné rm.ée: fi Requited, quitted, fatisfied, or
R payed ps ps — ’
apper: To bung again Sign
Retardé since‘ fail ra: flackened,de-
layed; indered, opped,impe at flayed à ,
Retardement : m. A fareflowing, flackening, delaying;
impeaching ,bindering, flaying, ,
ctarder.To foreflow linger flacken delay fay, flop,let,
binder impeach,put or bold off. : Re-


- Go gle


Li ip


Re


| Retargé:m.ée :f. as Retardé.

Retargement, & Retarger. 45 Retardement,& Re-

tatder,

| Retafter. To taf? againe.

Retatiné: m. ée: & withered, forunke in, decayed,

old, ‘
Retaxer. To tax bim that bath taxed vs, to returne ene

| _ taxation for another,

| Retcinét: m.éte: f Died the fecond time, or died a-

| gaine.

Reteindre, as Retaindre. .

Retcinture:f..4re-dying,afecond or new dying,a dy-

tay ouer 4game,

Retenail:m. 4 bold,or thing to bold by.

Retendte. To firetch out againe.

Retencur: m. A vetainer,detainer witbbolder.

Retenir. To retaine,withbold, flay,keep back ; refiraine,

containe, bride, bold in; alfo, to preferue, ot main-
taine.

Retenir place pour voir, Te keepe,alfo,to take wp, a
place to fee in.

Retenir par puiffance de fief, A Lord, by the prini~
ledge of his Seigniorie, to redeeme, or ewitt, from a
purchafer the tenement bought of bis vaffall,

le retiens apres. J crane the next : (Rab.

Retenter. Te reattempt, reaffay, put unto baxard a-
aine.

Rétetaiens :f, A retention, detaiming, withholding ; a

keeping in the hands.

Retentir. To refound, to ving againe, to yeeld an echo,
or great found,

Lieuoula voix ne retentit pas. A dull, dampe, or
deafi,place.

Retentiflement: m.A refounding,or a ringing againe,
a rebounding of the voyce, an. eccho-like returning of
found fir found,

RetentifSement de harnois. The clafhing of, or the
fountl yeelded by theflefhrng on,armour.

Retentive: £ laret. The retaining force of nature
whereby food is beldin the flomacke vntill it bee fully
concocied.

I n’a nulle retentive en la bouche. He bath no bold
of bis tongue,he cannot firbeare praté 3

Retentras. ll fait du ret. He is deafeofthateare , or
feemestolifien to fomewhat elfe; or making as if hee
bad more to liflen to, beedes not greatly what one fayes
unto him,

Retentum. vn ret. in mente Curiæ. Is when a Court
pronounces nota full Arreft, but referues fomewbat to
be afterwards ordered, 3

Retenu :muë :f. Retained,detained, withbeld, flayed
backe; refirained kept in.

Homme retenu. 4 grane, fober, difereet, aduifed,
well layed fellow ; one whofe wild oats ave fowne.

—— vee as pus alfo,a | dd sali Aine

tion, flaiedueffe,aduifednelfe ; alfo,a grant inrenerfion
of an Office fess Kings boufè.

| Droid de retenué. À prisiledge of fome Landlords,to
vedeeme within fortie the land fold by their te-


Q


bought by another:
__ fessthe benefit of Droiêt de retenuë,as well as Land-


lords in others.) Ce
Plaider par lé, (C'eft quand les parties ne


EEE URE rn ae


ut te pa ihe befides bis reafonable
and charges,as much as be gaue for it.

Linagier fur Linagier n'a ane de retenué. One

(So that it fèemes that neere kinfmen baue,in fome cam


flackly,by panfes,or bybalues.
Retenuément. Sparingly,reflrainedly ;flayedly, adui-


fedly.

Reths. Looke Rets. ë

Retiaire. Cafling a net in fight, therewith to take an e-
nemie.

Reticence : f. Silence concealement,counfell-keeping.

gr : m. A reteniion; refiraint, ele À. nr À

acke.
etier:m, A Net-maker.

Retiercement. By way,or after the rate, of atbirdout
of a third,

Retiers : m. 4 third part of a third, as of nine, three; À.
of tbree,one.

Retif. Looke Reftif.

Retiforme: com. Fafhioned like aner.

Retinacle: m, 4 flay,er bold ; any thing whereby ano-
ther is retained or held backe,

Retine:f, The fifi thinne membrane of the eye; foft,
white,and a nourifher of the glaffie bumor.

Retirade :f. The retrait or the retiring of an Armie; al.
fo,a place-of retrait,or of retirall, for defendants be-
bind a breach, ’

Retiré : m.ée: f, Retired, withdrawne,put or got back,
pulld or dravone in; alfo, plucked or taken from; alfo,
harboured, receined,intertained ; alfo, foot backe or
againe, ‘

Retirée :f. A retivall withdrawing,vecoyle.

Retirement: m.4 retiring, withdrawing vecoyling.fet-
ching or putting backe, pulling or gatheringin; alfo,a
drawing or comming neeve; alfo,apulling or placking
away from; alfo,a priuate barbouring,or receining (as
of lealers,or of flollen things ; ) alfo,a fhootine backe ,
or againe.

Retirement des netfs. The fhortening, or fhrinking

- of the finewes,

Retirer. To retire,withdraw ; fetch or put backe,pull in,
gather up, vecouer bring or draw backe unto; alfo, to
fhorten,contraël, fhrinke ; alfo,te take,or plucke from;
alfo,to receine,bar bout ,intertaine; alfo,to foot backe,
Se rerirers Yo reciple, votive, gluebecke ; ré ia
Seretirer. To recoyle, retire, gine backe ; to fhrinke ;
to withdraw bimfcif. seh jae
Retircr a. Torefemble,be like, or come neere unto,in

-¥ gr fifhion. ‘

etirer ce qu'on donne. To giue atbing and take a
thing ; to weare the dinels geld-ring (fay we in atri-
uiall prouerbe.)

Retirer fon efpingle du jeu. To defift from, to quit,
leaue off,gine ouer ; to draw bis necke out of he coller
(fay we.) =

Qu'on ne peutretirer. An irvenocable,or unrecone-
rable matter,

Qui ne retire de fa vache que la queué ne perd
pas tout: Prov, He that can recouer the leaft partof

"his owne, pet loofts not all, ovis not to negleét it; fir
better is fomething, bow litt ry then notbing,

Retifler. To weaneagaine, =

Retiftre. The fome

Retoifer. To fathome oner againe,

Reseanbe if, 4 falfe cup, wherein drinke feling intoan
odde corner, feemes to be drunke up; clfo,a flat vault,

or avcome thats Pade vault-wife, ©

Retombée :f. 4 filling backe ; alfo,a crooking.as of a
fickle turned backwards,

Retombée dehumeurs, 4 running of bumors ; or a
difeale wherin the humors that grieucd one place leaue


it,and get into anotber. :
Re-


Original: from


HE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY f


Retomber. To fall backeor againe; to fallinto a ve.
lapfe. weer ;
Retondir de toutes parts. To ring, or torefound all o-


uer. AT
Retondre. Tofhaue,or fheere againes: 1:
Retondu: m.uë : f. New fhauen,clipped, fhorne.
Retorceurc : € 4 twining, wreathing,twifüing; a wry-
ing,a wrefling backe ; a retorting.
| Retordement : m. as Retorceure.
Retordeur:m, 4 swifler,twiaer; a wreflersa reterter,
| a wuer,backe. | ; f
Retordre, To swine wreath,twifl; retort; wrie, wrefl
backe. |
| Retordure :£ a Retorceure,
Retorquable: com, Retortable, :
Retorqué: m.ée: £ Retorted, wrefied backe, writhen


|e backward. .


Retorquer. To retort,writh backward, wref backe, to
retsrae violently;to threw or fhoot againe,

Retors : m.orfé: f.#5 Retort,

Retort :m.orte: fT wifled,twined,wreathed;wrefted,
or wrung,backe ; retorted,violently returned.

Retorte: f. A retort, or crooked bodies a Lymbecke of
glaffe(varnifbed or leaded within) for th'extratting
of oyle out of wood , and other bard;and drie [ubftan-


ces,

Retouble: m. A field or ground fovone euerie yeare.

Retouchement:m. 4 fecond touch, @ touching a-
gaine.

Retoucher. To touch againe,

Retouiller. To mingle, meddle, ruffle, puxxle, or con-
found againe. :

Retour: m. 4 returne,returning,comming backe.
Retour de Matines. A difplea/ure done in fecret &
on a fudden ; or the fittift time to firprife.a private foe;
Looke Matines. :

Fuflaye qui eft fur fon retour. That is fome 200yeres
old.


Avoir retour de. To play quit, crie quittance, be e-
uen with,
Tout le retour qu'il en peut avoir. All the helpe,re-
medie,or amends which be Er rs for, or from.
Baillez moy mon retour.Said byfuch as;hauing paid
. more then was due,demaund the reft againe;er bence;
Ime faut deux deniersde retour. 1m4/f? bane two
pence backe againe,
À luy doit cela de retour. He à bebolden tobim for
that,
‘A beau jeu beau retour : Pro. Round worke,fquare
play, as good returned as came, one good(or bad)turne
another,
Retourné : m. ée: fRetwrmed,come or gone,backe ; al-
fo,reltored. ‘
Retourner. To returne,to come or goe backes alfo,tore-
flore ; alfô,10 gine bootie for a thing exchanged.
«Retourner au champ du bois. Looke Bois,
-Retourner fes chafles. 4 Hawke (that bath flowne
out at her fill pitch)to come in againe. 4
Retourner à fes moutons. To refme the fubieët
from which he bath digreffed,to fall in band with it a-
aime, we


etourner farobbe. Toturne bis gowne.or coat; to


Pernixe,or Apoftatize it; to play the tuyne-coat,
Retourner fur foy. Looke Soy. 2

Mais n'y retournez plus. But doe fo no more.
In’eft chance quineretourne: Prov, All things
that haue beene will be ;no chance but comes againe.
Ilne vas pas du tout à honte qui de demie.voye


+


retourne : Prov. Looke Honte,


Qui mieux ne peut à fa vieilleretourne : Prov.He


that can get noyong, falls backe to bis old, ftuffe.
etracer. To retrace,or trace backe; to turne often,and
the felfefame way,vpon, 3
Retracer fon los, Often to repeat bis praifés.
Retracter. Torecant reuoke,or call backe; alfo, as Re-
traiter,
Retraction :f, we Retraëtation ; ‘ala, a retraëlion;
a ene sredecming ; al/o,the crampe.
se Retrahir. To retireor withdraw,bimfelfe.
Retraiét: m, An Aiax,Prinie, boufe of Office ; alfo,a
reconerie,redeeming or drawing backe of things alie-
ned or ingaged.
Resraict de barre, ou de Cour (in the cuflomes of
Britanie) Quand le luge du fuperieur ou de l’infe-
rieur veut cognoiftre du deliétou different : ŒRa-
ueau. 7 F6 0 ce: 2
etraict cenfuel,& feodal. The power a Lord Cen-
fucl,and Feodal baue,to redeeme,euitt,or draw backe
from a Purchafer th'eftates gotten by bim of their vaf-
falls, ;
Retraiét conventionnel, 4 couenant,or prouifo in a
_ bargaine , giving the (eller libertie to redeeme the
thing be paffed(therein refembling our Morgage.)
Retraict du gobeler, The Batterie,
Retraïét Lignagier. A power, giuen bp cuflome unto
the neereft kinfinan of one that fells land, to vebuy it
within a certaine time(commonly a yeare and a day) for
as much as was payed for it ; but this muf be a inf
ee of the ftocke,or fide, by which the land came to the
eller, +
En retraict. Priuately,retiredly,alone.
Retraict:m. te: f. Retired , withdrawne; drawne
backe; firaitned,growne narrower, fbruake up.
Retraicte :f, Aretrait,retiring, withdrawing ; a draw.
ing backe.a returning; alfo, a place of refuge, of fuc-
cour,of fafegard; alfo,a firaitning marrowine.or fhrin-


ing up,
Droiét de retraiéte, The power of redeeming, ot. of |


buying, land morgaged,ingaged,or fold.

Retraicter. To renife, perufe, onerlooke, onerfee, runne
ouer ; alfo,to bandierepcat,orintreat ofjagaine, ~
etrainer. To drag,or draw,backe,

Retaintif: m, Leoke Reftrainâif.

Retraire, To withdraw ; draw backe ; plucke out or un:
19; alfo,to fhrinke narrow, flraiten, draw in; alfo,te
upbraid,ortwitin the teeth, Se
Retraire en fervage. To challenge, or awerre, one to
be bis flane. ae


etraitte :f. 4 Retraiête. “3
Retranchement: m. 47 abridgement ; abatement ;
cutting off part of. Win 2k
Retr . as Retrencher,


Retranfitif: m.iue :f. Retranfitine, vefleétine opon ie


Retraffer.as Retrai€ter;al/o,to amend ,corredt,re forme,
repaire. :

Rent ce: com. Which may be fetched, or dravone,
b, L


ac ;
Retrayeur: m, A redeemer,a fetcher or drawer back of.
Retrecir. Tofiraiten, contraét, narrow, bind of make


rat,
Reweciffement :m, A firailning narrowing, contrac.
ting, fhortenine. : R
e.


siatizes by GOugle


tractation :£ A retraélation ; a recanting , reuo-


Lt ey


au tie


Retrempé: m. ée:f. Soaked,or leeped,againe, "1

Retremper. To foake, fleepe,or fofien in liquor, anew,

Retrenché: m. ée :f, Cut, firucke, or chopped.off; di-
minifbed, curtaled, leffened, abridged; alfo, intren-
ched ; inuironed or defended with trenches ; lodged in
trenches, Vis . |

Retrencher. To cut, firikesor chapoff; to curtall dimi-
nifb,le[fen,abridge ; alfo,to intrench; to inuizon with,
or lodge in,trenches,

Retrefci: mie : f. Straitned.

Retrefciflement. as Retreciflement.

Retribuer. To retribute;reflore, yeeld or gine backes al-
fo,to requite,recompence,reward.

Retribution: £.4 retribation,vequitall,recompence,re-
compencing,refloring.

Retroaëtc. 4 former act, proceeding, or difpatcb, in


Law,

Retroaétif: m.iue : f, Retroactive ; cafling,drining;re-
lating backward,

Retroceder. To recoyle,retire gine backe.

Retrogradation :f. 4 retrogradation; a fRepping, or
going, backe.

Retrograde: £ The fame ; or a flep backe.

Retrograder. To recgle, returne, retire, flep, or goe,
backe.

Retrouér. To make new boles into ;10 pierce or bore,a-


gaine.
Retrouffé : m.ée : fFhicke and fhort, druggellie,trun-
chion; well trufjed, frongly made ; alfo, truped or tuce


hedvp.
Ocilretroufté. A flaring eye; an eye, whofe lids bee
reuerfed by fome great inflamation ; and whofe white
_ becomes higher then th apple,
Retroufler. To truffe,or tucke vp.
Retrouvé: m.ée : f. Found againe,
Retrouver. To find againe,
Rets : £..A net,
Rets admirable, A certaine narrow skin in the bead
(made of a part of th’ Arterie Carotide)wbich difpofes
it [elf into the forme of anet, neere to the bole, or paf:
Sage of the third paire of finewes ; This net is hardly
found in a mans bead,
Rets d'aulx. A little bundle,or double rope of Garlick
beads tied together with their leaues,
Retube: £ 4 flat vault,or vaule make like the backe of
an ouen,
Retumbée : f. Looke Retombée, ©
Reu:m. A brooke, (mall flreame , little gullet of wa-
ter.
Revanquir. To reuanquifb,refubdue;reouercome.
Real . . To reinforce, improue, raife, or better, the
Va . \
Revaloir. Iete lerevaudray. 1 willrequite, repay,
it 5 0r, be as much worth unto thee as it comes to,
Rerancher as Revencher.


im, A renenger,


Revan eur: m.cure: f:-Reuenging ywreaking,
anner. To winnow againe, j f

be : f, The root called Rewbarb, or Rewbarb of

paquets See Bheubarbe. ease 155
~ Reubarbe des Iardins. Garden Rewbarb; reftm-
ae a Date pnes polars bin
 Keubar moines, Hearbe Patience, Monkes |
| Rewh arbe, Races 4 a
| Reve-grand. (4x ironicall allufion to, Reverend)much


RÉ na tein


“Digitized im Go gle


R E V!


Reveiller. Seeke Refveillers +" 7.0 4020
Revelation :£ Arenelation,arenealing,


Revelé: m. ée :f. Renealed,aiftlofed vitered, iftone-


red,manifefled. , ees

Revelement: m.Areuealine ,diftlofing diftonering,

Reveler. To reneale ,difelofe, difcouer, manifefi,vtter.

Reyeleux : m. eufe : f wanton, lafcinious, incontinent;
Shameleffe impudent ,virulie,outragious. |

Revenant : m.ante :f. Returning,reuerting revining,
incteafing rifing ; comming againe. |
Bois revenant. Copfes or Copies, young woods,

Revenche: f. Renenge ; requitall; returne of as good, or
as much as was brought,

Revencher, foy reven. To wreake, or to reuenge, bim-
SLR ; to veturne, or toretort,a difpleafure,
evendage: m. 4 retailing ,or felling againe,
Fermier durevendage du Roy. Entreles mains
duquel vn debreur met biens meubles exploi@a-
bles pour la fomme deué, à fin d’avoir trois {e-
maines de terme pour payer fon creancier, & dfin
d’avoir main levée de fes biens prins parlefergét.

Revenderefle :£ 4 woman buckfier,or bagler.

Revendeur: m. 4 Huckfler,a Regvator,

Revendication: £ A refuming of, or a reePabliflment
in, a pretended right.

Revendre. Te fell againe, (:

A trop acheter n'y a que revendre : Prov.There’s
nothing gotten by wares ouer-bougbt; nor does any
man take muchioy in that, which to get bee tooke too
much paines, Hees 1
evendu:muê:f Sold backe,or againe.

Revengé:m. ée:f. Renenged, wreaked,

Revenir. To reuert,returne, come backe, or againe sal.
So,to reuiue, or conze to bimfelfe after a trance; alfo, to
Swell,rife,or increafe,as dough by leauening or flefh by
parboyling ; alfo,to profit benefit or yeeld increafe ; al-
fostorefembles alfo,to fit, fute,or agree well with,

Se revenir, Tocome to bimfelfe againe after a great
anger, feare , amaxcment , of {wooning ; to recouer,
picke up bis crummes, grow well, wax whole, againe.
Cela merevient bien, 1 baue a good conceit thereof,
I like it paffing well, ’
Cela me revient bien au coeur. It goes to the beart
of me ; it vexeth, or fretteth me at the verie beart,
Cela me revient toufiours au ronge. The fame; or,
1 ore neuer forget it; itwillalwayes vanne in my
mind, COR het $2

Ilnous revient infinement, It benefits vs excee. -
dinghy + 0" > SDT 1

Us’enrenvient le mieux qu'il peut. Hee makes as
good fhift with or vfe of,it as be can.

\» Souvent ils's'en revenoyent, & fe mutinoyent.
They turned backe vpor it; they grew fencible of, or

~ into choller vpon,it; ofthat made them after fall into |.
miutinie. ÿ ious '
Viande quirevient à la bouche. 2feat that leaves
-ä the mouth an ill tafl behind it, or fends it up there-
into,after it istatem, - ON UN

Reventes: as Venterolles; or,as Reventons.

Reventons. A fee due to a Lord Cenfuel (oner and be-
Sides the Lods,and Ventes) from a purchaftryof land
charged mith Cens,who hath vadertakento diftbarge
the feller of the Lods which be fin bis part, ftouldvpon
the bargainebanepaied, P

Revenu: m.Qeuene ; yearelierents,profits,or inéom


ming,

Revenu:m.ué:f Reuerted,returned, come backe, or
againe ; alfa, renined, well recouered, or come againe
0 ‘ to


Orig Nal from


Rete OHIO STATE UNIVE RSITY


R JENV
to bimfelfe; alfo; fivollen or puft vp againe.
Revenu de queué. whofe taile is new growne (appli-
+ able to an old cokes,or callet.growne wanton on a fud-
den; or to any one which afier a great weakenef]e hath
picked up bis crutmmes,or is become luflié againe.)
O que c'eftvn homme qui m’eft toufiours fortre-
venu. Ob how pleafing that mans companie,or conuer~
fation, bath ener beene unto me. :
Revenue : f. Reuenew,rent,erc ; as Revenu; alfo,are-
tucne returning; euerting,or comming againe. |
Revenué de bois, The new fpringing, or putting out
of wood after it bath beene lopped,or felled,
| Revcoir. Looke Revoir.
| Reverable: com. Reverend, fit to be reverenced,


| Reverberation:f. Arenerberation, reflex,reflettion;


a repercu(fion, firiking or beating backe .
cee :m, A reuerberatorie; part of à Lÿm-
ecke. ï
pe : mée: f, Reuerberated, beaten backére:
cited, 1 }
Reverberer. To reuerberate, reflect, beat or firikebacy
againe. -
Reverdic. To flourifh,or wax greenejagaine,
Il l'y planta pour reverdir. He left bitm in that place
without refolution,meanes or knowledge, to get out of
it ; alfo,he ratled bim vp with fhort and [harpe tearms,
and (ud denly lefi bim to paufe on them while, or thinke
of them what,be lifted.
Reveremment. Rewerently, with reverence.
Reverence: f. Remerence, awfull obferuance,worfbip,
honour.

-Reverence papale. The bomage done, or fubiettion
acknowledged,by a Prince unto a new-elected Pope.
Reverence Turguefque, 4 od, ' pi
Faire lareverence à, To arife,giue place,make cour-
tefie, vaile bonnet , unto; to folicité with cap and
kace. 3

Reverencer. To renerence,re(pect with an awfull ob-
feruance.vorfhipihanour;adores

Reverend: m.ende : f. Keuerend,vener able,wor fhip-
fill honourable, facred, graue ; alfoymoft ré (pect iull of,
or dutifull unto. . a
everender, as Reverencer. ©" \

Reverential : m.ale :f Rewerent, full of reverence.

| Reverer. To reuerencesworfhip,adore.

Reverifier. Toreuerifie, reconfirme, teapproue, make
good againe, à
everni: mie: fas Vetni ; or new glazed ouer.
evers :m.A back blow,clap, flroke,wherrit; or ablow
with the backe of a hand,or ford,
Les revers de fortune. The croffes of fortune,

Revers de gouvernail. The backe of'a Rudder, —-
Revers de Guyfard.'ce ne font pas les revers de

à Guyfard (qui eftoyent fans retour.) Thefe are no

Such deepe queftions or bard matters; they may be re-

~ folued,or anfwered,wellynongh, = 7 = 0
“A revers. Backward,ar finarfie, infide outward, vp.
‘downewar a cleane kamme. 1"

Revers :m.erfe : f. Strange uncoth ; croffebarfo,
| Reverfailles :f. Theveuerfions of, or dvinke lefi in, the

Maifters glaffes, or draughts, powred togetber into a
pot for theferuants. 0: a
à age Revefche. > ous
everfer. To powre backe,or pore out a: À
Reverfi : m. 4 kind of Trumpe (played peu and
{illoffport) which we Dake of Seuay bronghe [ome


ten yeares agoe into France,


Reverfion:f. A reaerting,returning;or comming back;


R E vi


alfo,a Reuerfion inLaw.

Droi& de reverfion. LookeDroi&,

Reverfure: f. Thegwaining, or turning at the top of a
land,where one fBrrow ends and another begins,
Reverfures. as Reverfailles.

Revertir. To renert,retuÿne come backe.

Revertir en quelque lieu, ou avec quelqu'un. To

haunt, ffequent,repaire often unto; to cenuerfe, ac-

companie,confort much with,

Reveiche: f Courfe Bayes ; Cotton or Frize for ly-
nings. ‘ place
Revesche: com. Harfb,churlifb,rude ,vatraëtable,fro

ward ; wild, fauage hagard,vnrule, fierce.

Vin revefche. Hard, fowertart,vapleafant wine,
Reveicherie:f HarfhnefJe,rudene(fe,churlifhne(fe.fro-
” mel a wildne(fe, fanageneffe, fiercene{fe, vnruli.

neffes % aye

Reveft:m. 4 reinuefiment yeinuellive,

Reveftement: m, 4a upper garment,robe,or vefiment,
alfo,a reinuc/ting,reattivin; new-clothing ; alfo, aclo-
thing, attiving, putting on,couering omer with,
Reveftementde muraille, Ces arbres font com-
modes à faire des Lambrunchemens, ou revefte-
mens de murailles. Are fit, 07 good to feele, or boord
walls witball,

Reveltiaire. # Reveftiere,

Reveftiere :m. 4 Veflriein 2 Church, :

Reveftir. To reinueft,reattire, cloth or apparel againes
alfo,10 put Upon, or couer ouer with, a garrrent: to put
on an upper garment ; 10 put garment vpon fermentor
one garment ouer another, LA
Reveftir de quelque terre. To give, or put into, pof:
feffion,t6 make linerse and feifin of a peece of ground.

Reveftiffement : m. 4 reinueftment, or a reinueflings
al/o,a mutnill,and equall gift made,aud pafed pute
licke AG, betweene two that are ioyned, or allied, by
mariage. .


Reveftu :m.ué =. Reuftedreinueied sinuefled; clo. |


thed,attired,apparelled,againe ; alfo,clothed or voue.
red all oucr with wrapped round about in. Le
Paon reveftu. A Peacocke flayed, parboyled, lardéd,
and flucke thicke with Cloues ; then roafted with his
feet wrapped vp to kecpe them from |corching ; then
conered againe with bis owne skinne as foone as be is
cold and fo wnderpropped that, as aline, hee feemes to


Land on bis legs : Inthis equipage a gallant, and dain


R tie fernice. rae à
cveué:f, A reuiew,reniewing, [uruey, (ürueyin one
looking ; alfa Mufler,er the maso 4% Ami ;


Revifier. To remiue,returne unso life, quicken againg. «
Revigourant. adding mor regi nore vi


Le;


Se gour;unto, ~~ : SEER eae
Revigourer. To reuigorate, adde new vi
rue Aus. * du aay ap Peu
Revirade:f. Æwbeéling;or round tarne, a backe er,
© whirle, whiske; blow,or thrufl, ©
Revirer. To wbirle often about, to turne agañie and a=


aimes s Fin ai TE te
» Serevirer contre fon ennimi.Againe to turne back,
‘Gy wheële boit wpon anencmit, — § |
Revifeur: mA yewifor,or reuemer, ©
Revifion: f. 4 renifion,reusfe,yeniew, reexamination,
= lookinig ower dain. ey 3s ; ate t
Revifit: m. 4 reniew taken b the King of bis ‘Officers


yes


“accounts, © *~


Revifitation® £4 teuifitation; or as Revifitement.
Revifitement : ii. A rewifing,yemieming, recognizing, |


omer feeing, king againe.


Re-


i
= hd


CT
i


Sg ee ee eee)


R, EV.


Revifiter. To reuifé,reuiew ; reuifite, recognize; ower-
looke,ouerfee, faruey,againe. :

Revifiteur: m.4 reuifor,reniewergenifitor,ouerlooker,
ouerfeer. ‘

Revivifienne: f. A reuiuing,a returning unto life.

Revivre :m. 4 later math,or crop,

| Revivre. To rcuiue,recouer breath,returne unto lift ; to
be renewed ; to [bring er grow vp againe,

Reume. The rhewme.

Reiini: mie : f, Reanited reioyned seconciled,

Reünion:f, Arcunion,reunitement, reconcilement ; 4
new league or coniunétion,

Reiinir. To reunite,reioyne,reconcile,attone,

Revocable: com. Rcuokable,wbich may be recalled,
Office revocable ad nutum, 4n Office granted du.
ring pleafure.

Revocation:f. A reuocation, a renoking; a counter-
maund,recalling vecantation,

Revoguer. Tofailebacke,or againe.

Revoir. To reuiew,recognixe, reexamine ; ouer looke, or
oucrfee,againe,

Revol : m. 4 flying backe,a returne upon the wing.

Revoler. To flie backe,toreturne flying.

Revolte: f, Arcuolt,arebellion,

Revolté: m.ée: £ Reuolted,rebelled, fallen from ; alfo,
returned,or which hath made anew turne,

Revoltcment: m. A renolting, rebelling; a quitting,
leaning or falling from; alfo,a returning.

Revolter, To renolt; rebell; fall, flip,turne,or goe from,

Pe leaue,quit,abandon, forfake ; alfo,to returne,or make a
new turne, F5.

Revolu:m, ué: £ Rewolued ; rounded or turned whel-
ly,paffed or gone fully about. ‘
L’anrevolu. The yeare fully ended,runne about.

Revoluble : com. Reuoluble,reuolwable ; fit or apt to be
turned about,

Revolution :f, Areuelution; a full compaffing , roun-
ding, turning backe to it firft place,or point ; th'accoms |
piment of a circular courfe.

Revomir. To vomit againe.
Revoque :m.ée sf. Reuoked, recalled, countermaun-
de


Revoquer. To rewoke,recall,countermaund,alter,make


Reupe :£ The dropping of the mofe; alfo,a belch,
Reupontic : m, as + 2 ae
Reuppe: £ 2s Reupe. -
Tobeleb,


‘4 Reu 2e ‘
ReiifSir. To ifhesrifé, or fpring out ; tofucceed, er come


“wnto good or exi rat


Revulsion:f A revulfion,a pullme vp, or plucking “a


“way ;alfi,the drawing, or forcing of humors from one
part of the bodie into another, -
Reyft e Reiftre.


Looke |
:m A flat, plaine feuell ground,
Genus


e round, “x tbh. i | 8

; Rez de chaullée The fame or à foundation,bottome,

gored whence: L'eftage de rez de chauflée. The

To fi Morie,the florie next ta the ground;and,Le mur

eft à rez de chauffée, 1s Ok ohm wall flands
ts it,


deuell with the ground tha Res”
Ke rez. & rdres. Euen or leuell withyelo
a AU SEE 14 un AUDE
| "Meurerez pied rez terre. Ya rafé , caft 7 beat
ne crdi


spots tego l


: ing.
4 farlie, | Ribaine. Ribon ribaine, Looke Ribon, 15


RH ES


rafh,or arrogant fellow ; be refpects no man, cares for

no bodie, feares neither ete 3 (fon a it
in Troyes bearing the furname of Rez, and Jo great
in authoritie and means as it was an ordinarie threat
in that towne,to fay, le Je divay,on feray fçavoir,aux

. Rez ; wberwith a good fellow being oftentimes vr ged,
came ont at length with thefe words; Je n'ay que faire
desrez,ny des tondus ; alluding to the Signification
of rez, wherewith Tondus almoft fynonymizeth.)

Rezueil L m, Networke for the baire ; or, a Cawle of
network.

Rhabarbe: m. Rewbarb. à

Rhabiller. as Rabiller,

Rhabituer. To reaccuftome,reinure.

Rhagade: f, 4 cbap,or chawne,comming by cold,é>e,in
any part of the bodie,but e (pecially in the fimdament,

Rhagadie. The fame,

Rhamindique. Th’excellent Indian root called otber-
wife Mechoacan,

Rhamne. The fruitfull white Bramble called Ramme,or
Chrifis thorne, :

Rhapontique. The leafi,and worft kind of Rewbarbe,

gor in Pontus, ;

Rhatimburgs : m.sele@,or > bagp Indges for the de-
cifion of all cafes that fell within the compaffe of the
Salick Law.

Rheteur : m, 4 Rhetorician.

Rhetorique:f, Rhetoricke ; the Art of Eloquence,

Rhetorique:com. Rbetoricall,of Rhetoricke; eloquent;
a Couleurs Rhetoriques.Looke under Cou-
cur, : +

Rhetoriquement. Abetorically ; eloquently; Rhetori.
cian-like, \

Rhetoriquer. To Rbetorize it, play the Rbeterician,
(peake eloquently, argue neatly, plead finely,

Rhetorifer. The fame.

Rheubarbe: £. Zewbarb ; and (move particularly) the
beft and fecond thereof, brou if out of China,
and out of Barbarie : See Reubar

Rheume : f..4 rhenme,catharre,pofeymurre.

Rheupontique: fi The sworft and leaft kind of Rew-
barbe; growing in Pontus; alfo, the root of great
Centorie , called foin diuers Apotbecaries fhops, but
ervonioufly.  "" :

Rhodais. The name of a good tovene in Languedoc.
Elle eft de Rhodais. She bath ber flowers.

Rhomb :m. 4 Turbot : qLangued.

Rhombe:m. <4 pinning wheele,reelewhirle,or turnes
alfoya figure that bath equall fides, and unequall an-
gles ; as a quarric of glaffe.erc.

‘ante. AWbirligig,or Top,
ide :f. A figure bauing unequal fides, and }
-1, angles.


.Mufdlerhomboïde. 4 muskle which drawes back-
= wadithefkoulder blade, |
Rhon. as Rhomb ; alfo,the flarub Sumacke,Curriers Su-
_ #racke,leather Sumacke, a
RpUs ide. A fqnare:; or as Rhomboide.

upontique. 4. ntique.
R pore. led Sumacke.
agas. The poifan Aconitum,
jant : m. ante: f Laugbing,geering, fleering. «
Dents riantes, The foure tres :f0 calledbecaufe
in langbing they are commonly diftonered,
Fa enriant. Looke Mordre,


Riard : m. >f, as Riant ; or continwally laugh-


Ri-


me Ca


RI IC


Ribaud,& Ribaude. es Ribauld,& Ribaulde. "1
Ribaudaille: £ 4 rufianlie crue, a roguifh compa.


nie.
Ribaudequin: m. 4 fafhion of buge croffebow ( fome
peat or fifteene ain Tenet) tbat along ar~
row feathered with borne,or thine wood, é is at this
day out of vfe. x 411171
Ribauderin. The fame.
Ribaudine :f. as Ribaulde; or,a rafealliequeane,\ _
Ribauld :m, A rogue,ruffian, rafcall, feoundrell, var-
let, filthie fellow; alfo, a ribauld, fornicator, wbore-
muager,bawdie-houfe baunter; alfo, a bafé fellow, or
labouring man, of a big bodie, prong limmes, andbard
conflitation,atough whorefonne.
Leribauld d'une grappe. The flaulke of aclafter of
grapes, : :
Roy destibaulds. Am Officer which, in old time; loo-
ked to the vagabonds, ed idle perfons that baunted the
Court; and fearcbed any that came in, to fee they bad
no Armes, or bidden weapons about them; and to-
wards night vifited all the chambers in the boufe, to
preuent fecret maffacres ; and thruft out at doores at
meale, and bed-time, {uch as bad not their diet, and
lodging allowed them ; and punifhed all diforders
committed, by the followers of the Court, without the
Court gate: This Officer bad agard of Archers at-
tending on him,and a Lieutenant, called Prevoft des
ribauds : In Charles the fixts time the name (100
necre a King) was fuppreffed, and, as fome thinke,


thoritie unto the Office.’ =" à
Ribaulde: f, Awbore ,queane,punke,gill, flirt,commin
hackney ,doxie,mort, à ps
Ribaulder. To play shevibauld,ruffian, rogue, >’
Ribauldife: £ ‘Ribauldrie, roguerie, rufianifme, who-
ring ,whore-huating, ’ à
Ribault. as Ribauld. ;
Ribe:£, Acoaftierc’; as Rive: qLangued. A
Ribe taillade. See Taillade, j ts
Ribes: £ Red Goofeberries , beyond-fèa Goofeberries,
garden Currans baflard Curtans. :
Rob de ribes. Looke Rob,
Ribettes. as Ribes. : 108
Ribier:m. The red Goofeberrie plant ; alfo, a kind of
Riblant. Roauing, ietting, raking, fivaggering abroad
~ with weapons to the (poyle, or defpoyling, of euerie one
be meets, "220 GG 94 : 3
Ribler. To rowe,roamey ake,or iet abroad weaponed,and
wronging cuerieone; to boot-hale, rob, ranfacke, prey
upon paljengers;ar poore county ep people. LEE
iblerie : £. À rowing,ietting, roaming, /waggering; a
adding abroad in armor, to the wronging, ranfac:
NRA pa(fengers,or poore Countrey people; a
| boot-haling ; alfo;a violent courfe or'incurfion vpo an
enemies ouh, RQ TE Fréntil
Riblette:£ A collop,or flice. =
Des oeufs à ne Eggs and collops ; or, an
| Omeletor Pancake of eeges, and flices of bacon mini
| reins together. i :
! Ribleur:m. 4 ne Prageerer,
outragious reakes-player; arobber,ranfacker, boot-b D
| Ler;preper upon palfengerssemc® RIT?
Ribon ribaine. By booke or crooke, will ye nill ye,whe-
À cher you wilor no. 8 eo or 2
Riciric. Quite wbolly,througbl;extreamely; exattiy,
we


2 of bacon.


|. precifely, in enerie point.


altered into Prevoft de l'hoftel, of late peares bee ||
come, le grand Prevoft de France, & de Vhofteldu |
Roy; which title charles the ninth added ‘Sor more au: |


Ricalde : f gil, flirt,callet; (could; a long-tongued
and TA 8 D and fatling Pufoifs 3
Reset Tighying , [porting ; dallying , wantoni-
g 1 |

Ricaner. To gigele,tigbie,dallie,wantonize it.

Ricaneux: meufe:£ Tighying , giggling, ewer (por-

ting, dallying, or playing the wanton.

Ricaffer. To giggle, flere, laugh with a tighie, play the .
wanton epregioufly.

Richard : m. Richard; alfo,the bird called a Fay,

Fer de richard, A kind of great yron wire.

Riche : com, Rich,wealthie,opulent,well lined,of great
meanes,that bath much to take to. rt os
Riche commeynladre. As rich asa Lazer (who is
tearmed rich, either becaufe he gets few children ; or
becanfe few come to eat onbim.) | Ula
‘A riche homme n'en chaut qui ami luy foit: Pro,
A rich carle no mans loue tefpeëls; or doth not care
though no man loue him.
Homme chiche iamais riche: Prov. The niggara’s
nere (in bis opinion)rich. ' :

Ieftriche que Dieu aime: Proy. Rich is the man
whom God affeéts,
Le plus riche n’emporte qu'un linceul: Pro. Seeke
Linceul.
La vache du riche velle fouvent, celle du povre a-
vorte: Prov. The rich mans cow is fruit fill, fat, and
Strong, the poore mans (leane; and ih kept) cafis ber
young,
Pour devenir bien toft riche il faut tourner Je |
: ‘dos à Dieu : Prov. He that will fone grow rich mut
1 ee 1s x se:
Qui bien gaigne, & bien.efpargne devient tantoft
riche! rs He that gets and {pares much will quick-
ly be rich. -

Richement. Richy, wealthily, opulently, abundantly,
Richementmentir. To lie for the whetfloneor with À
the beftofthem, — - ‘

Richereaui : tn, A wealthie chuffe,rich lobcocke,well-i- |

“wed boore ; one that bath move wealth then wit, more

fubftancethen'cinilitie. QUE :

Richefle :f: Kiches,wwealth great fubfidniceymeanes, pol

‘Seffions,tr eafure, fortanes. + SCA OT
Enfans foncricheffes dé povres gens. Store of chil-
dren is all the wealth poore mien can brag of;(yet is tbat |.
brag but idleif they be idle; SeekeEnfant.) © |

cheffe eft peché eft: Prov. where riches are


. Ouric
tie fle ote |


dr :

icochet. The fport of ski

M me tacts Drake.

Crett i chanfon dico ee Ti an idle,or endleffe |


tale, a fubiel whereof one part contradicts,
ami - owes,anotber. , 2 sets. à
Ricote :f. A kind of milke- meat ; or at; cae ef
Ricottes:f. (urds made of whey. >. er fas)
Ridde:f, 4 Flemmifh coyne worth about $ s. fterl. ”

Ridde de Gueldres. Is worth about 3 s.fterl,

idé: mée:£wri primpled crumpled, frumpled, |

in firrowes like am angrie brow; alfo, fliffened,orfiret- ||

ched out unto a fliffenelfe. : nz


Rideau: sm. A curtaineor cloth-skreene. 9 |
Ridelle: £ The vayle of a Cart or waint; and more
particularly , the vppermof of the three ; the mid- ||
dle one being tearmed fauffe ridelle; avd the lowefl,
Ridement:m. A wrinkling, wrimpling,crumplingsalfo, |
a fliffening,or firctcbing out. ARE : cet 8 |
Aaaa Ri- |


ae ae |
af LES


Vs ANR PART TT, 7”, =e © Se , dla


RIE


Rider. 0 wrinkle,or to wrimple; alfo (among Mariners)
to ftiffen, or firetch out vuto a fliffenelfe.
Se rider. To frowne, lowre, [coule , (ooke flerne, fir-
row or wrinkle the forhead, knit the brawes.


| Rides:f. wrinkles, or fivrowes on the face of an old,


or angrie peifon ; alfo; crumples, wrimples; foulds,
plaites,

Ridicule : com, Ridiculous, vaine, find, worthie to be
laughed at.


| Ridiculement. Ridiculoufl,vainely, foolifbh.


ié : m, as Rie.

Rie:f. Awaft;an vntilled or unbusbanded peece of
ground,

Ricble : m, Cleauer, Claner, Goofé-fhare, Loue-man,
Goofe- grape.


Rien. (without the companie of a Negatiue , fignifies as


the Latine Res) a matter,thing, fome thing, any thing,
ought { (but with one either expre[fed, or underflood,
Sienifies)nought nothing, no whit not a et,

Rien rien. No no,neither fo nor fa.

Ce n'eft plusrien quedemoy. lam as good as no-
thing, or,1 am utterly undone,

Elle lehaït fur tout rien. She bates him extreame-
ly, aboue all things, more then fhe bates all the world
befides.

Encores s’il m’euft donné quelque rien, Yet,had be
giuen me any thing,or neuer [olittle,

Me voulez vous rien mander. Looke Mander,
Rien n'a qu’aflez n'a: Prov. He nothing bath whe
(thinkes be) bath not ynougb ; or, as good baue nothing
as not baue ynough. | |
Rien n'eft bien fai que ce que Dieu parfaié :
Prov. & Rien ne faiét qui ne patfaiét; Looke Par-


re. ;

Rien n'eft fi caché qui ne fe trouve : Prov, The ¢lo-
felt kept things are at length found out,

Rien ne peut eftre grand qui n’a bon fondement:
Prov. The thing cannot be great that bath no good
foundation.

Rien ne vaut l'afaillant s’il n’eft fort, & vaillant :
Prov. Ju vaine he playes tb'affailamt who is not firong,
and valiant.

Rien ne vaut la chofe finon ce qu’on la fait valoir:
Prov. Euerie thing is as it is taken; or, conceit fets
rates upon all eartblie things.

Rien fans peine: Prov, Lagke Peine.

Aujourd’huy roy demain rien: Prov. To day a King
to morrow (as good as) nothing, }

On ne fait de rien graffe porrée: Prov. Fat broth
cannot without fome fluffebemade.

chet: Proy. He that


. Qui rien ne porte rien ne |
beares nothing lettetb nothing
ui n’a patience n’a rien: Prov. Looke Patience,
ui n’a fanté n’a rien : Prov. He that wants health
wants all things.
Qui n’a fi
Qui ne fçait rien de rien ne doubte: Prov, He that
L Sc bie Gé
pee yr undrell, foumme,ra[caB ; bafeor
ahs a 4 1
Riens. as Rien. (v.m. |


RE |
Res cts nt See, NE


captifs riere les Ef Is, 4
Spaniards in Spine een E


ee orl cae


hee


bay |
Ar Een


ance il n’arien : Pro Look Suffifance. |


R 1G


Ries :m.4n under vaffall,a vaffall vaio a vaf:


Dee ri LE

ju : m. A little brooke,a reyne,or gullet of water,

kc ee e

Rieur: m. À laugber.

Rif: m, as Rieu.
Uneluy lairra rifny raf. He will firip,reaue , or de-
prie, bim of all,

Rifage :£.4 Sowre,lowring,powting, couling, frowning
houjewife.

Rifflarde: £.4 rauenous,or a rifling drab;one that loues,
or lines.by,the (poyle of them {he conuerfes with.

Rifflandouille, A bellie-god, fpoyler of chitterlings,loe
ner of good cheere. :

Rifle: £ Fire : qBarrag. whence;
On n'y a laiflé ne rifle, ne rafle. They bane fwept
ne away; they bane left no manner of thing bebind
them,

er. To rifle, ranfacke, if le,make bauocke er cleane

worke, fiveepe all away + alfo, to rauine, or


eat greedily.
Rigalil :f, Lickorice,
igaliffe fertile. Common Lickorice, » ’


rs msg fterile. Barren Lickorice, Hedge-bog Lic-
orice.

igaud: m. aude: £, whence; ‘A jambes rigaudes.
. C'eft à la renverfe, & les jambes en haut; or, With


ads vp-firetcbt legs.
Ris) ipl. as Reigl x Reiglet.(v.m.)
ifle:f. Lickorice, :

Rigolage: m.4 mocking,jeaffing,or laugbing at.

Rigoleinent :m. as Rigolage,

se Rigoler de, To pes lek laugh at, make bimfelfe
mertie or play tbe wanton wx,
Se rigoler au foleil. To (port, folace, or iopfully to
bleake, or fpread bimfelfe in the Sunne,taking a fenfu-
all or wanton felicitie in it,

Rigolerie :f. as Rigolage. :

Rigoleur : m. A common mocker of , or ieafler at; one
that batiles,or pleafes bimfelfé,in a continuall (porting
. with, or laughing at,otbers.

Rigoreufement. Rigorou]ly, flernely,anplerely, feuere-
l,i extremitie,witbout any L

Rigoreux: m. eue: f. Rigorous, bard, firidi, lerne,


\_ extreame.pitileffe;vnmercifüllauflere,ftuere.


Rigueur: £ terne aujleritie, fe=


ueritie, flernenele. à
Rillon deporc. as Graton ; or that part of a bogs in-

trailes which is like the tripes in an Oxe.
Rim de vent. 4 puffe of wind; or as Rum.

sr A :f, Paultiemeeter, forrie time,

inailleur :m. 4 meane compofer, a forrie rimer.
Rimailleufe : f. 4x RES Poeteffe.

i :f.as Rimailleufe.


imart: m, An unlearmed,or feurnie vimer,
imafler, To time unlearnedly,to make forrie meeter.


timafleur: m. A forrie rimer, a paulirie meeter.ma-


imaffeufe: fiasRimailleufe,
me : f.Rime,or meeter;alfü,a crannie chinkerifieltft,
chap,chawme. ' ET
jmer, To rime: to write or Peake inmecter. — .
:£,.A little rime orfmall riming pocfie.
Rimeur: m. 4 rimer, a maker of rimes, a writer uw


Le


Rimeufe : € A Poeteffe,or woman thatmakesrimess —
Rignonner, Torime,ére ;as Rimer, Ri


en get 2


=


a ti ae et


RV Tig


Rimoyer. The fame.
Rimoÿeur : m. A rimer,a meeter-makers
Rinceéau. as Rinfeau.
Ringer. a Ruminer. . ;
Rinsé: m. ée:f. Reiafed,as linnen. a
| Rinfeau : m.The flaulke(or part of the flantke)of a plant;
a little bough of a tree. ;
Rinfement : at. 4 reining of linnen clothes.
Rinfer. To reinfelinaen clothes.
Rinfeur: m. 4 reinfér of linnen,
Rioge. as Mefentere : ¢Langued,
Riolc. Streaked, rayed ; whence, Riolé piolé; diner-
fified with many feuerall colours ; or as under Piolc.
Riorte :f Awith,or band; a dr flickerfit tomake one.
Riote: f. A brabbling,(coulding ,bramling,chiding;de-
|  bate, contention, (quaring, altcrcation; alfo, as Ki-


orte. 12

Rioter. To chide, brabble, could, bravole; iangle; de-
bate, fquare,contend, fall out in words.

{ Rioteux : m. eufe:f Scoulding ,biabbling brawling,e-
uer chiding iangling, wrangling ; moft litigious or de-
batefill neuer quiet.

Riotte: f.as Riortes or,the band of a bauen,or fagot;al-
P,es Riote; or a fmall brabble; alfo, a flimflam, idle
diftour(e,tale of a tub.

Riottement de chiens. The parting, or wburring of
dogs, dogs brabbling. |

| Ripaille : À Gs properly a tearme of warre fignifjing,
pillage ; whence, ripaille necefsiteufe; a needie and
rafcall companie that lines onely upon the fpoyle ; yet is
it ufed much for) gluttonie, fur fering, idle expence.of
money,or of time,in pampering of the bellie :@ Norm.
ça ça ripaille, vie de goulus, àlafoupe garçons,
(Tb'ordinarie fbeech of fuch bellie-gods.) FA

Riparographe : m.4 writer Sens painter of bafe
or (Curuie matters.

Ripeilleux. as Ripilleux. ‘

Ripilleux: m, eufe: f. Craggie , mugged , umenen,
rough.

Ripopé Vin rip. Raftallie bedge wine ; bad wine
made a great deale worfe by much water ; or (mot
properly ) the droppings of wine, takenlout of the Bac-
quet, orTub that flands under the fpigot, and min-

à -gled'with water by, or for pore fèlkes.

Rippe : À The final fifb called a Sbarpling,Stickle-back,
07 Banke-flickle, ae

Ripperie :f, Acoufening, gulling, cheating,conicatch.
ig. Tis

Rippopé. as Ripop :

Ripuaire. A i Law agreeing with the Salicke
both infubflance and date. … \. owl

Riquaner. as Ricaner; or to bray like an Affe.


Pepessque: Throughly wholly quite off or avvay. |"! |


eu dé riqueraque, Wild-fire. :: |
Rire. Yo laugh,tighie; geere, fleereymocke,ieafl.er feoffe
‘at; make bimfélfe merrie with, ;
Rire à demie bouche. To laugh difdainfully,or as one
that is more angrte toen merrie. i
Rire à groffes dents, From the.teeth outward, fay
spe


we ttes 1 ;

Rire fous leur bonnet; & Rire fous gorge, To la
-vaderband,or in their miei A : “4
-Se chatouiller pour fe fairerirc, To plea/e or flatter
bimfelfe with trifles, idle hopes vaine thoughts; or, to
 coine many fleight or idle ieafis for bimfelfe to laugh at,

if no bodie de will + Se
Pincer fans rite, ‘fo gird clofely, to gius prinie nips :
and, louër à pincer fansrire. The fame ; as alfo, to


enue


nimme, filch,purleyne. A

Vous verrez bien rite. You (ball fee good langb-

ing, ee th

Femmerit quandelle peut, & pleure quand elle

veut : Prov, Looke Femme. t
Marchand qui perd ne peut rire: Pro. Can anyman

: pr rare loofes ? can any man take pleafurein bis |

L
Tel rit quimord: Prov. Some laugh and bite with-
1; Appliable to an bypocrite, or difembler ; whe

brings, by bis faire words or fhewes, confüfien to thofe
he conuerfes with.
Tel auimatin rit qui au foir pleure : Prov. May
thatwere glad in the morning are fad ere night,

fs :m. The graine called Rice,
is:m, Laughter; or,alaughing,tighying, fleering, .
Ris de chien. .4 difloyall,or treacherous geerimg,
Ris d'hoftclier. Seeke Hoftelier.
Ris deloup, The name of a certaine great peare.
Ris Sardonien, 4 forcedor caufelefie mirtb,a laugh-
ter onely from the teeth outward; of, a long laughter
that ends in forrow, .

Ris (The Participle of Rire) Dequoy il fur bien ris.
whereat good [port was made,

Rife: f. 4 laughter, or laughing ; a tighying,or fleering;
alfo,a mocking, flowting,ieafting at, \
Ache de risée, Crowfèot of the fallow field; or,Crow-
foot of Mliria,

Rifible : com, Fit or wortbie to be laughed at.

Rifque : f. Perill jeopardie danger, hazard chance,ad-
wenture.
Ie le préns Ama rif{que. Hab or nab, at my perili be
it,bappen bow it wilt,

Riffes chevreaux. Fat Kids : (Rab.

Riffole: The browneneffe that is giuento a thing in
the frying thereof, ,

Rissolé: m. ée :f. Fried throughly, or browned allo.
uer in the fying, ;

Riffoler. To frie a thing untill it be brovone,

Riflolle :f. 4 Jewes eave; or Mufbrome thats fafhioned
like a Demie-circle, and growes cleaning to trees;
alfo,a final and delicate minced Pie,made of that fa-


Rit: m. as Ris; Rice,
nailler. Torime panlirily, to write or pronounce

rime doggerell. . *. |
Rithme:m. Rime,or meeter,
Rithmer. Torime,to make meeter. . 2
Ritual : male: £ Ritwall;cuflomarie, cerimanious;of or
à -belongingtorites. 1 202g re
Rivage :m. The fea fhorezor coajt ; a water banke, wa-

ters fide,the fea fide.
Droid de rivage. Shorage ; Looke Droï&t.
re :m.cre:f, Belonging, or neere,unto a wa-
_ ters fideo. x
Rivagier:m. One that dwells neere the waters fide.
Rival: m, Arinall,corrinall competitor in loue,
Rivant. Riveting, sd
Rive: f. The Sea fhore ;. fide, or coaft ; the banke

ov fide of d Riuer ; the brinke, or brimme of a Spring,


dc. A

Larive d'un bois. The skirt,edge,or fide of à wood.

Larive d'un pain. The fide of a loafe.

Il eft plus aifé de fe tirer de la rive que de du

fond: Proy, Better may a man get from the brinke
~ then from the bottome ; a mifthiefe is fooner crufhed,

adelight more eafily called, when one whut dipped,

then when be is plunged panto it,

Aaaa ÿ ki-


: Go: gle


oe St eae Pre 7 à A ee Te


Rel V


Rivé:m.ée:f Rineted, clenched; faflened or turned

: backe, as the point of a nayle.

IlJuy a bien rivé fes cloux. SeeClou,

Rivement:m. A rivesing,a clenching,

River. Torinet or clench; to faflen or turne backe the
point of anayle coc ; alfo,to thruft-the clothes of a bed
inat the fides,

River vn clou à. Togetort a fpeech backe upon; to
make a found replie vato.

iveran; m. A. Ferrie-man or Bote-man ; alfo, a
welfh booke, or hedging bill made with a booke at the
end; or as;

Rivereau : m. The pole with a forke of yron, ec, at the
end, wherewith Watermen fet forward their boats
when they row not ; we call tt a Bill. booke.

Rivereux:m.eufe:£ Frequent, baunting, full of, or
belonging to,riuers, .

Faulcon rivereux. That preyes in marfhie places, or
on riuer fowle ; a riuer Hawke, or Hawke for tbe ri-


utr,
Riverotte: £ 4 brooke, little fireame, finall viner,
Rivet: m, The welt of a flove.
Tirer au rivet, Looke Tirer,
Riviére: &£ Ariuer; afireame; alfo, a certaine apple
that yeelds an excellent cyder. ,
Les riviéres retournent en Ja mer: Pro.Looke Mer.
En petite riviére nefe prend grand poiffon: Prov,
Small towns ,or meane families affoord no great prefer-
ment. ~
Enpont, en planche, & en riviére valet devant
Maiftre derriere: Proy, Looke Pont.
Les petis ruiffeaux font les grandes riviéres :Pro.
Many litiles make a mickle; many {mall parcells ioy-
ned together make up a great bodie,or bulke, 1
Riuler. To rauell out like filke, (van)
Rivure. as Rivement,
Riz: m. The graine Rice. ;
Rob: m. The inyce of blacke whortle berries preferued,
Rob de ribes. The prejerucd inyce of red Goofe-ber-
ries,or baflard Currans.
: Robbe: £ 4robe, gowne, mantle, coat ; any long vpper
ms arment; alfo,the fea Calfe,a fifb.
' Robbe d'argent brodée de merde. A learned text
valearnedly commented on.


fwords. é
Robbe longue. gensde robbe longue.
Clevher,Profellorsof artes,é>es cr “es enh


»Burguers garment ; aciuile, neat, (price gowne, or
garment. : Fais


~ cherie sia round, fats plumpe wench.) .::: sVTPE
Accommoder la robbe au petit poinét; I] luy ac-
commoda fa rob. He et bis gone clofe te bis oil.
ders,becourfl bis coat ot Facket foundly.


>. Atanght or two vader your babits.


e does well on no mans fhoulders ;


_ A borrowed gown ;
us Do! co er etage + eit
» Robberefait moult l'homme : Prov. Handome ap.


% | sé pera For LA
; . i Pro, Creat pasceh vee poe abredest eaves


= |


Digitizeckay Go. gle


Robert: m. Robert(the name; ) alfo,the peare Robert.


Robbe courte. gens derobbe courte. 44 that pro. |
fefe ge 3 bold of the fword , or vfnally weare |


: | Marchants; the refife, or followers of better (iti-
Robbe qui fent fa petite ville. A citizens gowne, a | +) fife»


y 1
Bonnetobbe. A Bona roba; good fuffe, found le- | R


|


Beuvez, vn coup ou deux en robbe. Stealé a
: i


“Ts nefe font gueres fai@ tirer la robbe: They were |
foone intreated,eafily drawne,to rc. - M”: 4
Robbe daurruy ne fait honneur à nulluy: Prov.


AU SRE
Robufteté:f. Strength or firongneffe,toughneffe,pithi-


Fille trop veué, robbe trop vefluë;,n’eft paschere
tenué : Prov, Looke Fille. ; j
Ventre de veloursrobbe de bureau: Prov. chopce
food,and cofilie fare doe make the backe goe bare,

Robber. Torob, fleale,purloyne, filch, nimme.

Robberie : f.Robberie ,theeuerie,(iealing, filcing pur»
loyning ; prowling,
obbeur: m. A robber ; or. as Defrobbeur,

Roberge : £ A kind of long fhip, wberin both failes, and
oares are ufed, ;
“ge Robert, Hearbe Robert ; a kind of Storkes-

ie ? à 3

Le pourpoint de Monfeur Robert. 4 Doublet
sar firebodie is fine fluffe , and the backe parts
courfe,

Sauce Robert. 1s made of yolkes of cages, veriuyee,
white powder, and a little broth flrained together and
Jerned vp with whole Goofe-berries putinto it ; alfo,a
Sauce for bogs feet,of onions ,pepper,verinyce and vine-
gar,

le luy bailleray bris contre Robert. will gine him
bread for bis cake,or as good as be brings; 1 will call
him Jacke if be call me Gill,

Robice : m.A robbing ; or arobberie, felonie,theeucrie;
a pilfering aét,a theeui{h pranke,

Robille: t.Provifion de la rob, The clothes zines, Jew-
els,and attive of awidow, with as much other fluffe
as fhe can carrie,adiudged unto her vpô ber renounce.
ment of ber deceafed busbands eflate,

Robin: m. Robin; (a proper name.)

Bon Robin, The name of a certaine bearbe.
Chanfon de Robin. Looke Chanfon.
Robina trouvé Marion: Prov. A notcrious knaue
bath found a notable queane. }
Robin fe fouvient toufiours de fa fleure: Pro. 4
drunkard eucr dreames of pots a mifer of bis pelfes the
ambitious of greatneffe, the lecher of filtbineffe ; euery
one thinkes moff of the thing be affcéts moft.
C'éft la maifon Robinde la vallée, ouiln’y ane
potau feu, nicfcuellelavée: Prov. Appliable t0 a
oomeedie and a naflie boufe,

Robineries :f. Pleafant conccits. .

Robinet:m. 4 Pipkin; a little Pots alfo , the Cocke

of a Fountaine,or of a Ceflerne; alfo,the Taps- bead.

Robon: m. 4 flort gowne; or a fide caffocke reaching
below the knees, + ‘

La fequele au robon. Meane Tradefmen poore


ReBorstion : À À fivengthening , fliffening, reinfor-

cing, fortifjing. i

Robe = as shen, Bie fntifseatoie
oborer. To frengthen, fliffen, fortifie, reinfirce,

Roborin. le bas rob, as Rembouér.

Robre : m. The great Oake,or great Gall tree; the moft
“bard and durable Oake thats. à

Robufte : com, Strong,tough, finnewie,pitbie, flurdie,


Robuftement. " sirongly 3 roughly furdily » forci-


neff ,bardneffe or bardine fe, force, might, abilitie of


Récrer: aie e,flonie crag; bold; alfo, a

ai Cheffe pete poppe anton y
: the crooked peece of timber tbat flands on th'outfide of
= the forecafile of a fhip; and is tearmed the


“ Sans


Original frot
THE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY


ROC


Rocard, vn vieux roc. A hoarfe mouldichaps, an o-

uerworne fincaunter sone that can neither whinnie,nor
» wag the taile. :
Roce. as Rofle. : '
Roch: m. as Roche; alfa,the name of a Saint, for whom
|  aholy-day is, in foie places,-hept on the fixteenth day
of Auguft,
Herbe de S.Roch,Fleawort ,Coniza, Fleabane,Flea
bane Mullet, = Se
Defrobber la bofle 1S, Roch: To heepe his hands in
ure(as in Bofle.)

Rochaille: £. Rockes; rockineffe.

Rochau : m. Rockc-fifhany fifh that lines among rocks;
and particularly,the Cooke-fifh, or Sea-tbrufh ; as al.
So,the fifh Coenusi

Roche :f. A rocke; a flonie crag or bill.

Roche bife; Looke Bis,

Roche vive. Such a vocke as is all of flone without aa
ny bed,or mixture of earth,or fand among it,

Ilya bien de l'anguille fous roche.T herein yet lurks
Some further matter there is more init then the world’s
aware of,

Rocher : in, 4 rocke.

Lagambade du rocher. Precipitation, er the being
throwne headlong from a rocke. -

Rocher: mere : Ë Rockie,ofa rocke.

Roches, Colombe rocheraye.Arocke Pigeon; al.
fo,a wild Pigeon, or one thats’ bred betweene a wild,

4 tame one, f i ;

Rochet :m. 4 frockes looft gaberdine,or gowne of cats.
uas, or courfè linnen , worne by a labourer ouer the-
reft of his clothes ; alfo, a Prelates Rochet ; alfa, the
blurre, button, or blunt yron head, of a tilting-
Pape; or, a Tilting weapon baning a blunt edge, or
en


Rochier, #5 Rocher.
Rocquer vn enfant, To rocke a child,
Rodage : m. A certaine Toll exafted by fome countrey
Lords upon euery waine that paffes(though in the bigh
' way) néere to their Scigniories, whether it be laden or
no ; for if it be, they will be paid both for the load, and
for the cart, :
Rodanes :f. 4 kind of fwect Cherries.
Rode :£ The Dorce,or Gold fifb.
Rodé. Quiarodéle pais. That:bath roamed, wande-
ved, here ar the countvey ouer, :
| Rodelle d'un clou. ‘The head of anayle.
| Rodemontade. Looke Rodomontade, :
oder. To roame,wander,vagabond.ze itrogueabroad,
| rame vp and dovone , flit here and there, trot all the
: > countrey ouer. ‘ Je Kurt ù
oder les rues. To iet, walke, trot vp and downe


£


the fireets (efpecially anigbts ; )-to fee the towne fer-
; a es Uy anightss )


+ Roder lesyeux.'r0 voll the eyes unfleadily,to cafi the
eyes round pp looke on cuerie fide of him.
Rodeur:m Awa 1d, Voamer, wanderer, fireet-
walker , bighway-beater ; a rolling flone ; one that
© does nought bat rimme here and there , trot up and
downe,rogue all the countrey oner; an often and vn-
certaine flitter, a ;
Rodibiliardique : com, Fat,orlarded with fat,
Rododaphne. Oleander; the Rofe tree, Rofe bay , Roft
= bay tree; @ forub. verie beantifull, and verie fil of
poifon. 1


Go gle


RAP 11


—————— ç—— ——————— …——_——"————"—."—"——

- Sans efpargner ny roy, ny roc. Without mercie,
he re(pect of perfons, dealing alike-feuerely with |
Git. be de :


| Rodomontade: £ Abrag,boafl,cracke, vaineglorious
brauadoe, : apr
Roëlle :f Seeke Rouëlle, * ,
Faces tf. Rogation dayes, the Rogation weeke, the
- Gang dayes or Gang weeke. +
Apres Pafques,& Kogation fy de preftre,& d'oig-
R non: Proy, ec Poe or Preftre.
Ogatons:m. Indulgences, Bulls of pardon, Reliques
e&c,borne about the a: she ae
Porteur de rogatons. Locke Porreur,
Roger bon-temps. A madyafcall,a merrie grecke.
ognons. as Roignons,
Rogue. The Mefenterium ; Looke Mefentere.
Rogue: com, Arrogant, proud, prefumptuous; mala.
pert, faucie ; ude, furlie,

Roguement. Arrogantly,prondly, prefumptuonly ; fur-
lily ; malapertly, faucily.
Roïde : com, Stiffe, fleadie, firme, lable, firong ; flur-

die, flubboïne ; rough, fierce, rude, unciujle, violent;
conftant inflexible ; untrattable,
trs as sp ry ane : en
Oideinent. Stifly, fleadiby, firmely, rengly ; flurdi,
fcrnely; rudely, fiercely, HAE ha TUE
violently, vebemently, ;
Roideur: m. Stiffenefft,feadineffe, frmenefes might,
Strength, force, vigour, power ; flurdineffe,rudenefe,
roughneffe, vntractablenepe; earnefineffe, violence,
uchemencie,
Roidi: m. ie: f. Stiffened, hardened 3 fretched,or bént
out, ‘
Roidir, To fiffen,barden, fraighten bend or firetch out.
«+ Seroidir.To be flifly bent unto, fetled in, refolued of;
to frame himfelfe unto a couftant, rigid, or vntralta-
_ ble determination ; fafhion, or bumor ; alfd, to be bard
pr to grow flarke with cold. ~
oidir le jarret. Tofhake,or flretch out, the legs, as
one thats felled by a deadlie blow,
Roigne. # Rongne. - VERRE RENNES
Roignement: m, A paring, clipping, fbredding,a cut
ting off or away. |
Roigner,& Roïgrieux.Lock Rongner,& Rongneux.
Roignons: m. The kidneyes.
Roine. SeeRoyne. rs
Roifons:£ Rogation weeke or dayes, Gang weeke, or
Gate dayes; called fo by the vulgar.
Roitelet: m. A pettie or poore King; alfo,awrenne,
Roland: m. Rowland a proper name.
Mort Rolatid. Thirft,or a dying of thirft : Rab.
Faire le Roland. To brag, boaft, cracke ; fwagger,
freare,teare, flare, fare like a mad-man.
Olat. as Roule : qBayonnois, +
~ Obligé en rolat. Swbielt unto the vigour of the Court


Bailli.. :
| Role Rôllet. Seeke Roule, & Roulet.


Rollier: m. .4 Waine-man, or Waggoner ; one that
inaWaineor Waggon,carries other mens ware up and
downe,

Rollon:m. 4romer, a rowling flone. :

Romain: m.ine : f. Roman, of Rome. TA
Abfynthe Romain.Roma wormwood French worm-
wood Wormwood gentle, fmall-leaued Wormwobd. ©
Efpée Romaine. LookeEfpéc. | os
Lai@ué Romaine. Roman Leéluce, the greateftkind
of Cabbadge Le@uce. :
Mente Romaine. Speare Mint, browne Mint,gar-

den Mints, . eet

Nielle Romaine. Gith,Nigela, Bifbops-wort,Saint
Katberines flower. ti


= NE tés


Aaaa iy Sauge |


at. A es


age


Te


»


en", Te Ue PTIT hw}


Fe


“4 . Le a2 Mc 5 é NN 4
« c :


.


à ges ee re,
}


UT, lu) dé dé > En RENÉ


Romanefque : com, Romifh,Roman.


Romore. Seeke Remore,


Br: pps m.A breaking, burfling,pafbing afunder,


| moll egregious > ye LE
BE! J rompt le ic; Ve


| den aes à


a LE dns. ! LS


R'O M


ROM


Sauge Romaine. Balfamint, Coftmarie, Alecoft; as | Rompture:f. Aruptare; breacb,breaking,é*c; Looke


Mente Romaine,

Romaine:f. 4 Koman beame, a Stelleere ; See Cro-
chet.

Rotman:m. The moft eloquent French, or any thing
written cloquently,was tearmed fo in old time; (of the
Roman,or moft eloquét language) Hence; Le Roman
de la Rofe; The Romant of the Rofe: (In the confines of
Germanie,and Lorraine the language that is not Ger-
man is at this day called Romant.) ,


Romans : m. Beets : €Pic.

Romarin, LookeRofmarin,

Roune : f. (The citie of) Rome.
Le Joup alla à Rome, & y laiffa de fon poil, &rien
defes couftumes: Prov. No place can alter an inue-
terate lewadnelle.
Qui fol va à Rome fol en retourne : Pro, Seek Fol,
Qui langue a à Rotne va: Prov.He that can fpeake
may lrauell any way.
omicole : com. One that affeéts,or honours,Rome or
the Romifh Religion, . :

Rommeler. To rumble,grumble,grunt.

Rommeny : m. The fürre called Budge.(v.m.) |


Rompable: com. Burflable,breakable,

Rompeis: m.Grounds newly broken vp ; efpecially fuch
as either haue nener,or not within memorie, beene til-

led.

dajbing in peeces s alfè, a cancelling; diffoluing, infrin-
Ling vndoing.
ompe-pierre. 4 Rompierre.

Rotnpeur :m. A burfler a breaker,

Rompeur de chanfons. .4 continual interrupter of
fuch as talke more wifely then himfelfe.

Rompierre : £ The bearbe Saxifrage ; alfo,Sampire,
Rompierre blanche, white Saxifrage, white Stone-
breake, 0
Rompierre dorée, Goldë Saxifrage, or Stone-break.

Rompre.To burflsbreak; dafh,er pafh in peeces; to pull,
rend or teare afünder ; alfo,to caffe, cancell, infringe,
diffolue,vndoe ; alfo,to barre at Dicec. ,
_Rompre l'anguille au genouil, To perférme an im-

Offence. :

Gane le coup. To beat or put by a blow , in Fen-
cing ec. 4 :

_ Rompre le coup à vne menée. To disert,croffe,dif-
folue,make void a shah y a ia :
‘Ie vous romps ce coup 12,1 denie you that,or
there; boe ibe neighbour by your fauour fir. ie


Rompre les orcilles à, To deafé,or moleft with ever.


much pratile.
Romprela pailleavec, To fall out with a friend;


_companion,or familiar acquaintant,


; pare plato rai pier. Looks Pl. NS
Rompre


a pr tefte a, To wearie, tire,or toyle out with
i bling; to importune,er crie out up6 ouermuch,
YA tout


worl; all
Met wom Home. An extreame raftall, a


ining to take 100


0 yeeld a little then perifh altoge-
ia Ce RON PTE TA
t Suse Vie why :


Go gle


bi | … pañes
rompre. At the ; be biche 5 7 joie La
, Na , et i | _Miterond. on afshe foure muskles which draw


Rompure, '


Cas de rompture. An equal) in wf abenk ts
2 7 ph creditors ; ps once ta. if pate


dfubieét unto rent, the Landlord bath it the firfi | .


yeare in lien of bis arrerages; and afier bim euerie one,
in bis turne bath it bis year.


Rompu : m, Bon rompu. 4 good companion, good fel-


low,or(as we fay)a good rogue. i
ompu: m, ué: f. Burft,broken ; dafht,or pafht,in pee.
ces; pulled,rent,or torne, afunder ; alfo,cafed cancel.
led infringed,undone,diffolued ; alfo,burft ; viz, whofe
bowells be fallen into bis cods. |
- Rompu aux affaires, Praëtiféd much exercifed, filly
beaten in,well acquainted with,the courfe of bufinef:
fs of great experience inthe world, ‘ |
ompu de travail. Harried, wearied, ouer-tepled,
cleane beaten out,tbat bath loft both firength,&healib
by 100 much labouring. |
Cheminrompu, Le chemin eft tout de
gens. The way is much beaten, or worne by the multi-
tude of paffengers. 7
Dos rompu. ‘A dos rompu. Dobling,twofüld as if
Fa backe were broken,
ront rompu. Qui à le front rompu, 4” impu-
dent fellow. fhameleffe or brafem-faced. companion,
Gorgerompué. Crier à gorge rompuë, Till bis
mouth flit withall, |
Ie m'y fuis bien rompu la tefte. I baue extreamely
api » perplexed or troubled my braines with.
a


Rompu-dos. ‘A rompu-dos. as ‘A dos rompué,
Rompué : . A rout,a difcomfiture, son
Rompure:f.4 ruption,rupture, fiatture,brack,breach;


bur fling breaking.


Ronçay:m, L4 Brier-plot; a ground or place full of


Breerse


Ronce:f, 4 Bramble,or Brier ;alfo, a kind of Thorne


2 backe.
Ronce de cerf. Rowgh Bindweed,
once de chien, The Brier-bufh, or Hep tree; or, a
great kind thereof, which beares a white flower, and
eat leauesrefembling the foles of mens feet ; fome al.
cat oan Caper fhrub.
plant or bufh.


once Ideenne. 4 Rafpice


Fioncé: m. éc:fAurled; or making a wburring noïfe, |


as a fione,érc;call with violeuce : Gale,

Ronceux : m. eufe : f. Bramblie,brierie; full of bram-
Ree fess L te fu of
onciere: f. A bufhie cloje or a place full o

2628 van arr pe a
Ronçoy. as Ronçay. : ;
Rond :m. 4 Sol, or the French (hilling (tenne whereof


make but one fur; aie dane called Rods | ;


- whence; war tied
Te fuis tout faoul,iedancerois bien yn rond.
Rond: page 2 ‘ound, circular, orbicular, com-
: pe ;alfo, free,blunt, plaine, open-bear-


‘ netber ; and which (particularly) puffes
= the aus therfire by oer Anatomi(is
called Buccinator.

Vaiffeau rond, 4 Ship; tearmed thus to make a diffe-
rence betweene it and a Galley, Foift,Brigantineec;
all which ave tearmed, Vaifleaux longs. 6

Donner le plein, &le rond à, Te perfeét,confums-
mate,accomplifh,


Tenir


~~


11
iii


RON


Ro


Tenir table ronde. To keepe open houfe.

Rondace: f. A round Targuet,or great Buckler.
ondache. as Rondace.

Rondacher: m. 4 Targuettier ; one that ferues with a
Rondache, .

Ronde: f.A circle; a compaffe,or compaffing;the Round
(watked) in Garvifons.

Ronde. (Aduerbially) Cent lieuës à la ronde. A bun-

dred leagues compalfe. :

Rondeau: m. A Scrowle ; (uch as,among Armes or Em-

"— blemes 4 Deuifà or Mottoe written in; alfo,a kind of
round,and [life Pancake,
Rondeau de paftiffier. 4 round and flat boord
whereon Paftifliers doe raifé their Paft and Pies.
Rondeau de rime. A Rime, or Sonnet that ends as it
begins.

Rendle. To tuine, wind, wheele, goe compalfe, call a-

out,
| Rondelet : m, as Rondeau.

Rondelier: m, 4 maker of Pucklers, or of round Tar=
gucts; alfo,a fouldior that ferues with a Buckler;a Tar-
guetlier.

Rondelle: f 4 Buckler,or (little) Targuet ; alfo,the Ro-
chet fifh; alfo, the head of a nayle.

Rondelle de fer. À round plate,or band of yron.

Rondement. Roundly, circularly, orbicularly ; fully,
plumply ; freely, plainely,bluatly,throughly.

Rondeur: & Roundneffe, globineffe ; fullneffe , plump-
nefe ; plainenefe; bluntneffe, free Speech, good ear-


| nef.
Rondin: m. A meafure for Corne,or Graine; containing
about a Picotin end a hal,


Rondole: £ The fea Bat, or Rearemoufe of the fea; a j


lying fifh. j
RAA! FES Cards. ;
Iouér à laronfle. To play at band-Ruffe ; alfo, to
nore.
Vous me remettez à point en ronfle veuë. You put
me fhrewdly 10 my plunges, drine me to the wall, bane
me at a bay.
Ronfler. To fnore, fuort, rowt.
Ronfleur: m. 4 /norer,a fuorter,a rowter.
Ronge: m. A gnawing, fretting,nibling. .
Cela luy revient toufiours au ronge. That lil doth
extreamcly vex,or fret bim; be cannot forget tt,it will
neuer from bis heart.
Rongé: m. ée: £. Gnawne napped or nibled off, eaten,
fretted,worne away, - ren
Rongeard: m,arde : £.Gnawing,keapping nibling,off;
eating, fretting wearing away.
Rongement: m. 4 gnawing, knapping,or nibling,off;a
fretting eating or wearing away,
Ronger. To gnaw,knap,or nible,off; to firet,eat,or weare
away ; alfo,to champe,or chew,
Ronger vne colere en fon efprit. To fret, vex, or
chafe, inwardly.
Ronger entre les dents. Il faut ronger cela entre
les dents fans dire mot. That mul be borne, intertai-
ned, or difgefted, without contradiction.
Ronee fain; (Much like the former) to bite of
the but, EU see
Rongeur: m. A gnawer,knapper,nibler ; fretter.
Roue: £. Scurfe, (eabbinelfe, the mange.
Rongné: m.ée: f. Pared;clipped, fhred,cut away,al/o,
circumcifed. Ke
Il s’eft LE les ongles à l’eftude de, Lobk Ongle.
Reflembler la monnoyerongnée. To be vnlearned,
or without letiers. à


Rongneinent: m, A clippi i ing;a cut-
coe pr nits paring, fbredding;a cut
: Rongner. To pare,clip, fhred,cut, fret off or away.
| Rongner les ailes à.To 4cepe low hold under binder
he diab
es ongles a, To we. ifarme
Re offence.) Drag id
. Qui fief ropene fief perd. ff a tenant,or vaffall,a-
ai: = fief, be forfeits the whole unto the Lord


Rongnette: £. A Farriers paring-knife.
Ragan : À Afhred,paring,clipping;remnant.offall,
-Rongneures. Shreds, parings, clipping, odde ends;


alfo,wine left in the bottome of a glaffe, érc, after a
draught. : :


Les rongneures du temps que nous defrobbons, .


& prenons pour nos affaires. Od, floine, or vacant
times befowed on our priuate occafions.
Rongneux: m.eufe: f. Scabbie,mangie, (ouruie.


Cheval rongneux n'a cure qu'on l'eftrille; Prov..


A fiabbie Fade affects not the Currycombe; nor a fcur-
uie Facke any correction, : | |
Mere piteufe fait fa fille rongneufe: Prov, A ten-
der-hearted mother breeds a fhort-heeld daughter.
Meftier n’avons de paftiffier rongneux: Pro, Looke
Paftiffier.

Rongnonner, Ta pare,clip,or gnaw by little and little ;
alfo,to grumble,murmureé,or mutter.

Ron nure, as Rongneure.

Ronsé. Rayeronsée. A Thornebacke,or roche Ray.

Boofiere: f, A place fül of bryers, a plot full of bram-


les.

Ronfon. as Bondelle,

Ronfoy: m. a Ronfiere,

Ronteis: m. Grounds newly broken up , efpecially fuch
as (although they haue lyen a long time lay) either ap-
peare,or be remembred,to baue beene tilled,

Roole. Seeke Roule, 5

Roolet: m. Was, in the ciuill warres,a watch-word ae
mong the French Clergie, fignifying a collection forthe
penfions of thofè great Perfonages which bad underta-
ken to proteét them; alfo,as Roulet.

Roolle. SeekeRoule.  ~ . 5

Roollé:m.ée: fRowled up, wrapped or folded inwards,
turned round.

Ropts fm. Pot-fhards.

Roquau: m. A gluttonous Rock-fifh (of no certaine co-
lour ; for there be of them blacke ones, greene ones,red

: ones,and fome of fundrie colours)wbich makes of pralfe
aneafi in the fea,and therein batches ber fpawne. —

Roque: £ A Rocke; Fort,Caflle,Citadell, Block-boufe,or
flrong Hold (built on a Rocke.)

Roquet: m, as Rochet. |

De x vo f, Alittle Rocke; a final Fort;alfo,the bearb
Rocket. So


Roquette des jardins.Rocket gentle; garden Rocket,


Roman Rocket. «à
Rose fauvage. Wild Rocket,wall Rocket, |
Roquillede vin. The quarter of a French ( much a-
bout our balfe) Pint. pom À
Roface: £ The flower of Brankurfine,or Beares-breech;
tearmed fo by Fngrauers,oe. *
Rofage. as Rofageur. ee


Rofageur. Thefhrub Oleander, Nerum, Roft-Lawrell,


Rose-tree,Rofe-Bay,Rofée-Bay tree.
Rofagine.as Rofageur.
Rofaire.An ordinarie Limbecke for the diftilling of Rofe-
water “


Go gle


Sr ee ni 50 ae Se à


9a NIMES iMRI oD bah.


a


: ORNE dé ee ee


L


R OS


PORT. Ce ON DIE" ‘À
7 t


RO S


water ; al/o,a Kofarie, or our Ladies Pfalter.

Rofat. Of Ro/es; whence Huile rofat;Miel rofat; &c.

Rofcignol. 2 Roffignol.

Role: & A Rofe; alfo, the ouglie excrefcence of the fea,
tearmed the red Nettle; aljo,a finall red-taild fifb,not
much valike a Mennow, but that it bath feales, and is
almayes fill-rowed.

Rofe Aucumnale. The white Muske Rofe.

Rofe blanche. The ordinarie white Rofé.

nee blanches, as Les Fleurs blanches ; under
eur.

Rofede buiffon. The brier Rofe, hedge Rofe, wild

Role.

Rofe canine, ou de chien. The wild Rofé, or brier

, Rofe (of what kind foeuer.)

Rofe Damafquine. The white Muske Rofe.
Rotede Damas. The fame; or the fingle white Muske
Rofe.or Damaske Rofe.

Rofe efcarlatine. as Rofe incarnate.

Rofe franche. The red Rofe.

Rofede Hierico. Rofe of Ferico,or of Ferufalem;the
Heath Rofé,our Ladies Rofe.

Rofe iaulne, The yellow Rofe.

Rofe incarnate. Our Damaske Rofe.

Rofe de lunon. The white Lillie.

Rofe mufcate; ou mufquée. The white Muske Rofe.
Rofe de noftre Dame. Rofé of the mount, Knights
Bloome,Peonie,Pionic ; alfo,as Rofe de Hierico.


Rofe d'outre mer. The garden Mallow,called Hocks, |


and Holyhocks. :
Rofe de pienne. Peoaie ,Pionie,Rofe of the mount.
Rofe de Provence. The Prouince Rofe,the double Da-
mashe Rofe.

Rofe de Provins. The ordinarie double red Rofe.
Rofe fauvage, The wild Roft hedge Kofe,brier Rofe ;
alfo,the Eglantine,or weet brier Rofe.

Camphre en rofe.Naturall Campbire,or fuch as bath
not beenc touched by fire.


Chapeau,ou chapel de rofes. À fmall fleight,incom- |”


petent, or leBe-then-due,portion giuen a maid to her
mariage. 13
Droiét de rofes. Looke Droi&.


Pot aux rofes. 4 miflerie, clofe matter; fecret mif- |


chiefe, prinate inconuenience,hidden knauerie.
Racine fentant les rofes. Rofe-root, Rofewort ; an
bearbe. '


Semer des rofes aux pourceaux.To beffow excellent
things vpon the wiciows that will not, or the ignorant
that cannot make vfe of them, © HA 2 ait

La rofe en fin devient vn gratecul: Pro. The fairefl
Rofe ends in a hep ; griefe fits om pleafures bigheft


Nill rofe fans efpine : Prov. No Rofé ‘without a


ae


ie. | tis ae nd Wass Sal le


: ‘rage sme mieux bran que rofes: Prov. Looke
ran. |
Rofeau: m. 4 Reed,a Cane; alfô,a Raft,or Float-boat of


— Rofeaw aromatic, Calamus Aromaticus, the aro-
‘Tobe: a aH


- R Can > Pole Reed. oe
D var nests 5


bi


;


Ee ay oe à 2e Pee
\ » ‘ y


a
Pt ESOS


: | des Indes. The flowrin Reed.

re 4: pre sofôft
Eftanfonner lemenfonge d'un rofeau. To vphold,or
“fi ons, idle ar | Ænguinff ns. s rryélo 2


a


mt: 51:10!


Rofée du foleil. Sunne-Dew, Ros folis,Youthwort ;-


an bearbe then moifleft, and moli couered with dew,
when the Sunne lyes hotel onit ; Ja the North parts it
is called Red rot ( becaufe it rotteth fheepe)and Moore-
grafe. . SE

Tendre rofée, A young,tender delicate lafe.

Rofetique. Vin rofetique. The befl kind of Gafton
wine,growing within the territorie of Netac,and there
So called of it Vermillion bue.

Rofette: £ Vermillion,Cheeke-Varnifb;a bright ruddie
colour ; alfo,red Inke to rule bookes with; alfo,a kind of
fine Copper that comes out of Hungarie in roid plates;
alfo,a little Rofe ; saw Rofe at the end of the cheeke
of a bitt, next 10 the reynes; alfo, a little rowell of a

urre.
ofette noire, Latten or Copper whereof Kettles are
made ; efpecially (uch as muft not be hammered, but
melted,
Poire derofette. 4 verie tender, and delicate Peare.
Vin de rofette. Aljigant.

Rofier: m. 4 Rofé-tree, Rofe-bufh, Rofe-brier ; alfo,a
Garden,P lot Bed,or Arbour of Rofes,

Rofier fauvage. The wild brier,or hedge brier.

Rofiere: f. 4 final, yellowifh,broad-bellied,or breame-
Like fifh,euer fll-rowed. Pic.

Ronan Dewie, bedewing , dew-dropping , dew-
Jeelding.

Rofin : m, ine: f. Rofie,red,ruddie, faire fragrant ,Rofe-
like of or belonging to Rofes,

Rofinant. 4s Rofillant,

Rofinement: m. 4 bedewing; a falling of dew.

Rofiner. The dew to fall ; or to fall,difill,or drop downe
as the dew; to dew, to bedew.

Rofineux: m.eufe: £Dewie, full of dew.

Roofle, as Roule.

Rofimarin: m, Rofemarie ; alfo, the-bearbe Frankin-


_ cenfe. .
~ Roffnarin des jardins. Garden Rofémarie, common
Rofemarie. ° ‘

Rofmarin mafle, Rofemarie Frankincenfe, Libanotis

Roftmarie,blacke or white Haït-root.

Rofmarin pointu, Sweet Broome ,Heath,Ling.

Rofinarin fauvage. (The red-branched) wild Rofe-

marie, 5

‘Donner du rofinarin. To difmife,quite put off; gine

a flat anfwer (or denyall}unto,a woer.

Rofoyant. Bedewirg ; alf, of arofiecolour,.

Rofoyer. To dew, bedew,wet gently, moiflen faire and

fige | ‘
Vne vapeur qui rofoye. A drifling, mifling, miftie

© gaine ; or a vapour that boners aloft, and,being not yet
come to the fubfiance of araine, wafis it felfe by drix-


ing. '

Rofpe: £. 4 Toad.

Rosse: m. A'ladejaTit, 22 "7
Il n’eft fi bon cheval qui n'en deviendroit roffe. 14
would anger a Saint,or creft-fall the beft man liwiag,to
befovfed, "|

oar bon cheval ne devint roffe : Prov. Looke

\oCheval, 7 2" |

Roffe: f. The Roche-fifh; alfo, a fmall red-tayld lake-
fifh, not Usd agli alfo, as Poule de


Role « =. foe kind of final

+1, 4, 5 alo. act

: Called the joc f Def
ol:m: A Nightingale; alfo,a picklockex
Roffignol d'Arcadie. An Affe. - =


Co gle


~ ip
§


|
ADI: com, Nightingale- like, harmonious,
mel


ROT


Roffign

2 Pend cry up and downe the fireets flayed Frogs.

offignol de muraille, A Starke,a Red-tayle,
offiguol de riviere, The riner Nightingale; or, a
Kings-fifber that fings verie (weetly,


find
Rofig gnoler. To record,or fing like a Nightingale,


dious; dolefull,mournefull.
Ro fignoler: m, À yeutesor ile, Nightimg ele,


Rof: m. Rofte, roft-meat. .


Roît de uffer and, as Roul ; ; alf,rofled Apples, -
Qui a mangé le roft ronge l'os. When as the
us iscleane gone, a man muft faflor gnaw the
one,
Roftedom: m, One that requires, or takes, backe the
gift which be bad befiowed.
Rofti: m. Rofl-meat; Looke Rofty.
Rofti fanglant. Is made by pater with Haves
bloud dryed vaio powder,
Rofti: m. ie: f. Rafted; tofted ; broyled.
Ocil rofti. À vebement inflamation of the eye, a Car-
buacle in the eye,
Roftie: f 4 toaft.
Roltir. To roft; alfo,to broyle ; alfo,to toa(t.
Roftifferie: f. Kofi, roft-meat ; alfo, a kitchin,cookerie,
or Cookes fhop, wherein meat is vfually rofied.
oltiffeur: m. A roffer of meat ; alfo,a Cooke that fells,
or dreffes none but roft-meat,
Roftiffierc: £ 4 rofling Cookes wife.
Rofty: m. Rofl, roft-meat,
S'éndormir fur le rofty. Looke vadey Endormir.
Rot: m. 4 belch,
Rotateurs : m, Two muféles,a greater anda le effe,which
turne about the eye.
Rote: f. A great high wayia a Forrefi; alfoa tree grow-
ing therein.
Roteur: m. A Pond to water Flers, Hempe,in.
Rotine. Par rotine, By rote.
Rotiflerie : f. as Roftifferie.
Rouffeur. as Roftifieur.
Rotifloic: m. 4 Cobiron,or little Racke. ;
Rotondité: f, Kotunditieroundnefe.
Rotte:f AwWith, or the band of a Fagg ere (about
Blois.)
Rotte de cire. Five pound(weight or nie Wax.
Rottée de bois. as Corde de bois; or as much wood as
will be contained therein,
Rottement: m, A belching, ov breaking of wind,
Rotter. To belch,or breake wind upwards.
Rotteur: m. An Officer that meafures les Rotrées de
bois indiffereatly for the buyer and feller.
Rottier: m. 4s Routier.
Mao: f, An vfuall courfè, beaten path, ordinarie


Rotnle du genouil. The ball, or whirlebune of the


knee.
Roture: £ Yeomanrie ; the eflate, condition, or ay
of fuch as are not of gentle bloud; alfo, focage, or
fuch ignoble tenure ; alfo , the "land. thats held
there:
Sarees de roture. The Plough,
Heritages en roture. Land held in focasey or by.
Cens, rent, or other ignoble feruices.
Roturier : m. .4 Yeoman, or Plebeyan ; a Plough-
manja Husbandman ; any lay man that is no Gen:
.tleman.
Roturier: m.ere:f, roma Pig, gnble, tn


Riu.


Go: gle


ols de marais, So doe they in fame, places


R OV


Fief roturier. hich is held by rent, or Cens, or any
other ignoble (ernice.
Rente roturiere. A bare rent charge, or vent fecke ; 3
ac arent as iQues out of an :inberitance which is
no fie
pp Bafely, Pe ee ignobly, clomniply,
an-

Roüable, as Rable ; 4/0, an Engine wherewith fifh is
(forbidden to be) caught, . ae
Roüage: m. Wheelage wheeles, wheeleworke ; the fur-

niture of wheeles ; prouifion of wheeles.

Roüage d'artillerie, The carriage of Artillerie,

Droié de roiiage. Wheelage ; Looke Droi&t.
Roüaille. 4 deuife,or engine wherewith fifh is caught,
Rousions m. Rogations,Gang-dayes.

Roüant: ante: f, Wheeling turning round aboutsal-

light, flütting,vnfieadie; foone paffing
Roiiart: m. 4 Marfhall,or Prouoft Marfhall;an o

that breakes,or (ees broken, malefa&lors on thewheele;

— great and firong-boned fifo Rota,or the wheele


Rouce. # Ronce. I
Rouche:f. 4 rufh. à
Roucherole: f The river Nightingale ; ora kind of |
Kines-fifher that fings verie fweetly.
Rouchet. as Rou iia
Roucin. as Rouffi
Roucoler. To creo like a Doue,or Queef.
Roucoulement : m, The crooiny of Dowes.
Roucouler. To croo.
Rouétement: m, 4 belching,
Roué: f. A wheele; alfo,the breaking of all the ioints on
a wheele,
Rouë de compte. 4 Notch-wheele in a Clacke..
_ Rouéde mer. The fea-wheele ; a buge, round, ES
monflrous [ea-fifb.
oué de rencontre, À Flea-wheele, or the balances
wheele of a Clocke.
Faire Jaroué. To wheele, goe compaffe, turne round
Swing or twirle about ; (A Peacocke fait la 10Ug when
in the height of his pride be coucrs bimfelfé all ouer
with bis tayle.)
La maiftrefle roué qui tourne le moulin. That
which does all in ail.
Marcher à quatre rouës. Cela marche &eaThat by
Juge goes roundly,or faft,on.
Mettre le foin en roué; viz. in andes ii
wind-rowes.
Pouffer à la rouë. 70 fa forward by all the meanesbe
can,to affif with os oi maine,
La pire roué duchariot eft celle qui aie le plus
“fort: Prov, No man’s in companie fo lowd as he that
can doe leaft.
Roiié: m. ée: F. Broken, or executed, opon thewheele
ape bared fran about 3 alfo, dapled at


bore. F'oyef
Rouëlle: € Alittle flat ring,or wheele of plate,or
- im horfes Bitts ; alfo, a round plate of armour dl
fénce of the arme-hole when the arme is lft vp; and |
- generally, any (mall hoope, circle, ving; or round
Thats poset in the place which bit bolds. wine,
Rouëlle du genouil. The ball, bb vecignnss aA the


knee

Rouëlled'oignon. Afhiueof. an Onyon.

Rouëlle de veau. The broad end pa “as Fa, i
cut round,and dinided from the km 23.


Rouëment: m. 4 wheeling,or t
Rouën. Cheval rouén. 4 roane borfe,


RO V


Rouér: m. Vn rouér, 4 wheeling,a compaffing,a round
turning, a (winging about.

Rouër. To wheele, turne round, fwing about, eoe com-
paffe, draw afier bim turning ; alfo;to breake vpon the
wheele, à
Rouëï fur les miferes & calamitez. To turne vpon
the wheele of aduerfe fortune.

Rouéffe : f. The name of a certaine great Peare.

Rouét: m, A (pinning wheele; any little wheele ; alfoja
Weauers Cloth-beame ; alfo, the locke of an Harque-
bufe, rc.

Rouët dentelé, The cog-wheele of a Mill.

Mettre au rouét, To grauell, plunge, lay foreto, put
to his laft {lifts;(from a Hare,which being fo farre (pent
that {he can runne no more end-wayes, but 1 fainc to
wheele about the dogs they fay of ber,Le lievre eft mis
au rouét. )

Rouëter. To trae a(fpinning) wheete.

Rouétte: f A little wheele.

Rouge d'avoine. A certaine Peare whereof excellent
Perrie is made,

Rouge: com. Red,vermillion,bloud-red.

” Rouge bourfe, A Robin-red-breaft.
Rouge grenat; ou grenat rouge. as under Gre-
nat.
Beftes rouges. Any kind of Deere, or barmele(fe
game. ‘
Gorge rouge. À Robin-red-breaft.
Monnoye rouge. Golden coyne. aie
Rouge comme vn Cherubin, Hawing.a Fierie fa-
cits.
Le plus rouges y font pris. The crafticft,or cunning-
ef of them are intrapped there.
Rouge vilage,& grofle parice ne font fignes de pe-
nitence: Prov.4 /wagging belle and a drunken face,
are not the fignes of a repentant grace.

Rougealtre : com, Reddifh,ruddie, fomewhat red.

Rouge-bourfe. as Rouge-gorge.

Rouge-brun: m, 4 darke red which Painters lay for a
ground to their Vermillion.

Rouge-clair: m. Ax excellent Enammell (made of


… not fettle on any thing but Gold. }

Rouge-gorge. The finall bird called a Robin-red-

= breaf | :

Rougelet: m. The name of an Apple.

Rougeinent. Redly.» | juré

Rougeole: £ The Meaxles.

Rouget: m. 4 Rochet fifhs alfo, a great round Apple
that yeelds excellent Cyder.

-Rouget barbé. The fore Mullet, :

Rougette:f. The Red-fifh; verie like a Gurnard, and


Roupir. Toblufhsto grow red,
Rougiffant. Blufbing,waxing red.


| Rouille: £1 ineffe. aad as


-
er,


| See Claveure, È
| Rouiller, To un beat l
Rouiller. AR A tee ri th


Gold, Quick-filuer,and the Spirit of Copper) which will |


- : à |


R OV.


Rouillure: € Ruflisefe. Puf]
Rouïr du chanure, To leepe or water Hempe. *
Rouïfle : £. The name of a great Peare.


Rouiffoir: m..4 Pond,or Poole to water Flax,or Hempe


in, Ma

Roul: m. The fiay of a Weauers Loome, bauing teeth of.
Reed, @rc, like a combe. i 5

Roulant: min ay : Rowling, foulding vp into a rowle,
turning round. a
*Chardon roulant. The bundred-beaded Thiflle, field
Eringus,Leuant fea-Holme, champion fea-Hollie.

Roule: m, 4 Rowle ; a Lift, fnuentorie, Catalogue, Bil,
Scrowle,Regifler, of Names, or of Caufès ; alfo, a row-
ling, foulding turning x ounding ; alfo,mutabilitie, un-
fleadineffe,continuall motion. À:
Tour du roule. The catalogue of caufès to be beard
that day,delinered to the ludges at their fitting downe
in Court. .

‘A tour de roule. 77 courfè, in order, by turnes, one
after another. :
Gaigner le tour du roule, which an aduocate is [aid -
to doe, when he procures the hearing of a Caufe which |
be is towards(and which is called on in cour{e)to be put
off unto a further day,

Ionér fon roule. To play his part.

Roule: £ The high way for Carts,and waggons; the Rut,
or flreet way. :

Rouleau: m. 4 Roll of Paper,or of Parchment; alfo,the
round pinne, firitchell,or firickle ufed in the meafuring
of Corne ; and, more generally, any rolling pinne; alo,
the cloth tearmed Cotton; or a courfe woollen Stuffe of |
the making of Cottons.
Rouleaux. Long and round Leauers whereon Ships
are gotien into a Docke, and launched into the water
againe; alfo.(in Architeëlure) Rolls Cartridges,or Car-
toufes. |

Roulement: m, A rowliag, turning, foulding up or in-
wards; a rowling,or a running,along. :

Rouler. To rowle,turn® round, fould up wrap inwards;
on rowole along ; whence; :

oule boule. Runne Bowle ; and bence alfa;
Il fait beau rouler en eft. Tis good trauelling by
Coach,or dissing of a Cart,in Summer.

Roulet: m, 4 Lift, Roll, Inuentorie,Catalogue,Scrowle ;
alfo,a fet fpeech. at?

Baftir,(ou faire)à quelqu'un fon roulet. To prompt,

appoint, infiruët, or teach one, what be [hall fpeake,or
oe.

Qui fçait bien fon roulet.That knowes bis liripeope,

thats throughly provided to fpeake.

Roulier: m. A Carter, Carrier, Wayne-man, waggon-
man,that carries other mens things from place to place;

© generally, any one that guides, drines, or goes with, a


Waggon, crc ; alfo,a Hogs-fiye.
Roïlies A Enr ut PTE A flvong
mL HE fade.
r akes,or piles. à


| Roulis:m.Great
R


ulle,& Roulleau. as Roule & Rouleau.
ouller. 25 Rouler; alf0,to drine,or guide a Cart, Wag-


‘gon Wayne GC.
Rous Lode Roulix
Roumarin. Rofemarie. 33
Roupeau: m. 4 little Heron which haunteth rockes,and 3.
illsjand hath a peake of feathers falling backwards on
the hinder part of bis bead. rat #
Roupie: f.4n Jficle ; or (more properly) the fil,
\ or wateriedrop that bangs at the nofe end incold wea-
ther ; alfo,a Robin-ved-breafi. x


| RON :


Coffin à roupies. 4 womans Maske, >

Roupieux: m, eufe: £ Snottie, faisellie, whofe wofe is
encr dropping.

II fut bien roupieux. He was mightily afhamed, or
much decciued.

Roupille: f. 4 CaBocke,

+ Kouppeau, as Roupeau. :

Roupt: m.pte:f. Broken,burflin peeces,

Roupte: f, Looke Route. 3

Rovre: m.The moft bard,mol flrong,and moft branchie
tind £ Oke ; alfo, the geat Gall-tree ; (a kind
thereof.)

Rous: m. Rouffe: F. Looke Roux.

Roufeau: m. 4 flower which flyes away with the wind
Like the downe of a thiftle; alfo, tbe bearbe water-
fre Cats-taile , red Mace, March Peflil, Douch

owne.
Poire de roufeau. 4 verie tender and delicate Peare
g00d to make Perrie of.

Roufée: £ as Rofée. :

Roufoyer. To bedew ; to wet gently,

Rouffable: m, The ¢lofé roome wherein Herrings are
finoaked vntill they be red ; Looke Sautir.

— : com. Reddifh, or betweene red and yel-
OW.

| Rouffau: m. The name of a Fig.
oufle: f. A red-haired or freckled,voman.

Rouffeau: m. 4 freckled and red-haired, man,alfo,the

~ Bittor; or a fowle thats leffe then a Heron, but otber-
wife refembles ber; alfo, the Crabfifh tearmed a Pun-
gar; (Normand.) al/e,.a verie tender; and delicate
-Peare.

Rouffelet: m. The name of a delicate finall Peare.

Rouffelet: m.ette: f. Reddifh,ruddie, fomewbat red.

Rouffer. To groane,or complaine, like a grunting wo-
manor ouermorne lade.


Ree.Sevela + £ The Riner Nightingale; a kind of Kings-


ere.
Rouffet: m. A little ruddie Dog-fifh; alfa, red wheat,
Dack-bill wheat,Normandie vwbeat.
Rouffet: m. ette: f. Ruffet,browne,ruddie,inclining to
adarke red,
Pain rouffet. cheat or booted bread; houfèbald bread,
made of Wheat and Rye mingled. |
Rouflette: £ 4 ruffetin Apple; alfo, a little Dag.
whofe ruddie skinne is powdered all over with blac
fpotss es a certaine ruddi@, or dunne-red bird, no
ieger


: a Titmoufe,
Routes Little, red, wan,or blackifh pimples or fpots
in the face,erc ; freckles.or 2 kind thereof.
Rouffin: m. 4 Curtall,or firong Germanborfe:
Rouffin de fervice. A horfe of Armes, or for she
“warres a good rong. borfe fit to ferne ou,due to a Lo,
feodal from enerie vafall (that bolds
Jeare,or upwards) once during bis lifesovin Gen there-
of (if there be no certaine rate ufed, or agreed on). the:
Sift part of a yeares Rewenne: The rate of this Rouffin
4 60 folz Tourn ... «200 rt
Homme : ue rouffin, fafcon de vin,
rennent toft fin: Pro, Lans Homme,  :
Ds Aorin, Latin, & touffin, par tout il trouve Je
chemin: Prov. He thats well lyned, well (poken, and
_ mell mounted, fhall aeuer be out of bis way. der
Rouffiner. To wbinnie after Mares, like a rammifb,or
lecherous Fade; alfo, toleapea Mares
AE To wax red. Bee ih
oufloyer. To wax ruddie, gromreddifhy. -:!;
Roufte de bois. A With; Pag ng : Aa


Go gle


|| Route: £ 4 belch,or belching ; alfo, a rowt, ouerthrow,


tenne pounds a |.


a


R OV.


defeature, diftomfiture ; tbe breaking of a troope, or
on,of men; alfo, a rutt way, path, fir cet,courfe,
Pafage; trace, traét, or Sogting; alfo, a rowt, heard,
Ke str oope companie multitude of menor beafis; al-
û,a glade ee rent or,as Rote. :
outes. voting of rauenous,or biting beafis,fuch |.
as the Wolfe,Bore,Fox,Otter,erc. sy
La route d'une branche. The broken peece of a
bough ; the truncheon of a broken bough,
hafcun fa route. Ewerie one in bis courfe, place, or-
der when bis turne or time comes.
sue a la route. To roofe à Deere with a lyme


Il n'ya toute que de vieux regnards: Prov. Loo
Regnard. | a +


Router. Tafglch,or breake wind upwards,  *
Outier: m4 Ruttier; a direélorie for the knowledge,
or finding out of courfes, whither by fea or land; alfo,
an old traueller, one that by much trotting up and
downe is growne acquainted with moft wayes ; and
bence,an old beaten fouldior ; one whom a long praëtife
hath made of great experience in, or abfolute maifler
of,bis profefion ; and (in euill part) an old craftie Fox,
notable beguiler,ordinarie deceiuer, fubtill knaue;al/o,
a Purfè-taker,or a Robber by the high way fide.

Routine. Looke Rotine,or Rottine,

+ + f as Route; aljo,a kind of tumbling or vaulting
tricke.

Routtier, as Routier.

Re Looke Roture.
outures d'eauës. Bracks,breaches,pathes,vwayes made,
or worne out,in rocks by a continuall running, or bea-
ting of waters.

Rouveau. Pomme derou. The Ruddocke, Redding,
Summer Gouldin

Rouvieres. The name of a kind of Oliues.

Rouvraye: £ A Forreft, Wood, Groue,or tuftof firong |
Okes,or great Gall-trees. *
ouvre. 4 Rovre.

Rou .as Rouvraye,

Roux: m. Roufle: € Reddifh,ruddie,yed-Deere colour,
a ruddie or fad yellow,Lyon tawrie. à

: Beftes roufles. All hind of Deere , or barmeleffe

»: Same. : . "1

Rouy:m. ye: f. Ouerfodden,and wanting liquor in fee- |
thing ; alf, fleeped or foked inwater,asHempe. "À

Roy: m, A King; alfo,the chief, or head man in a com-


janie, : er: à Il
Les Roys. Thé Epiphanie, or Tovelfth day in Chrif |
Roy d'armes. Aprincipall Herald,a King of Armes, |
Roy dela Baloche, LookeBafoche. “von
Roy de cailles. A Rayle ; or she captaine, and leader,
of Quayles. COR a ETAT vo.

Oy des merciers. An officer deputed heretofore b
the Lord high Chamber lane of France to view , or
looke onto, the wares, weights, and meafures of thofé

; es or Shop-keepers that followed the Court: but
now the King himfelfé appoints him, yet by the title of
Vifiteur, hauing fuppreffed this, by Editt in the yeare

; |


4


1597.

Roy des oyfeanx. The Wrenne.

Roy des ribaulds. Looke Ribauld. =

L'Aulne du roy. The Kings Ell; conrames three foot,

fenen ynches, and eight lines. ; seule

Couleur de roy. A title im old time due onely vnio
: Pur-


R-yO OY 4


Purple, though vfurped at this day by a kind of bright \
Tawnie, which we alfotearme de roy colour; and yet
Some boldsthat this. comes neerer the trae Purple of the |
Ancients then (he moderne one ; (Howfoener the Vio-
let is beld the French Kings preper colour.)

* La Court du Roy Petaud, See Peraud.
La fefte des roys. # Les Roys.
Mefure de roy. The Kings meafure; which in furuey-
ing allowes 22 feet to the Perche ( fayes the Author of
La maifon Ruftique;) but that proportion is eitber
outof date, or refirained vnto fome few places, the
more common one being of no more thin 20.
Monnoye de roy. The Kings monty ; coyne bea-
ring the French Kings flampe, or nade within bis do-
. minions, a
Pied du roy. The ordinarie twelue-ynch foot ; a foot
according to the Standard, à
Toife de roy. Is three moderate paces, —
Bailler morniflea la levre du roy; &,Bailler fur le
nez du roy. To make falfè money, ta counterfeit the
Kings coyne. j
Sans efpargner.ny roy, ny roc, Equally rigorous,
hard,or fenere,vnto all.
Jouër au roy defpouillé, Chafcun iouë au roy def-
pouillé, where the hedge is lowef euerie one leapeso-
uer, when a man is falling euerie one belpes him on; a
Prince once beaten, growne poore, or otherwife de-:
. ¢lining, bappie is be that can pull a fleece from him, e-|
were one indeauors by pluming of him to feather their
owne neafls, ios!
Aujourd'huy roy demain de rien: Pro, Nowa King
ere long nothing.
: Boy vinen roy: Pro. viz. Moderately,
Chafcun eft roy en fa maifon: Prov. Euerieone à a
… King in his owne houfe, ! .
De mefchant homme bon roy: Prov. Looke Mef-
chant.
. Ine parle pas au roy qui veut: Pro. Not ewerie one
that vould,may fpeaké to Kings.
Que veut le roy ce veut la loy: Prov. The King and
Lawhaue but one will and pleafire; the Law is wholly’
gouerned by the King; even as he will fo is it interpre-
| © ted, fo under ftood. wl |
< Qui mange l'oye du royilen chie la plume cent
» “ans apres: Prov, He that eateth a Goof of the Kings
doth fpue vp her feathers a hundred yeares after ; (Ap=:
pr le to untrue Exchequer mensand unto any purloy-
_ ners of bis Treafure, concealers of bis Titles, withhol-
- ders of fee Hu 7 | Mass

.: Qui fert le roy ilabon maiftre: Pro. He that feryes
the King ferues a good Maifter ; or, be needs none elfe,

| that bath a Kingsto Maifter. arr hvo®

| Royal: m. 42 old coyne of gold,worth about 68 folz.

oyal de France. Another of a later, flampe, worth
55 solz Tourn... i #


.


“at m. ale: f Royall,regall,kinglie, princelie,maie-
= ! eee ey f iq
A. Af AE


wie ton:
de +


| Royer.


mn enter into,a great,and dangerous exploit.


R © Ÿ


Royalement. Royally kingly, princely maiefti¢ally, |.
= com, Taking the Kings part, fiding wuh the |
ing. 2
Ge: m. A Realme,a Kingdome. u
oyaulme de Suerie.Cornelins bis Tub;or,the fivea-
ting kingdome, whereof the Pockie are your onely fub-
jects, u ma)


Le royaulme des Taupes. The ground,the earth.
Royaulké: f. Royaltie, kinglineffe,maiefle,princelinefe.
Royaume. as Royaulme,

Roye:f. A ray, line, fireake, farrow, dc; as Raye,

To raxe,blot out,efface,deface.

Roÿeu : m, The Meaxles.

Royne: f. A Queene.

La Ceinéture de la royne. iijd upon a Muid, and

iij d upon a Queuë, of all wines. (that were not got-
ten in the owners grounds) lenied within Paris, euerie
third yeare,to the Queenes ufe, + :

Roynette: £ 4 litle, or poore, Queene; alfo, Maid-
sweet, Meddow-fweet, Queene of the Meddowes;
(an bearbe)

Roytelet: m. A little,or poore, King; alfo,aWrenne:al-
50,4 thing, like Tynne, found often in Antimonie, and:
keeping it,moulten, from being tran{parent.

Royzelet: m, 4 Ginne, or denifé to catch woodcocks.

Rozat. Of Rofes. :
Aromatic 10Zat, Looke Aromatic. sy

Rozelet: m, A verie fmall,and beautifull bird, which
ufeth to fing verie much, and in finging, to flye vp fud-
dainely into the aire, and as fuddainely downe againe,
into the reeds,or vwillowes,among which he liues.

Rozereaux: m. A kind of Martins, whofe skinnes are
of much vequefl. ‘

Ru: m. A brooke, fmall fireame,or gullet of water; alfo,
a gutter in the middle of a’fireet; alfo, a caf, hurle,
throw, fwindge,

Il entend ‘le rü du bafton. He is à cunning fen- |
cer, Re Souldior , of much experience im the
worla, ay St

Ruade:£ 4 borfes kicking, win, hing, firikin

| flinging, flying ae ee
Ruade feiche, A dry bob, ieaft, or nip; a flroke that
crufhes, es it cut not, ‘

Rubarge. as Roberge. i’ :

Rubefié: m.ée:f, Redned,made ved. .

Rubeline: fi 4 Robin-ved-breaf,

‘Ruben: m. Ribbon; alf8,a ribbon; whence;

Ruben detefte, 4 fillet,bead-band,haire-lace of rib-

Rubenner. Todecke, trimme, tye, fet, or lace withrib- |
OM, VO 1 :

Rübennier: m. 4 ribbon-makerjbead-band maker.

Rubetret Et greene earth-Frog,or red Toad; very full


of poyfon,and of great ufe :
LA 9 se Rubis.
 Ruübicans:m. : ite bait

- and there upon the coats’ oloyred borfes "À
Rubicon: a The name of a Riuer in Italie, ouer which |
Julius Cæfar pafed in the beginning of bis Expedition |


% |
spañler le Rubicon. Tevndertaké, or


Rubicun
bloud-red.
Rubie maicur,ou des tain@uriers. The bearb Madder,


ed Madder, ,
Rubi mineur, Clauer, Lowe-man, Gooft-fhare,
| Ru.


tom, Verie red,verie ruddie, vermillion,


-graffe


R V B


{ Rubienne: £ The Red-tayle,or Starke; a final bird.
Ru is: m. A Rubie.
Rubis balay. À Rubie ballais; a kind of pale,or peacb-
coloured, Rubie.
Ruble:m. Ax ftalian weight of about 600 pound, afier
| _ 12 ounces to the pound,
Rublitelle: £ The balft of a Ruble.
Rubrication:f, 4 rednafçur a ruddine[e; alfo, a ma-
king or waxing red.
Rubriche. Rudle oaker sred lead,red chaulke,red mar-


ws fone,

Rubriché: m, ée: £. Rubified,made or growne red;alfo,
marked with rudle, red oaker, &c; and written with,
or (as a Rubricke) printed in,red ‘Fake; whence;

Son Kalendrier eft rubriché, Said of a woman that
hath her montblie difeale.

Rubrificatif : m. 4 Rubrificatine ; a plaifter of fo
fron, or firongly-dravving ‘fimples, that it vlcerates,

oo at leafl) makes ved, the place it is applyed


Rubrique: f. ARubricke; a fperialltitleor fentence of
the Law written,or printed,mred.
Rubrique Sinopique. Sinopian red earth; a beauie,
majfiue, lincr-coloured, and aftringent earth, or mine-
rall,wbich put into water foone moulders, and falls in-
to peeces : This may verie well be the ordinarie Bole-
armenie that is, at this day, vfed by manie Surgeons in
the launching of bloud cc, but is not the true(Orien-
tall) one, redder then it, and not [o eafily diffolued by
water as it.
Ce nous feravne rubrique de droi&t. This fhall be
an abfolute Law unto vs; according thereto will we
gouerne our felues.

Ruche: £ 4 Bee-hine; aifo,an earthen pot,exc, for birds
10 breed in.

| Ruchéc:f An Hiue-fall.

Rucher. To hiue,make biues,gather honey intobines.

Ruchette: f, A little ine.


| Ruchot: m. (4 fafhion of) a cloke tyed clofé about the


necke, and thence falling downe round about the
bodie.

Rudache. as Rondacé,

Rude: com. Rude,rufticall, clownifh, boorifh,boblike,
lumpifh, loblike ; blunt, blockifh, brutifh, barbarous,
unmannerlie vnciwill ignorant, bome-bred,untaught;
alfo, curf?, (oure, furlie, churlifh, froward, rigorous,
pittilefe, vatratlable, vngenile, aufiere ; alfo, bafe,
Plaine, fimple, bomelie, bungarlie; alfo, rough, barb,
knottie, ri apy sew vnpolifhed, ill-planed,
st A flormie, tempefluous,or turbulent fea-


‘A Aude chien dur lien: Prov. Curft ofage fits a chur
oe peers or, füurlie humors muft be reprefed by foure


Rene. ‘Rudely, clovénifhlp, unciuilly, churlifhly ;


2 a fimph; roughly, ruggedly, barfhly, bunglar-


”.


Pine i fierlily, frowardly, pittile fly, rigoroufly ; bafely,


Rug ce Ed col


athing,wreathed worke;a
Rade thats anes of the me of a Cable,
| Rudepeau : m.A verie long browne-tawnie Adder, full


moft abbominably.
shardn barflne|fe;bluntnelfe,
: Lumpiflanefe,e nefe,inc iitie , (iar lineBe; rough-
neff, curfinee, frowardnelfe, rigor, vntrabtablenefe,
© 'auferitié, fourent,


_Rudefle de paroles. Rude fpeech, hard words, harfh


RVE


tearmes, rough lan guage. - +
Rüdoyement: m. À chiding,rating, LT ll reproa-
ching,reprouing.

joyer. To chide,pate reproach,reproue checke, tax,
“take Up, gine ill words to, vfe verie hardly in words.

: f. Rue,Hearbe Grace.

ue de chevre, Italian Fitch Goats Rue.
Rue de muraille, all Rue,Rue Maiden haire, white.
Maiden aire,
Rue fauvage. Wild Rue; (whereof there be diuers
kinds) more vbiement in fimell, and violent in operati-
geben gardenRue, ”

ue vineufe. Some bold to be the hearbe called Oke of
‘Jerufalem.

Rue: £. A freet, in a Towne; alfo, a caufey, or bigh way
(called, in diners parts of En land, a fireet, and the
firect way;)alfo, a Taylors hell, or the e place wherciato
he cafts all bis fhreds.

Batre les rues, To iet,reuell,or fwagger vp and dowae
the fireets in the night.

Rué: miée:£ Beaten or caft mangers ton 7
-calt,burled flung.

Ruelle: € alittle fireet,a lane,

La ps du lit, The (pace betweene the bed and the
wa

Ruer. To rufh, flye,runne,breake violently in,or vponyal-
foto caft,burle firme throw; alfo,to onerthrow,{ubuert,
batter,beat or caft downe.

Ruer vn coup d’ eftoc à. To make a thruft,or dart a
Rapier,at.

: Ruer coupsfur. To beat extreamelp, to poure blowes
upon.

Ruer-en cuifine: II rue tresbienen cuifine. He it 4
good trencher-man,he falls to bis vitthalls eagarly.
Ruer des pieds. Te okickeswiafe;yerke rite, fling, e
out with the beeles.

Encores n'a pas failli qui a à ruer: Pro. He hath not
bp thats yet to fling; or, be thats: to fling bath not yet
failed


Onne feait qui mord ne qui rue: Prov.One knoÿes

not what may happen,wbo may burt him,what mifchiefe

may in time,betide bim, ;
Ruette: f A lane,a little fireet.


Racor: m. A kicker, Prikerswinfer; a dirai) an onier-


thrower. :
Riffage: com, Currifb,dogged,barfhi,churlifh.
Ruffien: m. A Bawde,a Pandar.
Ruffienner. To vuffianize, Pandarize, it ; make or fet
R ah rt Raf er the mt 0 nt
uffennerie : f. Ruffianifme,Pandarifme,
RU eniné FR ee ee


R
Le th: ate
giment: m,.
igine : eine le The’
Bo bones, *


nem 22


ire bellowing
Irument shell a Surgeon Ja.


 Ruginervnos. To feale (or ferape) a bone,


Rugir. Toroare,or 10 bellow.

Rugiffant: mante: f. noi

Rugiffement. a: Rugiment.

Rugiffeur: m, 4 roarer,abellower.

Rugofité: f Ruggednelfe, wrinklednefe, rinsed
crumpling wrimpline, firrowing, ba flneffe to the fe
lin


ing.
Rugucux: m. eufe : f. Auseed, rue wrimpled,


» Go. gle


… erumpled,riuelled,rough har{h to be fel
Ruille; &, Plomb3ruille. 4 Masons plumb, or
plumb-line. ;
Bbbb Ru-
Original fron
THE:OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Ri V'I


R VS


Ruin: mgr grunting of a Hog.


Ruine: f: Ruine,wracke,waft,bauocke, fpoile ; fubuerfi-
on,defola tion ouer throw,undoing,deltrudtion,
Battre vne ville en ruine. To fhoot at the houfés
thereof’, to batter or breake them dovene with great


shot.
Ruiné: m. éc : £ Ruined, wracked, bauocked, fpoyled ;
Jubuerted,ouer throwne,utterly decayed,undone.
Ruinement: m. 4 ruining wracking, (poyling ; fabuer-
ting,onerthrowine undoing.
Ruinet, To ruine,wracke,waft hanocke, [poyle ; fubuert,
ouerthrow,undoc deftroy,
Ruineur : m. 4 ruiner, wracker, fpoyler, fubuerter, o-
uertbrower,deftroyer undoer.
Ruineux: m. eufe: £ Ruinous, falling, dec lining, ouer-
aged,in decay,
Uir. To rore,or to royne,like a Lyon ; alfo,as Rouir.
Ruiffeau: m. A brooke, finall ftreame, gullet,current of
water,
Les petis ruiffeaux font les grandes rivieres: Pro.
From lutle fireames great riuers haue their fwellings.
ne iffeler. Tofireame,runne,trickle,or glide along, luke a
rooke,
Ruiffelet: m. 4 fall brooke or gullet ; a reane,or gut-
ter of running water.
Ruiflement: m. 4 roaring,or Lion-like royning ; alfo,a
fleeping or watering of Hempe,cre.
| Ruit: m, The rut of Deere, or Bores ; their luft; and the
A Seafon wherein they ingender; alo, a beard of female
y Deere followed by the male ia that feafon,
Ruité: m.ée: f whence, Venaifon ruitée. Thats killed,
P or gotten,in rut-time.
Rum: m. The bole,or bold of a fhip ; alfo, as Rumb.
Rumatique: com, Rhewmaticke ; troubled with a
Rhewme,


k Rumb: m. 4 roombe, or point of the Compafe ; a line
2 dvavone diretily from wind to wind in a Compaffe, Tra-
3 ners-boord,or Sea-card.

: Voguerde rumb en rumb.7o fayle by trauers.

4 Voguer par divers rumbs: pom divers boords, or
3 changes of winds,

Rumne: f. 4 Rhewme,Catarrbe; Pofe, Murre.


Rumeur: f 4 rumor,noifè bruit, fame, report. |
Ruminé: m. ée: f. Ruminated; reuolued, confidered,
pondered,weighed,examined in the mind.
Ruminement: m.4 ruminating,or chawing of the cuds
| | _ alfo,a deliberating or pawfing en. |
Ruminer. To ruminate,or chaw the cud ; alfo,to ponder,
5 © weigh, examine, confider or thinke eliberate or
pawfe on,reuolue in the mind. *
Rumineur: m. 4 ruminator ; one that confiders or
thinkes of,deliberates or pavofes on,a matter. ‘
Runge: m. The chewing of the cud; or,as Ronge,
Rupricam. 4 bay horfe. : Pe
uption: f A ruption,eruption,burfling,breaking,
uptoire: m. A ruptorie; a corrofiue, or potentiall cau-


Rural : male: f Rural, ripical, clownifh, contre
Relea al. Aa ignoble or bafe ef which bath neither
belonging,


- ae
Rufche Ap d Ne er. ; . / ie Foti
+f A fleig: alag craft cl
[sete ese

+ à 4


Digitize


ter. 2a ee ES ‘vant
rh Aru ne ir fling, br eaki
Rectorate |


Rufé, Bi pro Ltiheunine, Int Jing eit.
TIC


fil, alle, fill of à
Homme ruf€ tard abufé: Pro. The fubtill are not ea-
fy: pest : i ;

plus rufez font les premiers prins: Pro. He that
Seekes others to beguile,is ee bee wile,

Ruféement. craftily cunningly, Subtilly, fliftingly, flyly,
deceit filly, falfely.

Rufer. To be, uile deceiue,{hift,ofe tricks,deale cunning-

R bed oct
uftaude: f. 4 churlifb,rude,er vamanmeiliebageage.

Ruftauderiesas Rufticité, ? et

Ruftault: m. 4 clowne,boore,chur le bob, hinde,fivane,
lobcocke rude or vnmannerlie lozell,

Rufterie: £ as Ruftrerie.

Ruttication: f. Husbandrie, countrey bufineffe, rural!
worke; alfo,a dwelling in the countrey.

Ruflicité: £ Ruficitie, rudeneffe,clovonifbne(fe,inciuili-
tie,churlifhne(fe; homeline[fe, plainnefe, ignorance, or
sp bafhfiullneffe.

Ruftique: com, Rufticall, rude, boorifh, clovenifh, hob-
like lamp ifh,lovotifh unciuillunmanneilie,bome-bred,
bomelie, fillieignorant,

Ruftique. ‘A laruft. as Ruftiquement.

Boire à Ja ruftique. To drinke vnmeafurably.


Ruftiquement. Ruftically,rudely,boorifhly, clovenifbly, !


Lampifbly,lowtifhly enmannerly unciuilly, ignorant

clufer ff lite. ifhly J: > 18 YY,

Ruftiquer.To play the clowne,or busbandman;to labour,
or till the ground.

Rufñtiquerie:f. Husbandrie,tillagé, rural prouifion or


uffe.
Ruftre: m. 4 ruffin,reyfler,backfier, fivaggerer; fawcie,
paultrie, (curute fellow.
Ruitre:£ À loxenge pierced round in the middle ; (a
tearme of Bla(on,
Ruftrement. Royfler-like; fiwcily.
Ruftrerie: 6 A royfting, fwaggering ; roguerie,knaucrie ;
fiwcinelfe.
Rut: m. as Ru; @ brooke, crc; alfo,as Ruit,
Rutiler. To glifter, glitter, fhine, glare.
uyer: m. as Vicomte ; or Voyer.
Ruyle: f. as Ruille.
Ruÿler du plaftre avec de l'eau. To miingle,or moifien,
plaifter with water.
Ruylette: f. A little plumb-rule,or plumb-line,
Ruze. Looke Rufe,
Ruzez. The turnings, or doublings of a Hare.
Ry: m. 4 little brooke.
Ryde,& Ryder. as Ride,& Rider.
R n. as Rum!
e.Ryme,or meeter,
t Rymer.Te vyme,to make meeter.
‘


The letter $; alfo, the marke of a Sol in a (written)

Reckoning; whence ; attics

_ # AllongerlesSS. (Fal/ely) to firetch out amAc-

eeu verie high; to fet downe firs,
francs in lead of {ols. ;
Sabat: m. 4 foule coylerumbling,dinne,burrie.


Sabath: m. The Sabzoth day,Sunday, - -
Sabatique: com. Of the Sabaoth; keeping the Sabaath;
whence; \


Riviere fabatique. That runes fx dayes, and the


Seuenth flands flilljor is dry. 4
a-


S A B.


Sabatifine: m.Holie ref.
Sabatizer. To reft,or kecpe holie,the Sabboth day.
abe. New fiveet wine boyled untill it be balfé confumed,

and kept for fawces,and feafonings.
Sabe de coing. The iuice of Quinces boyled (as afore-
Jaid;) good againfi a cough. |

Sabé. Haleine fabée. À fragrant, or fiveet-[melling

reath, :
| Sabech: m, The little Hawke tearmed,a Musket.
Sabine: £Sauine(afbrub;)alfo,Hartwort,or Birthwort
an bearbe.

Sable: m, Sand; alfi, the colour fables, ov blacke, in
Blafon,
Horloge de fable. An houre-glaffe.

Sablé: mée: f, Blacked ; of a fable hue ; alfo, farred:or
sariched, with fables.

Sablere. Looke Sablicre.

Sablicre: F/The Summer that compalfes the top,or upper
part,of a roome. .

Sablon: m, as Sable; Sand; alfo; great or finall gra-

1/4 2


uch.
Sablon mouvant, 4 Quicke-fand ; whence, U a la
tefte pleine de fablon mouvant. His head is fill of
crotchcts bis braine fraught with odde conceits;he bath
arunning,or a giddie pate of bis owne, :
Horloge à fablon. Anhoure-glaffe.
Sablonneux:m.cuf: £ Sandie; ereetie, +
Sablonniere: f. 4 fand-bed, fand-pit, fandie plot ; a
place full of fand, gveet,or (mall grauell.
Saboir. in flead of Savoir, €Gafcon,
abonner;& Saborner, To agree beforehand, of to be
at a certaine rate, with; Looke Abonner & Aborner,
Sabors: m. Portholes (for great Ordnance) in fhips.
Sabot: m. A Top,Gig,or Nunne to whip,or play with; al-
fo, pattin,or flipper of wood; alfo,a borfès hooft.
Saboté: m, ée:f. Turned,or whipped,as a top ; alfo,fa/-
Jhioned like atop; whence; oie
Coquille fabotée. The fhell of awelke, Periwinkle,


ene.
Saboter. To play at top,or to whip a top.
Saboulé: m.ée: £Rolled,toffed, tumbled with, trodden
under ,the feet; alfo,tueged mumbled,or {cuffled with.
Saboulement: m. 4 rolling, toffiag, tumbling with; a
treading under, the feet ; alfo,a tugging, or fcuffling
tb x


with.
Sabouler. To roll,tofe,or pen to tread under,
the feet; alfo,to tug,mumble,or (cuffie with, and hence,
to iumble a woman. ; ‘
Sabourré: m. éé: f, Balafted,or whofe bottome is filled
| _ with granell,erc. L
Sabourrer. To balaf,or fluffe the bottome of, with gra-
nell; alfo,as Sabouler (in the laft fence. 31
Sabrin:m. The (potted and skalie Serpent Hemorthois,
whereof one being bitten, bleedes, at all the naturall
pores,or paRages of the bodie,to death.
:m.eufe: f Sandie,grectie. ;
SEE £. Balaft (for fhipping) of grauell, or finall pib-


les.
Sac: m.4 facke,waft,ruinesbauock,(poyle; alfo,a facke,or
feared
“A fac à fac.the word whereby a Commaunder autho-


rizeth his fouldiors to facke a one or ee az
| Sac: m. A facke,poke,powch,bag; alfo,as Inteftin borg-
ne; am tp acted bas remaining je
erwound (thats healed in appavance) and afterwards
tes


|. turning into an tmpofiume. ‘ :
Sacs de charbonniers. Looke Charbonnier, «


ssn GOugle


S A C


| “aa au croc, À fit undecided,or,as we fay lying by the
wall. | :
Sac à vin. A drunken gulch,or gorbellie;a great wine.
drinker,
Cul du fac. Au cul du fac.At length,in the end, when
re és aeons all comes unto a 5 Go
. Freres des facs. A certaine Order of begging Friers.
Gens defac, & de licol. Loytering raged or vaga-
bonds, ec (as in the next word;) alfo, begging Friers.
Homme de fac,& de corde. lewd knaue,wicked raf:
call, graceleffe rakebell, filtbie vogue ; one thats fit fr
nothing but to find the executioner worke, whether by
drowning bim in a facke,or choaking bins with a rope.
Acheter vn chat en fac, To buy a Pig in a pouke (fay
we;) to bargaine unaduifedly,or band ouer hed,
Se couvrir d'un fac mouillé. To make a matter the
worfe by colouring,or excufing it. 1907
Donner fon fac,& fes quilles à. On luy a donné fon
fac,&c.He bath bis pafport given bim,be is tüviiéd ous
to grazing ; (faid of a fèruant whom his maifler bath
put away.) : pie
Manger fon avoine en fon fac ; Looke Avoine;or as;
Manger fon pain en fon fac. To be churlifhy ornig-
gardlie ; to faudge or munchion it alone in a cornersal-
fo, to (pend or imploy good things on a corner, or in too
eras a manner. die
rédre d'un fac deux mouftures. To take double fees;
or to make double vfe of one thing.
Servir à fac, & à fomme. Qui fervent, &c; Looke
Somme,
Sac plein dreffe l’oreille:Pro.The full purfe a fill eave
procures ; the way to good attention lyes by well-filld
bags.
Vn fac percé ne peut tenir le grain: Prov. 4 facke
thats torne doth fhed it corne ; a broken ov crackt heart
can hold no good thing in it ; applyable alfo to a heart,
that pierced with griefe,cannot hold but muft otter it, '
D'un fac à charbon ne peut fortir que de la pouffi-
ere noire: Prov. Nougbt but blacke duft from Colliers
Sacks can come; a vicious man will be lewd in histalke,
Es petis facs font les fines efpiceries: Pro. The little
head a daintie wit containes.
Avaricerompt le fac: Prov, The mifer coueting to
make bis bags hold ouermuch, breakes them,and laofes
the moft of that they had in them.
Chafcun ira. au moulin avec fon propre fac: Prov.
Each one fhall his owne burthen beare.
I ne peut fortir du fac que ce qu’ il y a dedans; &,
On ne peut tirer du fac que ce qu’y eft: Prov, You
can hane no more of a Cat but her skinne ; or, there can
come no more(no other [luffe) from a man then isin him,
On ne cache point efguilles en fac: Pro, A fack's no
fit thing to ne needles in; beart-pricking anguifh will
ewray it felfe.
On Hie bien le fac avant qu'il foit plein:Pro.d facke
before tis fullis well ynough tyed vp; men while they
are kept loware cafily kept in. «TPE
Sacabribe: m. 4 beggars wallet,an Almes-ferip.
Saccade:f A fallor onerthrov from a borfe, a horfès
cafling of his rider; alfo,a flirt. sx
Elle aura la faccade, she {hall be turned ouer.
Saccader! To throw, onerthrow, call done; alfa, to o-
uerlurne a wench, ER
Saccagé: m.ée: f. Sacked,ranfacked,yifled, pillaged,
ruined, deftroyed. See BS aS:
Saccagement: m. A facking,ranfacking ; ruining.
Saccager.To facke,ranfacke pillage vifle,ruine, 3
Saccageux: m.eufe: f Sacking, ranfacking.
Bbbb ÿ Sac.


sr tn hé


LEE" CU


elude 7, Cu > ns Le “ ha


" — J N


| SAC


Saccamenter. Looke Sacmenter.
Saccerclle: € A docke for a horfes trayne.
Saccharin; m. ine: £ Of fugar ; as white or fweet as


fugar.

Saccoche: f..A little facke,bag, poke,or powch.

Saccouter 4 l'oreille, To round,or whifper im the eare.

Saceller. To.rub, in bathing, with little bags full of
Braune,crc. ’

Sacerdoce ; m. Priefthood.

Sacerdot: m. 4 Prieft. ‘

Sacerdotal:m. Sacerdotall, Priefilie, belonging unto
Priefis.
Sel facerdotal. An excellent powder, or compound
Salt; (for which looke under Sel.

Sacmenté : m.ée: f.Sacked,ranfacked whereof bauock
is made ; al{o,backed,or hewed in peeces.

Sacmenter. To facke,ranfacke make banocke of; alfo,to
hacke,or hew in pecces,

Sacotin: m. Feauerwort,Earth-gall, common Centorie,
Cenrorie the lefe.

Sacouter. Looke Saccouter. é :

Sacquement: m; 4 haflie drawing, a quiche pulling
oui of a fword, ec; alfo,a prompt laying of the band
ona fivord (in offer of drawing, or ina readineffe to
draw) alfo,a facking, ranfacking, rifling, making ha-
uocke of. :

Sacquementé. Looke Sacmenté. :

Sacquer. To draw haflily, to pull out fheedily, or a-
pace.
Sacquer la main à l’efpée. (An ordinarie, but (fayes
Nicot) az improper, phrafe;) to lay,or clap bis hand on
bu fivord (with a purpofeto draw it.)
I uy facqua lefpée des mains. He faatched, or vio-
‘lently pulled bis (word out of bis hands,

Sacquerelle:£. 4 docke for a horfes tayle.

Sacraire: m. À Sextrie, or Veftrie ina Church; alfo, a
priuate Chappell,or Oratorie.

Sacranentaires : m, Sacramentaries ; Proteftants ;
Huguenots, or Caluinifis in the dottrine of the Sacra-


ment.

Sacre: m, The dedication of a Church,érc; the corona-
tion of a Prince; the confecration of a Prelate,
Same d’ Angers;&,le iour du facre. Corpus Chrifti


ce m. A Saker; the Hawke, and the Artillerie, fo
called; alfo, avauenous, or greedie fellow , one that
makes boot of all he can lay bis clutches on; alfa,an ex-
ceffiue glutton, or gully-gut ; and a fpendall, vathrift,
fine anderer, extreame rioter(efpecially in refpeët of his
ellie.
_ Sacre d'Egypte. A kind of Saker that feedes altoge-
- ther vpon ferpents,and carrion; and therefore among
: the auncient Egyptians the killing of bim was accoun-
ted felonie. —
_C'eft vn terrible facre. He is a vafh,beadie,wilfull or
El: alfosbe is a monftrous vnibrift, dc 5 as
in Sacre.


Sacré: m,ée: £ Sacred, fanttified, made bolie; veceined


re À


Lg €


| erated or denoted unto religious vfès. i

| Artere fäcrée. The fucred Arterie; a branch of

great one, which goes unto the marrow of the Os fa=
ae


Saffrette: f. A wanton, leacherousorlafeaions trull; a


led with, religious Orders ; dedicated, confe~ |


S A F


Os facré. The facred bone ; the great bone vponwhich |
the ridge-bone refteth. © Be. in iy
Pierre facrée. An Altar lone. à ke
Poiffon facré. 4 red- finned pio ve fo,becanfe

_ no rauenous or hurtful fifh doth ener (wim neere him.
Veine facrée. Looke Veine. : |

Sacretnens: m. Myflicall rites,or boliemyfleries ; and

2 hence,the hens of the Church. .

acter, To confécrate,ballow,dedicate; inthronizes in- |
_ uefl,inflall; alfo,to excommunicate,or outlaw. ° 5

Sacret : m. The tafell,or male,of a Saker.

Sacrificateur : m. Afacrifying Priefijafacrifier. |.

+. : com, Sacrificatorie, belonging unto fa- |*
crifice.

Sacrifice: m. Afäcrifice,an offering. ;

Sacrifié: m, ée: f. Sacrificed offered vpin factifice.

gee To facrifice, offer facrifice, or offer up in fa-
eresice, fe L

Sacrilege: m. .A facrilegious perfon, Churcb-robber,
flealer of holie or ballowed things ; alfo, facriledge, or
eb any hainous, and horrible offence, or
offendor. IC TON

Sacrilegement. Sacrilegioufly; moft bainoufly.

Sacriftain: m, A Sexton, or Vefirie-keeper,in a Church,

Sacriftie: f. A Wefiriesor Sextrie,ima Church.

Sadariege: £ The bearbe Sauories 11

Sagayer. To handle gently,or ftroke fofily ; alfo,to flatter,

‘mooth,cog.or collogue with. FA PE

Sade: com, Prettie, neat, fpruce, fine, compt, minion,
quaint.

— Prettily, neatly, fprucely, finely, comptly,
quantly. tes

Sadinet : m. ette : f. 2s Sade; (or a diminutiue thereof.)
Faire la fadinette.To mince it,nicefie itymake it dain-
tie,be verie fqueamifh,backwardorcoy.

Sadrée : f, The hearbe Sauorie,

Saffran: m. Saffron; Looke Safran.

Saffran baftard: Baflard Saffron, Garthamus, Mock-
Saffron, Saffron Dort.

 Saffran fauvage. Wild Saffionsorsas Saffran baftard.
Aller au faffran.To goe downe the weather,to decline
ov decay verie much mn éflate. ax
Hen eftaufaffran. 71 hath made him bankrupt, bis
haire is thereby growne through bis hat. -

Saffrané : m. ée: f. Seafoned,or coloured = Saffron;
alfo,blowne up, fallen bankr grown deepe in debt.

Saffranier: m. A feller of Saffron ; alfo;a bankyupt, one
thats blovene up, or oweth more then be is worth,

Saffraniere: f, A Saffion field or plot, a ground fowed
with Saffron.

Saffrenier. Looke Saffranier.

Saffreté: £ wanton dallying,leacberous ieafting lafciui
ous toying ; alfosranening or gour.


irt,queanc, gixie,
sete «Sabon


Rudder of a i ey te AN
Ar"
Safre:m.A heauie mineral which melted with gla{fe,or
ince (for alone it will not melt)
refolues into a water, wherewith glafes,and
earthen veffells be painted, §
Safre: com. Wanton, waggifh, toyifb laftinious, leache-


|| af tga | ay, an omen tn
(mois £0-jasne. Loto 2], Femme & yvrongneffe de fon corps n’eft {
Huile fa 3/0 called of theexcellen- ile Amelie i Mn 03
cie thereefs it ABET à ho ut: Sus yon her bodieyeelds to open fhame. ar
es Pe aos 3 Sa-
{ inal fron
LUN Go gle THE-OHIO"STATE UNIVERSITY


Safreté. Looke Saftreré,
Saftecte. rie Saffrette. eee
apen, & Sagapene, & 54 € gumme, or
Robe and pe a ser inite, of ST ruifed, cut, or bro-
ken root of Ferula,or Fennell-gyant.
Sage: com, Sage, wife, difereet, aduifed, underflan-
7


Elle eft bien fage. She is verie honefi.¢Orlean,
Faire {age de. To informe,certifie,let 10 wit, gine to
underfland, c
Chafcun eft fage apres le coup: Prov.’ 4a afler-it
is euerie bodies wit; any man can tell,after a blow gi-
uen,how it might haue beene auoided.
En defaut de fage monte vn fol en chaire: Prov. 4
foole , for want of better, doth flep up and preach;vn-
dertakes the bufine(fe; undergoes the charge. :
Femme fage,& de façon de peu remplit fa maifon:
Pro. Looke Femme,
Fols font {ages quand ils fe taifent: Pro, Foolesare
held wife as long as they are filent.
II n'eft f fage qui ne folie aucunes-fois: Prov. The
wifelt man “doth fometimes play the foole. 1
Le plus fage fe taift: Pro, The wifelt fayes the leaf.
Les plus {ages faillenc fouvent en beau chemin :
Prov. The wifeft often erre in plaineft matters.
On revient fage desiours: Pros 1m time one gets ex-
perience.
Vn fol advife bien vn (age: Pro. A foole may fame-
times gine the wife aduife.
Sagemener. Looke Sacmenter. ‘
Sagement. Sagely,wifely,difereetly,aduifedly.


Sagerautwife,wariedifcreet,well aduifed of great ex.


persence. . L 4 4
Sageffe 3 £ Sagenei, wifedame, knowledge, diféretion,
Under tanaing,
Dens de fesse de fageffe. The tenne iavs-teeth:
Mortier de geile teste Mortier, sh?
Voila vnebelle fageffe. That was a worthie wift ait;
the verie creame of Apolloes braine-panne.
Mieux vaut vne once de forme qu’ un livre de
fageffe: Pro. An ounce of lucke excells a pound of
wit,
Saget: m. ette: f.Prettie and (age indifferently wife.
Sabette: f. An arrow,or eft, tbe Ditch-weed eal-
ed, Arrow-head,or water-Archer.
Sagetté: m,ée: f. Shor, pierced,or transfixed with ar-


rowes.

Sagetter. To bit, firike, pierce, tramfix,or floot throwgh

with arrowes.

Saggotter. To ioult,rudely to flog or ‘fake.

Sapitale. Looke Sagittale. : ce

Sagitelle: £ The Launcet wherewith a Surgeou opeñeth
Deines and impofinmes.

Sagittaire: m, An Archer,Bowman,Sbooter;and bence,

“the beauenlie Archer or pe ou pa ass

Sagittale. Commiflure fagittale. The feame whic
on along on the ofthe bead, artd difiinguifbes
the right fide of it from the left.
agmenter, LookeSacmenter.

Sagnie: €. 4 bundle of the flender flanlhes offea-grafe,
or of other fea-weedes, wrapped clofe together, and
Swe, | by the working of the fea, upon the fhore.

Lan 5 : Es

Sagal Sagouin. A little Marmofet ; and thence,a

: i crackrope , fip-firing , wag, unbappie


lad.
‘Sahuc: m. A Sallow tree,the Goats Willow trees >


Sale. Looke Saye,


S A 1


Saiffe: £ The Dace,or Dare fifh.

Saigné: m. éc: € Blouded,let bloud,

Saignée: £ Phlebotomie, bloud-letting ; alfo; Dogs-
gra) rap ur graffe.
Selon la jambe la faignée: Prov. Let bloud actor-
ding to the bodies fulinefe, or firength; fubieëts, or 1e-
nants would not be drawrte 100 dry.

rc + obleed; alfo,to let blond.

aigner du nez, His heart to faint,or fayle bim;cow-

ardly to flinch, fearefilly to quayle,at ; to clap bis tayle
betweene bis legs,to fet up his crauen feathers(for much
bleeding cooles the beart,and he thats cold at the beart
muft needs be fearefull.)
Saignerlaterre. To till, or breake vp ground in an
unfit feafon,as in a verie bard fol.
Ie vous faigneray d'une autre veine. 7 will fee
what you can fay in other matters; F will tvy,or put you
toityanother way. .

Saigneux: m, eufe: f Blowdie, fill of blond,

Sailleur: m. 4 leaper jumper ec ; as Saulreur.

Sailli: Gone out, iffued forth; alfo,leaped on.

Saillicoque. Looke Salecoque. As

Saillie: €. A fale, eruption, violent iffie, or breaking
out upon ; alfo,a leape, fault, bound, skip, iert ; alfo,
an eminence, intting, or bearing out beyond others;
any difordinate exceffe, or exce/fiue out-flanding.
Saillie de maifon. Any out-iutling roome , or part À
thereof; and particularly, an open gallerie, or terrace
made without the wall,or hanging omer it. ,
Saillie de S. Mathuriri. 4n odde, fooli(h, bumorous,
mad, giddie, fantaflicall tricke.
Saillie d'un os. 4 Proceffe ; that part of it which Like
aknob ina tree, flands out beyond the refi,
Saillie d'une pierre precieufe. The imboBement of
an enchdcéd pretious flone,
Il a fait vne faillie. He bath runne too mineh riot; be
hath made a foulé fault; he was ill onerfeene; or too
farre carried by baf}, choller, paffion, foolif or baire-
braind affettion.
Il a les plus plaifantes faillies du monde. He vfs
the moft prettie, odde, and extrauagant digreffions
that eucr F heard.

Saillier: m. fallie,eruption,digreffion,extranagant fly-


ing out,
Saillir, To goe ont ile forth; appeare abowe, fland out
Sd cahens = toleape, inmpe,bound, skip, hop;
al(o, to ride, or leape one another, as the male dotbthe |
male. te
Sain: m.Seame; the tallow, fat,ov greaf of a Hog,or of
a ranenous wild 3
Sain A m.aine: PS whole, wboiefome,bealibfill
- eh re Kate
seer “fäine Se mul flore of
: things ; be complaines of tufe . : }
fines parle teftefaine: Prov. The wife,honef,
or guiltlefre,boldly fpeake. {
Saint: m. A Saint; a (canonized) bolie many 0 \
Sainétde quarefine. One that lines triétly or déuont-
ly in Lent, and loofely or prophanely the whole yeare af
ter; alfa, one that bides himfelfe, or is mv where to be


‘Oublier Dieu parmy tous les fainéts.To forget Gad
aroneff Al-hallovves ; amidfi many trifling, to negleft
bischiefeRoccafions. 2
“Le fainét de la ville n’ eft point oré: Prov.
~ Sen leall refpect their owne, or that they are w-
Sy ee es patrons are the leaf} im-
pl


: Bbbb i ry


ms OT


SAE


In eh relracle quede vieux fainéts: Prov. we cré-
dit not reports or miracles of afrefodate; antiquitic is
of avv fill authoritie. F
Il n'y afi petit fainétqui ne defire fa chandelle :
Pro, Laoke Chandelle.
Le fleuve pafle le fainét oublié: :Prov. The danger
pali our vowes are foone forgotten.
Sainct: m. cte: f. Holie, facred, fanttified, godlie, reli2
~ gious, denout, pure, of perfect or vnfpotted life; (and
fometimes) alfo,the contrariesas,O le fainét homme,
what a propbane wretch this.
Bois fact. The wood Gwacum, or Gayac, whereof
_ diet-drinke for the pocks is made.


Huile fainét, The ople vfed by Papifis in Baptifne,and | :


Extreame vnilion.
Huile fainéte,ou de Sapience. Looke Sapience.
La femaine {ainéte. The weeke befire Eafter, the
Paffion weeke.
Saindte: fA fhe Saint ; à moft bolie woman. :
Sainételot: m.otte : & Somewhat bolie,or Saint-like.
Saincteinent, Hobly, facredly, godlily,deuoutly, religi-
oufly.
Saingte-n' y-touche, An hipocrites an ouer-Jerupulous


Puritan;one that, fearing to feeme propbane,will not be |
Salat on: £. Salt-making,or a trading yA Salt,


touched or dares touch almofinothing.
Sainét-foin: m., Atedicke fodder,Snayle-Clauer,Spa-
» nifh Trifolie,borned£lauer  -
Sainement. Hentbfilyfonnaly erboly,wbolefomely.
Sainne. Looke Seine.
Saint,& mn 'y-touche, Look Sain8,& Sain&e-
n y-touc
Pr m. A certaine rent payed by thofe that haue


bas freed from bondage unto thofe that afrenchsid |


Sant fin: m.Medicke fodder,Spanifo Triflie porned
or Snayle-Clauers >
: Saintre, Droit de f-Looke Droiét big
Sainture. Loake Céinéture.


Sais: m. Certaine peeces of yron, whereby the aslereti is ||


: fallened unto the badie,of a Wayne,crte
Saifi: m. ie: f. Seifèds layed hold on, pofeffed of; alte


ched,arrefted.


[Sites A feifiire, dtreft; or atiachement of goods? | Salé:


saifine: £, Seifinglineriéand Seif; po effin, 6 in?
: Casdefaifine: dn AGion,or Suit a a diffeifin;lyes
+ where à man,out of, na full yeare anda ‘aed
peaceably inioyed within meee yeares before’, eith
continually, or by times, and ere
| gares; in which cafe the defendant is40 continue his


fjefion during the fuit whereas in Casde nouvelle


‘té (which is for a diffeifin within:the yeare and day) be


vistobaue the present. poffeffion that can fhew the ta
| im thercofge hauebeenveceined hybimfel |


shine yu rorterty't


«Proiét de fâifine. Looke
| Saïfir. To ftiia D Dit er bands on, take pofieffion shale


att, by See e\!

EUR Lo et ue id Le cet Le svke
= & Pied. : AE à i ma by LH 3
Ss my Aiifing, a laying baldor Lens


: Salant: m. ante: f. Salting: powdering or feafoning
Foie soe afi dnencefed Pravne.¢qNormatid,


| Saleco 5
: Sal |
| Saler. To /alt, powder, pickle; feafon or corne with fa,


| Saleté: f. Poe nafineeordare Susilo 4


a of; alfo,an attaching or arrefling:;alfo, |
anita witha qualmesor fownes »»\\ iv |.
2 = ant - loup: HAT


-gralle, _ cel
Eee NP 10 MM Stet en: Là hs zur:
Salicots. Saligots. ES:
!


SOAAL2


Si le fol ne folie il perd fa faifon: Prov. A jaole not
fooling is much out of. date ; 30rs afoole à 5 mot, when be
playes leaft,thefoole..
Saitte: f. A kind of te. -pennie broad Aides made of
veric courfe filkes.
Saive: Looke Seve. 2968
ie Mee cater 7 À uen en
acité: £ Leacherie UnefResrankne
Aion or tickling unto tl Sereno: pres
Salade: f.A Salade,Helmet,Headpeece; ; alfo,a Sallet of
hear bes, ; alfo,the young bead of a Deere (long ten-
der, woollie and but beginning to braunch) tearmed by
vs serre the crofing, or a Deeres beod “oe oi to
cro,
« Tantde filades Somanyhorfemen,
Qui vin ne boit apres falade eft en danger d'eltre
malade : Pro. 4 Sallet without wine is rap, vnvbble-
Some dangerous,
Saladier: m, ere: f, Belonging to,or fit frie Salade,or
aket
Salage: m. Saltage ; faltnefe; or (alt things. ! «.
at de lage. eoke Die bar be
a m. Afalarie, fipend, penfion, bire, wages, fee,


nen.


Salamandre, 4 Salamander. Looke Salmandre.


~ with alt,
Marais flans, Salt morfhes 3 ormarfhes whereon falt
is gathered, ;
Salarié: m.ée:f Hirédwaged, feed; rewarded,
Salarier. To hireywage, fee; give a flipend allow pay,un=
to; alfo,to reward.
rifer. ae Sdlariet. 00.532: «ns Ke
alaude: com. Looke Sale.
Looke Salle.
Sale: com. La fa ied nf aif nese fie,
loathfome,bealllie
‘Ledoige: {alc.The middle finger which: we ere
| Latines) call the, ‘oles fi nh
Le gris fale. A af oa ape aye
va E Salted, pren picked Sarak
or faltifh j"
ue: £ An uandjed Prawne. Norm. .


t. Poulely, flthilysnafily, fuir.


fleepe or. ldy in brine.
Salet: m. ette:f. Sullied | flubbered,fà led; fomewbat 4
naflie, lutsifhsor wneléane, :
thine[fe,uncleanenelfe beafllineffe.
Salettes A little ‘hall; aljo,the “à Sorrelor à Soure-
\docke.: 0 i
* Petite fi nn eh Sorrel fale Sorrell, .
Saleure. Looke Salure, | :
: Saleures. Salt meats.
Salez:m, The Bur: eniens, called foin old time by the |
French, mocking them for their controuer fies with. de
Germans touching their Salt-pits.
| Galezart=m; An arrant ar extreame flouen,a ili or or
_ preafie flowch,


Salfuge: f.4 indo Serpent thats poifoned bal. - .
 Salicoque:
Salicor: m.The SalbwortGlaffowert,crab-grifes


our


Original from


THE ORIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


S AL. Isa ae


Salidure :f. A little pafh wwheale,or powke; forcalled(at } Salmille: f Thebéaibe.cheruills "1

it firfhavifing)in Languedoc. - 2 | Salmonde:£, Hearbe Aüens, Bennet or Bleffed.

Salicre :f. Afakt-feller, à table or trencher falts alfo,a

powdering houfe; aljo,the bollowne]e,or hollow pit,be-
tweene the blades of the fhoulders ; Looke Salliere. + -

Saliette:f. Hearbe Sorrell, Sowve-docke, or Greene-

fauce. \

Saligot : m, 4 flouen,or flouch : &Orleannois.

Saligots : m. Saligots,water Caltrops, water Nuts.

Salin: m.as Trident; al/o,a garner for (alt,

| _ Droid de Salin, as Gabelle de fel.

| Saline: f. A falt-pit,or (ale-boufe; a place wherein falt

| & gotten,or made,

' Salir. To fonte, foyle, fulliesberay,begrime; pallute make

Jluttifh,defile,or fill wish ordure,

, Saliffon: com, 4 flowen,or flut(at Tours.) »
Saliffure : € À féubng fyling, fullying jdefilingyberaying,
begriming. ; ce

, Salival:m. ale: f Spistlie, flimie.

: Salivation:f 4 continual hauing ofmuch fpittle inthe
mouth; o7,a drawing of bumors tothe mouth,and ade-
diuerie of therm from thence im manner of fpittle,

ive: f. Spittle; alfo, aclammie foame, or inyce ; alfo,
the je of fnailes. ;

Table fans fel bouchefans falive: Prov. Appliable |

to-any dull,or unfauorie thing, which bath no power tv

| . excite th'appetite,
Saliver. To flauer; 10 be full of jpitele, yeeld much ppittle,
| Make a Clammie,or [lime foame.

| Saliveux : m. eufe : £ Spittlie, flauering, fill of mouth-
moifture;yeelding a clammie or flimie fame.

| Saliviere : f. 45 Baveretted babillons,

R | Salle: €, 4 Hall. ro } el À

| Salle d'audience. Any Hall, or place goberein a Soue-

À  Yaigne Court is kept. à 0 m9 ‘

La grande Salle du Palais. The great Hall of the Pa-

lace; that vwherin(asin ours at Wcfiminfier) mofl of the

Judges doc fit. ;

, Avoir Ia falle. To be whipped iz publicke, or (like a

| breeching bay of 1 Colledge) publicklyin a Hall,

| Salle: com. Looke Sale. + 1.

Sallebrenaut : m4 filthie, fhittenyfinking or flonen-

lie fcoundrell; a bafè,and beaftlie companion.

Sallebreneux: m.eufe :£ Mop filthily berayed.

| Salleté. Looke Saleté. PT

Sallette : f. 4 litle Hall, ; tip?

| Salli:miie ; € Fouled, foyled, fulied', berayed, begri.

| medyexceedingly flurried. :
iere : fas Saliere; al/o,the pit or bole ouer th'eyeof”
-@borfé; or the bone wherein it is.

Sallir. as Salir; or Saflir.

=o be gt fouling, foyling beraying,begriming de.

in À eng


ws filing, un
Salloit :m. À falting,or fowcing tub,or table, \

! Sallorge.4 fellor fo eboufé,or low de a falrin:
| Salmandre : f. 4 Salamander; a fpotted Lixard or beaft
like a Lixard,which(asold Authors affirme)liuesmuch
in the firesand either is not burt by it,or within à while
quenches it; but.the truth is, that although fhe endure


| Salnitre. sals-peter candied, or fined unto the colour cr
: fubhlance of white Sugar-candie, UCT
Saloir : m. 4 powdlering tub,or table. i
Ppe : com. 4 flouen,or flut : @Orleannois, "©.
Saloque. The South-eafl wind,” et
Salorge :fi:.4 flor, low rome, or floreboufe, to lay falt
in |


Salouér. Looke Saloir,
Salpeftre: m. Sa/t-peter,
Salpeftré: m. ée :f. Made of;or mixed with, Salt-pe.
ter, a Hi, LES |
Salpeftreux : meute : € FulofSat-peter.
Ma im. À Salt-peter-man, es Salt-peter-ma-
er, x Tas :+
Salfature:£'Looke Salfitude, © 0 oo. à:
| Salfeparille:€. Th'Indian bearbe or drug, Saflaparilla.
Salfitif sm, iue:f. Safe, faltie, or fali-making.
Salfitude:f, Salineffe,brackifhweffe. et
Salfugineux: m.eufe :f. Saltieor [macking of falt.
Saltereau: Looke Saurereau: - oo. oe.
| Salüade :f. A falutation,or greetings and jiarvicylarly,
avolley of great or finall fhot beflowed on a great per
Son, or worthie friend. vil
Salvador: M; 4 Saniour;(dravne from the Spanifh,) ©
Salvage. Droié de Salvage. Looke Droi&, KA
Salvatelle :£. TW outward branch of the fhoulder write,
falling down, ouer the wrift,vnto the partitio between
the ring finger,and tlie little one. - ° 2 '
Salvation :£.4 bill yeplie,or pleading, which maintains
the truth of an account,the depofitions of witnepies, or
the goodne ft of a deed, reproached; or contradiéied by
another bill grec, RE eu SLA ENT
Salubre: com, wholefonie,bealthfill bole: found. :
Salubrement. ree, Ne SANS
Salubrité. whole/omene(fe,bealth ite ffe, foundnelfe,


L ‘4 p
PT PVR ae APTE PET) er TIRE 4


Salué:£ A‘volley of fhot given for a welcome to fome
eat perfon,exc. 2 SA
Salué: m. ée:f. Saluted, greeted; reuerented, >
Saluër. Tofatute,preet,all-baile; doe rentichce, make a |
courtesies fend commendations, gine the'time of the
day,vnto. RCE a
Ils faluérent le promontoire de &c. They faplecl, of
À: paffed, by the"Promontorie of ete. MS ee
ane fA great carroufing , or drinking cup:
@Rab, Bey vw ark IUTRE
Saluéur: m. Afaluter a greeter. E
Salure:f A falting, powdering, pi


TE. de et dE eee Es. cies or ised


.


\


| ee cong ila


chling ; à laying in
oh ate dal
Salus. as Saluts ; al/o, a cértainé cräfiié fea- ich
- biteth away the bait, and meddleth not with the hooke,
— m. ng A pg nt me + alfo,

aluation, fafegard,preferuation; alfo,a greeting +
t aera A ane BR soe ' ing, fils
Salutaire: m, Tbe Pe QE ma a A
Salutaire :com, Healibfill, wholefome, fonnd, w le
\ comfortable sprofitable. °° Tr 00R
Salutairement.\Healthfilly, wholefomely, ‘comparably,


| it better then any other beaff, yet at length orrf fhe flay
pa any while ining os quenched by ber, but (hee con- Saluta-libenter: vital. cogging, ares
j ifmed byéten. >) wea à à À BAM _ ving mate; one that falutes exerie one (Ont cares for |
Salmandre d’eau: The water Salamanders black. ROE; MERE SSS NYT Pa EC DETERS,
»\ backed,red-bellied and fall of yellow fpots. » > Sahitation':f A /alutation, preeti on courtefie ; ave-
WFD THY


: Salmigondin:m. A Hachee; ormeat made ordinari. “wer éncings à témmending bimpelfe cate,


_ Ly of cold ficfh cut in little peeces,and flewed or-boyled | Saluts:m. da old French y pr coyne worth about |

| ona chafingdifh, with crummes of bread, wine, ver. ARR SE. 0 SNS RaSh oRteonsS J

| inyce,vinegar, fliced Nutmegyand Orange pillss °° | Samarré. Looke Chamarré. à ‘ a b H

nets? amba- |
je. ns


Original-from


“Digitized by Go. gle THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


mr


S A N


Sambacin. Huile fam. Oyle of Felfomine flowers,

Sambregoy. par le fain. À fooli[h oath, like our Gods-
bodekin,cre.

Sambucin, Huile fam, Oyle of the flowers, or berries
of th Elder tree. x

Same:f, The Mulletfifh : {Langued.

Samedy :m. Saturday,

Satmoiteau: m..4 great black grape which yeeldeth vee
rie barfh wine.

Sampongne:f, A bagpipe,er oaten pipe ; alfo, the bell
banged about the necke of a fheepe,or goat; fome call it
a Low-bell,

Sampfuc :m, The fiveet bearbe Marierome, |

Samy.A filken,or balfe-filk Ruffe which bath a gloffe like
Satin,and is narrower but laftetb better, then it.

Sanable : com.Healable curable.

Sancerre. The name of a firong towne in Berry, held by
thofe of the Religion,and befeged, in theyere 1573.9
laChaftre for the French King; during which fiege
150 ftrong vine-labourers did the defendants notable
féruice with their flings ; whence the Promerbe;
Piftoles de Sancerre. Slings to burle flones with,

Sanchet: m. A pudding : (Savoyard.)

Sanchet:m. An old coyne of gold worth about 2 s,

erl,

Sanétificateur: m, 4 fanétifier,a ballower.

Sanétification :£ A fanétification,a ballowing,

Sanctifier. To fandifie balow make bolie ; alfo,as Sa-


nifier,

Sanctittioniale : f. 4 Nunne : (Rab.

Sanétimonie :f. SanGtimonie,bolimeffe denoutnelfe,re-

… ligioufnelfe ; alfo,the proft(fion of a religious perjon.

Sanction: f. A Sanétion, Ordinance, Law, Decree, Sta-
tute eftablifbed.
La Pragmatique Sanction. A confirmation ofa de-
cree made in the Councell of Bafile,whereby(among o-
ther things eftablifhed for the reformation of th’ Ecclefi-
afticall State) th'eleétion of Prelates;and collation of
Benefices during vacancie,as alfo the decifion of fuites
concerning them(ufurped fome time before by the Court
of Rome). was reflored unto the Canons, Priefis, or
Monkes of the Diocelfe : This Confirmation was pub-
lifbed by Edit of Charles the feuenth, in the yeare


1438. ,
Santtoron zm. An hypocrite , or a counterfiiter of
Saints, > À :
San@tuaire: m, A Sanluarie, the San£luarie; a Tem-
ple,Church,or Chappell ; a holie or fanétified place.
Sandal: m. Saunders ; a fweet-fmelling, wood
out of th’ Indies; alfo,the Ruffe called Sendall.
Sandal blanc. a Saunders; Aromaticall er next
‘in goodneffe unto the yellow one...
= one ia Yellow Saunders; the tree whereof is
\ bigger,and the wood fweeter, then any other of that


rouge. Médine kind of Saun-
yeelding ,of it manner of odour, ;
dint roma |


- | _ Chirurgian,
» | Sangliere:f. A wild Sow.


S AN

Sandarache. Looke Sandarac,

Sandaftre. 4 kind of Carbuncle,or burning flone,wher=
in fall golden drops or fparkles that {bine like flarres,
appeare.

Sangean : m; A Linke,or Torch: (Rab,

Sandouille. The name of an apple.

Sanele. wild Muftard. ,

Sanemonde:f. Hearbe Auens, bearbe Bennet, or Blef:


Sed.
Saner.To cure,beale,or make whole; alfo,to gweld or fpey
a Sow, :


Sanes. Parliaments,or generallaffemblies; alfo,two fixes
at Dice,

Sang: m. Bloud ; alfo, a flocke,race,kindred, linage,

hee, are of Kings,in which [ence pr HA

the words Bloud royall,
Sang de dez. Looke Sang-de-dez.

Sang de Dragon, ‘Dragons bloud ; a gummie iuyce

difiling from the Dragon tree wounded, opened , or
bruifed in the Dog-dayes ; alfo,the bear b called Bloud-
wort,red Patience,and bloudie Patience.
Sang de France, The Blond royall of France (wber-
in th word hath a larger extention then in,Les Prin-
ces du Sang, which are onely fuch of the Kings kinf-
men as may cometotbe Crowne.) .
Sang d'homme. Atrattilis, wild baflard Saffron.
luftice à fang. Meane,or middle Fur i/dittion; fo tear-
med(belike)becaufé the Lord that bathit may by whip-
ping,éc, draw blond of bis offending vaf[all, but can
proceed no further.
Avoir du fang aux ongles. To be refolute, forward,
valiant , quicke,induftrious diligent,
Signer de fon fang. Looke Signer.
Il n'y fait que le fang tour cler. Hee bath but little
skill,or às at the end of bis skill in that.
Le bon fañiu ne peut mentir : Pro. Good bloud can-
not, (tbe well-bred will not) lie; a noble nature,con
fronted by wrong ,fcorne, or any bafe condition, doth
quickly difcouer it felfe. ”

Sang-de-dez. Little fquare-bladed pocket daggers.

Sanglamment. Blondily.

San pat : ME : f.Bloudic,gore, bleeding,imbrued,

of bloud. ©
| 1e fanglant.4 dredging with tbe powder of Hares


Sanglantement. Bloudily,bleedingly.

Sanglanter. To bebloud, or make bloutlie ; to fprinkle,
imbrue,or befmeare,with bloud,

Sangle: f. Agirth,a fengle; alfo, an auncient meere,or
bound wherebyland from land, and boufe from boufe,
baue beene diuided,

~ Ilen avoit toutlelong des fangles. He had bis
payment (whether in tearmes,or pate D ) alfo, be
f the pocks.)


his full load (whether of the pot.or
Sangle :com Single;
Sanglé: m. ée:f Girt,as a
Sanglement : m, 4, aborfe.
ae To girth ; to fafenyor bind in,with girthes,


:m, A young wild Boare.

2m. A wild Boare.

- Éefangliern'eftqu'un hofte : Prov. The Boare à

but a foiourner; for he feldome fayes, any time within
one wood or forvefi,but raunges continually, :: :

Au cerfla biere,au fanglier le barbier: Prov. The

Stag acoffin, Boare a Barber,needs ; er, if thou becft

\ burt by a Stag pronide a coffin, if by a wild Boare a |.


punir Looke Senglot. |

anglot de fang. 4 lumpe or clot of congealed,or clut-
tered bloud, ne

Sauglotin : m, À Boare-pig,or,a little wild Boare,

Sanglotter. To yex,or bickock ; alfo,to fob often.

Sanglout. Looke Senglot,

Sanglure: f A girding.

Sang-meflé : m. ée :£. whofe bloud is flirr ed, whofe co-
lou comes and goes, through a great,or fudden feare,


Ob :

Sang-inefleure:f.4 diflurbing,or flirving of the bloud;
a comming and going of colour, by reafon uf a great jr
fudden feare.

Sangoy. as much (in ruflicall French) as Sang de


Dieu.

Sangreal. Part of Chrifts moft pretious bloud wandering
about the world inuifible (to all but chaft eyes) and
working many wonders, and wonderfull cures ; if we
may credit the moft foolifh, and fabulous Hiftorie of
King Arthur,

Sangsué: f. À Horfleech,a bloud-fucker.

Sangfuër. To fucke bloud like a Horfléech.

- Sanguificatif: m.iue: £ Bloud-making, turning into
bloud.

Sanguifier. To conuert,or turne into bloud.

Sanguin: m, The purple fhrub called Hounds-tree,
Hounds-berrie tree, Dog-berrte tree, Gaten or Gater
tree,

Sanguin blanc. The white barren, or fruitleffe Pri-
met.
Sanguin noir. Our ordinarie Priuet,whofe ripe ber-
rie u blacke ; or (as Macalcb) Pomander Prinet whofe
berrie bath a flrning blacke hue.’ :
Sanguin rouge. as Sanguin.
Sanguin: mine: f. Sanguine, bloudie, red; of a fan-
guine complexion ; full of bloud.
Sanguinaire : f. Centinodie Swines-graffe,Knot-gralfe,
Birds tongue, S. Innocents bearbe.
Sanguinaire :com. Blondie, gorie red ; bloud-tbirflie,


+


cruel,

Sanguine:f. The bloud-ftone wherewith Cutlers doe
Sanguine their bilts,
Sanguine noire. A certaine fcalie,and yron-coloured
flone,of the kind of bloud-fiones,

Sanguineral : m. The litle ffhcalleda Mennow.

Sanguinité : f. Confanguinitie kindred parentage, affi-
mitie, neerenefe of bloud.

S$ or a :m,ente : f Sanguinolent,bloudie, full
of bloud,

Sanguiforbe :f. Burnet, Pimpinell,

Sanicle: com, Sanicle, Samikell,Selfe-beale,


Sanicle femelle. Blacké Maifterwort, or Diaftorides |


bis blacke Hellebore; called (vntruely) by the vulgar,
< Pellitorie of Spaine; ,

Celuy qui fanicle a de mire affaire il n'a : &,Qui

adu bugle,& du Sanicle,fait au Chirurgien la ni-
= que : Pro.(So great is the vertue,and operation of this

hearbe in the clofing and curing of wounds,

Saniclet: m. 45 Sanicle,

Sanie : f, Matter; corrupt,or filthie bloud ; or,more pro-
perly,the fevofitiesor waterifhne(fe of bloud, or of other
humors ; and, the waterie excrement thats yeelded by
vlcers,and bred of the fame caufe.

Sanic des oreilles. Eare-wax. fit

Sanieux: m.cufe:f Materie,corrupt ; yeelding or full
of. a filthie moifture.

Saninier. Looke Savinier.

Sannier : m. 4 Salter ; Salt-feller; Salt-maker.


5 AWN.
Sans. Sanfe,witbout,befides,
“eft mon homme fatis autre. Tis the fame man 1
looked for it wnone but be.
. Patfe fans flux. Paffe,I am not flufh; alfe, let goe, no
Matter,not a pinne matter,
Sanfonet: m.The bird called aStarling,or Stare ; alfo,


a little,or prettie and tunable, fart.
Sanfonnet, The fame, Del


| Sanfué :f° The water-worme called a Horfleech, or


Bloud-fucker:

Santal. as Sandal. :

Santé:f. Healib,welfare, foundnefe of bodie: In Xainc-

* tonge they ufe to give Prawnes unto difeafed perfons,
and thereupon tearme them,Dela Santé.
De ee ate Pye: on bienen grande fan-
te:Proy, comfort after many crofjes; long fick-
neffe often breeds a lafting bea saut cil
Mal deflusmal n’eft pas finite: Prov. Ayle vpon ill
cannot be bealth, 2 .
Point ne faut demander de malade s’il veut fanté:
Prov. on aie ficke man if be would be found; make
not a que/tion of things queftionle(fe ; doubt not of that
ich is alreadit me ON a J


Qui n'a fanté il n’a rien, quia fanté il a tour: Pro.


He that bath bealth, hath all things, be that wants it,
nothing,

Santonique :f. Wormefeed; the feed of holie worme-
wood,or Wormefèed-wort.

Sanués blanches, The white wild Colewort.

Sanut, as Canus.


| Sanxi : mie :f Decreed ordained enacted, eftablifhed,


ratified ; alfo, forbidden.
Sanxion:f. 42 Ad,Law,decree, Statute, Ordinance,
Sanye : f, Looke Sanie, |
Saoh : m.A challenge of or exception againfl,a witneffe,


Juror rc.
Saonier :m, A Salter,oné that felleth fait.


| Saonné : m.ée : f. Challengedor excepted againfi.
| Saonneinent: m. A challenging, or excepting ee


Sdonner. To challenge, or except againfl,a witneffe, Fu-


ror. e
À Saoul :m. A glut, facietie, fullnefe.


Saoul: m. faoule: f. Full,glutred,cloyed, faciated that
bath fo much of a thing as he is readie to loath it.
Le Pigeon faoul trouve les cerifes ameres: Prov.
The fül-fluft maw findes Ce AR in [weet things.
Qui a lapance pleine il luy femble que tous les au-
tres fone tapas Prov, He thats full-belied thinkes
all others full. an vee

Saoulé: m.¢e :f. Glutted, faciated, filled, clayed with,

Saoulement: m. A géutting, filling, faciating, cloying


with, SSE
Saouler. To glut, cloy, fll, faciate, gine a gorge full of.
Onfe aot Heu à fit gine a gorgefiull of.


de manger cartes: Pro. One may


well glut bimfelfé (or, Jone baue ynough) m cating


Tarts. |
Saouleté:f. Sacietie, fülne(fe, 4.cloying, glutting, loa-
thing, loatbfomeneffe. re 5


| Saoulure : f. The fame,


Sap. Bois de fap. Deale planke;Deale boords.
pepe > Ce ies «5 QUE 2
é 5-80) . Looke Sappé; &,Sapper. .- .*
DE mother aise HE sidi thinner ankle
unto th'inflap,and ibencetothe greattoe.
Seis Sapbicks, or Sapbicke verfes(of elenen fil-
bles.) : R a
Saphir 2m. À Saphir fle alfa bndyer blew pimple on
any part of the face.


4
%
3
4
:


Cod US CRE Oo € 4


; SAR SHAAR €


to grub,or cut up weeds or noifome bearbs,
Sarfouir: To grub,or Cut vp weeds.
Sarge :f. The fluffe calledSerge, 8 8 «
Sargette : f..4 fine,or thinne Serge. ‘
Sargon : m. The Gilshead, or Goldeney; as fome bold;
bowfoeuer,it is a verie lecherous fifh, and often chan-
geth his mate, ,


Sargoter. Tofhog,ioult hake, toffe, or thumpe; alfo, to
Swine, f


Sarin :m, A certaine water-bearbe,which hath a bard
root neceffarie for Smithes. RU

Sariffe. A long Speare,Launce ,Pike,or Favelin,vfed by
thrauncient Macedonians.

Sarlatan: m, Looke Charatan.

Sarment:m. The twig,or fmall branch of a vine,erc.
Se brider de farment. To bridle bimfelfe with a
vine-fprig ; to be fodrunke that be cannot fpeake,

Same :m,eufe :f. Fall of twigs, or fmall bran-
ches.

+ tin: mine : f, Ofor belonging to, afmall vine

ranch.
Dragmefarmentine. À draught,or cup,of wine,

Sarpe: f. An inflrument fomewhat refembling a little
Bill,and vfed for the lopping of trees, and cutting of o-
ther (mall wood, wherof bauens, and fagots be made,

Sarpette :f, 4 vine-kniféshooked Gardeners knife,fmall
hedging Bill.

‘A pleine farpette. La vigne qui eft à pleine far-
pette. Thats füll of,or well farnifhed with,grapes.

Sarpillére :f. À Sarpliar ; a peece of canuas, cloth, or o-
ther fluffe to wrap,or packe up wares in.

Sarpilliere : f, The fame.

Sarpillon. Looke Sarpette.

Sarrabouïte, Looke Raboutte : GRab,

Sarrafine: f. The bearbe Heartwort,or Birthwort ; al/o,
Sarafines Confound,or Comfrey. :

Sarrasson: m, Fleetings, or baflie curds, [eumd from

the whey of a new-milke cheefe,thex thickencl with a
little milke,or the yolke of an egge, and boyled on a foft


fire.
Sarre :f. 4 kind of jmall peece of Artillerie vfèd in old

{ tune.
. Sarrer. Looke Serrer.
Sarriette :£. Sauorie Summer Sauorie,

Sarriette d'Angleterre. Winter Sauorie, Timbra,

Time-byfop.
Sars : m, des fars. Chichlings, yellow wild Fitches.
Sart: m, Sea-moffe,Lungwort,Oiftergy eene.
Sarteau: m, The Bell-peare,or Gourä-peare.
Sartie : £. A Cocke-boat,or fhip-boat; the skiffe belonging


Saphre. Looke Safre, sa
Sapience:£. Sapience,wifedome,difcretion,cixcum|pec-
tion, warinee knowledge of all things.
Huile de fapience.Oyle drawne out of tiles or bricks,
which baue beene fleeped in verie old oyle.
Sapin: m, A Firre tree,
apin femelle, The Deale tree.
Bois de Sapin, Deale planke,or Deale boor ds.
Sapine: & Ax open tub, or velfell(of Firre wood, érc,)
‘wherein botiles of wine are ufually fet.
Sapinette :f. 4 groue,or wood,of Firre trees,
Sapineux: m.cufe: fi Firrie,of Firre, fill of Firre. |
Sappé: m. ée :f. Digged undermined opened, cut into
or through,as a wall,at the foot. Ss
Sappement : m. A digging of a wall, an undermining,
opening, or cutting into jet the foot; bence alfo,a fup-
planting.
Sapper. To vndermine,dig into, open, or cut open ( as a
wall)at the foot ; and bence alfo,to [upplant.
Sappeur: m. 47 vaderminer, or miner.
Sapphir. Looke Saphir,
Sapoin : m. A Chiappin, or Spanifh Pantofle ; monfirous
high-foled,and mot vfèd by women.
Saquer. Looke Sacquer, ;
Saquerelle :f. 4 Docke for a borfes traine,
Sarache:f. 4n Albanian fifh verie like totb’ Anchoua.
Sarazine. Looke Sarrafine.
Satbacane,or (which is better)Sarbataine: f. A long
trunke to {boot in; alfo, the muficall Infirument called
a Sagbut. :
Sarcable:com. weedable, fit tobe weeded.
Sarcafme:m, A biting taunt, bitter ieaf, cutting quip,
nipping (coffe.
Sarcelle :£ The water-fowle called a Teale.
Sarclé: m. ée:f. Weeded; grubbed vp with a weeding


forke.

Sarclement: m. 4 farkling;weeding; a grubbing up
with a weeding forke. Nay

Sarcler. Toweed ; to grub,or dig up weeds. Le

Sarclet: m. A weeding booke, or weeding forke ; made
fomewbat like a grubbing,or dung, forke. pr

Sarcleur: m. 4 weeder,

Sarcloir :m, Looke Sarclet. Be ad

Sarcocolle :f.A bitter Gumme which ifues from a thor-
nie Perfian plant; alfo, the Wind-rofe, or baflard wild
” Poppie.

Sarcophange :m. 4 (flonecalled Eat-flefh, becaufe it
“confumes, in fortie dayes, the dead carkaffes inclofed
“within it, nog

Sarcotique: com. Breeding new flefl ee

Sine: m. Acoffia for a dead corps; Looke Cer-
“ cueil.

fot ple

Sard: ifine:f. Filibie efenfualitie,

Sarde :f A Pilchard; alfo, a flefb-coloured flone,thats


toa fhip.

Sartre :m. A Tailoror Botcher; a mender of old gar~
ments.

Sarvinien : m, A fruithill white vinewbofe leaf is at.
moft round, |


tafie to be granen, and therefore much vfed in Seale- | Sasim. A ranging fiue,or fearce.
} ms ro *'f PRE eee: Al fas. carele, ight 5 je
en PT OR A NE ae
2 ee i s à Put Sasle: com, Looke Sale.
Sardine ir. Salir,


Sr Safl ei ir,
Salle: mee: f. Searced, fifted, ranged,boulted,
aflefique ; or. ique. Looke Safsify.

Saflement: m, 4 ffting,fearcing, ranging,boulting.
Saffer. To fifi, fearce ,vange,bonlt,

Safle bonne farine fans trompe ne buccine : Prov,

Boult thy fine meale, and eat good pafl, without report,

or Trumpets blaf


Saffeur: m, A fifter, fearcer boulter of corne,eoe,, Kr


S A T


Saffeures: f, Siftings or that which remaines in a fiue,
range or fearce, after that the meale bath beene jifted
jromut,

Saflefy :m. Goats bread, Fofepbs flower, Starve of Je-
rkfalem,Noonc.tide, Goe tobed at rioone,

Saflure. Looke Saffement.

Satellite: m. 4 Sergeant,Catchpole ; or Yeoman of the
gard ; one that arvefieth,or gardeth a mans perfon.

Saticté : fSatietie fulneffe ; plentie,content; alfoya glut
“ting, or cloying.

Satin : m, Satin.

Satirion. Looke Satyrion,

Satisfaction :£ Satisfaction contentment,a pleafing ; a
fulfilling of the defire, or will; alfa, repaiment ; alfo, a
purgation,or excufe,

SatisfaGtionnaire:m. A Preacher offatisfaétion.

SatisfaCtoire : com, Satisfactorie, fatusfying.

— m, Cte: f Satisfied, contented, pleafèd,
payed,

Satisfaire. To fatifie content pleafe, fulfill the bumor or
defire of; to repay,make fatisfaction ; tbroughly to für.
nifh,or prouide for. ;

Satouilles : f. Liste Lampreyes bred infinall frefb-wa-
ter flreames into which the fea comes not.

Satrape : m. A great Ruler,Commaunder,P otentate,or
Peere ; the Lieutenant,or Gouernour of acountrey. '

Sattaquer. Looke Attaquer.

Saturige: f. The bearbe Sauorie,

Saturité: f. Saturitie, fulneffe, glutting, plentie, ex-


ceffe.
Saturnales. The Feafls of Saturne, celebrated by tb'an-


cient Painims in December. -

Saturne: m, Saturne; one of the feuen Planets; alo,
lead(among Alchimifts,e>c.)

janv * m.enne: f.. Sad, fowre, lumpifh, melan-
cholie, *

Satyre: m. 4 Satyre; a monfler balfe man balfe Goat.
Satyre:f. A Satyre; an Inueéline , or vice-rebuking

: Poeme.

Satyriafe: f.Pricke-pride,lufi-pridesthe flanding of the
yard; abi int aluflleffeextenfion, or fwelling
thereof. à

Satyric : m. ique : € Satyricall taunting, inueying, bi-
ting, nipping, bittersfharpe, rebuking,reprouing.

Satyrion: m, Satyrion, Ragwort, Standlewort, Stan-

\ der-grafje, Gander-goofe, Priefts-pinice, (weet Culli-
ons, Ladies traces: (The Grecians tearme thus all Bul-
bus-rooted,and lajt-pronoking,bearbs.) .

Satyrion à deux couillons. as (th'originall) Saty-
rion, AA ‘

Satyrion 4 trois couillons. Triple Orchis, or tiple
Tadies traces. ‘
Satyrion à trois fueilles, Threesleawed Satyrion,

"Fox" flones, : ?


. Satyrion royal. Sutyrion royal, finger Orchis Palma
Chriflie® :
Satyrique. Looke Satyric. a


-


Satyriquement. Saryrically tauntingly, nippingly, bi-
tingly, vailingly, inneyingly, rebukingly,reprouing!y.


Satyrium, LookeSatyrion,
Sau: m, Salt; n. alfo, a feller; alfo, an Oxe-
“* bouft,or (uch like bafe roome in a countrey cottage.


Savart. as Friche. TU


Savate. 4a en 3 alfosthe play called Bob and bit, |
ñ 4


67 Hodman bi


EX


_ Le beau foulier devienten fin favate: Prov. Ap-
! pliable to beantie decayed orin the wane,by age érc.
 Sayaterie:f, 4 cubling,or the trade of a Cobler; alfo,a


SAV.


reet,or place, voberein old fhooes be fold.
— as Savetier; alfo, the play called Hedman


blind,
Savaton:m, 4 fhooe ; €Gafcon. alfosa peece of an old
0e.
Vicil favaton. The Millers thumbe; a fifh. i

Saubenite. A fleenelefe yellow coat,or gowne painted
all ouer with reprefentations of diuells, and put vpon
Sich as are found guiltie by th'Inquifition.

Sauce: f. A fauce,condiment, feafoning for meat. |
Sauce barbe Robert. A fauce für fried fifh,or roafled
Conies, made of little Onions fried in butter, verinpce,
pri. muflard, [inall fpices,and falt, boyled 1ogc-
ther, :


Sauce blanche , 1s made of blanched Almonds,c> the
brawne of a boyled Capon pownded together; and then
Cloues, Ginger, Cynnamon,Rofe-water,and Sugar, put
vuntoit,

Sauce chaude. Is made of Manchet firft dried, then


| fleeped in vinegar,or verinyce; and afterwards witb


long Pepper white Ginger, Clowes, Graines , and Nut-
meg,pownded,and firained, 5
Sauce d'enfer, A fauce,or condimel made of hogs feet
Sirf boyled,then broyled, then cut into great flat pee-
ces then fcorched on a gridiron, then flued in veriuyce
with Onions, then feafoned with muftard,and then boi-
led in a difh with hot coales put both under, and om
ucr it,
Sauce froide, Another,made of the liners and giferns
of chickens boiled with a little bacon, then taken out
of their broth and cooled ; then white bread fleeped in
_ vinegar and greene corne flrained together and Mar-
ierome P ar(ley,white Ginger,a little Sage, and a good
deale of falt,added unto them.
Sauce reale, & royale: &, Sauce Robert, Looke
Real; & Robert. =.
Lafauce ne vaut pas mieux que le poiffon : Prov.
(Appliable three wayes) the fauce and fifh are bad a-
like ; or,tbe fance fhould not be better then the fifb; or,
the fauce is feldome better then the fifh.
Sans fel ny fauce. Infulfe vnfanorie,abfurd without
any manner of grace. .
‘A chair de loup fauce de chien : Prov. Looke


Chien.-
Saucer. To fauce, to feafon with fauce ; alfo, to dip;
mee; . : “4
IIne faucera fon pain en mafouppe. Hee {hall not
dip bis bread in my broth ; he {hall not come neere me,
be fhall bane nothing to.dve withmes
Sauciffe :f. A Sancidge; alo, an Engine conered with
© leather, and trade like unto, aa ware a
Saucidge wbich writhen by onc end between the flones
: pe wall,and fire giuen to eee it downe:
ong foeuer 11 be; alfo,an Engine of peeces of wood
ound bard Logether with hoopes of yron in the forme
of a Tunne (but much thicker and longer, for a horfe-
man doth eafily {hrowd bimfelfe bebind it and fifiie or
(ixtie men goe tothe rovpling of | it'up and downe.)
Saucifle de Boulongne. A Bolonia Saucidge, is
made of beefe and leane bacon, in cquall quanthie,
flayed,and chopped {mall wish balfe as much lard and
Some a Ginger,and fait ; then put into a cleane
Oxe gut balfea foot longsond Laye i (alt for two daies
togetberand afterwards bung upin the fmoake.
Sauciffc de Lombardie. "A Lombardie Saucidge, is
made of the flefb of fodden Capons, and of Partridges
Weodcocks,or fome riuer fawle, and alittle porke with
lard chopped finall togethev, and feafoned nr whole
epper,


T
+


du ae


SAY S'A V


mons Prov. we mufl looft a litile that we may get


Pepper, [alt and [mall fpice ; then put into an Oxe gut,
and bung in the fnoake; fo may it be kept raw two or
three yeares ; but when you would eat it you muft fleep
it, aad afterwards boyle it a good while in wine and |
waler,

Sauciflon: m. 4 Lineringor little Sancidge.

Sauclés. as Melet.

Saudenier: m, 4 Souldier that taketh pay. (v.m.)

Save. Looke Seve. 4

Savetier.:m. A Cobler,a Sowter.

Savetier :m,ere:f. Of, or belonging to, cobling, or old


much.

Saulmone de plomb : f. A great fow of lead.

Saulinonnée : £ 4 great Salmon Trout. |

Saulmonnier:m.ere: f. Ofa Salmon; whence; Trui-
te Saulmonniere ; À Salmon Trout.

unes : ie ree ‘

aulmurages : m.Rubbifh of flone,bricke,erc,laied un-
der the under foundation of a boufe.. He

Saulmure :f. Pickle; the brine of fale; the liquor of
flefh,or fifh pickled,or falted in barrells ec.

Saulmuré: m.ée: f Pickled; kept or condit in pickle,
Seafoned or mingled with pickle. re

Saulnerie:f. 4 Salt-fhep, or Garner fir falts a place
wherein falt is kept and vented, FM

Saulnier : m. 4 Salier, Salt-feller, Marchant of falt;
alfo,a Salt-box,

Sauloye: f. A plot,or groue of willowes.

Saulpiquet. Looke Saupiquet,

Saulpouldrer, To falt,corne or powder with falt lay in
brine on falt, —

Saulpouldrer de fucre. To powder, beduft, or firew
ouer with Sugar.

Saulfaye : £..4 plotsor groue of Willowes,

Saulfé: ££ Looke Sauce,

Saulfer, To fauce,to dip in fauce.

Saulferette, & Saulseron. A little faucer.

Saulfiere : f. A faucer, '

Saulfiffe. Looke Saucifle. |

Saulfilsier : m, Amaber of Saucidges.

Sault: m, Aeape érc ; Looke Saut.

Saultant :m. ante: f. Leaping ;iumping ; skipping.

En faulrant, By leapes or skips, diforderly, cmfarily,
feattering|y,leaping from one matier to anoiber,

Saulté. Leaped ; iumped; bounded , or skipped ener;
whence ; . j
Aufsi toft preft qu'un chien auroit faulté vn efcha-
lier. Readie ina trice , or , in the turning of aband;
readie ere a dog can bane skipped over a file.

Saultelement: m..4 bounding, skipping bepping.

Saulteler. To loner skipsto Lound or fpring,

Saultelle : fas Bois debout(under Bois.) alfo,avine-
branch bowed downewards,and the top tbereof fes in-
tothe ground,thezeby to get root.

Saultement:m. 4 leaping, «> =

Saulter. To leape,iumpe,skip,to fpring or bound; alfo,to

rabat Bowles.) . :

Saulter le bafton. Refolutely to palfe om,or per firme,
what mufibe done, —- 1, ;
aulter du coq à l'afne. Seeke Afne.

» Saulter à deux pieds furle ventre à. To leape with
“both feet upon the bellie of; vtterly, er as much as in

him lies, to erafhor confiund 9 00e

ER treilleen pins: uly, or rsa |

sw t0fhiftsin difcoufè, fi cin one [ubicE vate another,
een pe me iter. He goes backe 10 take


oes,

Saveud. as Friche; whence; Terres Jaiflées en {a-
veud. Grounds that lye unlaboured.

Saveur: f. Sanor, fmacke,taft,relifh ; alfo,pot-bearbes;
or feafoning ; whence, mettez la faveur au pot.

Sauf; m, À limitation of time for the returne of a par- :
tie, which vpon his apparance, and th'aduerfaries de.
fant in Court,hath leaue to be gone.

Sauf: m. fauve : € Saft, fure, found whole, unbroken,
without barme or daunger , in good café ; alfo, faued,
referucd, excepting, without preiudice unto , whence,
the Phrafer, Saufmon droi&; & {auf voftre hon-
neur; &,{auf au defendeur fon recours ; &c,

Saufconduiét :m. 4 fafeconduét,conuoy ,pa(port, pale ;
protettion, fafégard.

Sauf-refpit im. Refpite of bomage,or a time granted by
a Lord unto his vaffall for the doing of his bomage.

Sauge: f. Looke Saulge:

Saugé: m.ce :f.Sagie; fill of Sage, feafoned with Sage,
wherein Sage bath beene fleeped.

Sauger: m. Thename of a fiveet and tender apple. -

Saugrenée : f. A porridge, vr meat of Peafe and broth
halfe boiled,and put into a difh with fops,falt,Saffron,
Sailes ople,and fome verinycesor vinegar. *

Saugrenu : m.ué: £ Vatoward, ungainelie ; ill-fauou-
xed, in{ulfe, abfurd, fottifb, or aif done.

Savinicr : m. The Sauintree,or fhrub.

Saulce. Looke Sauce,

Soulciffe. Looke Sauciffe, <

Sauldoy:m. Branches of willow cut euerie third or

fourth’ yeare, for poles, and props for vines, re.

: Saule:m, AS. llow,willow,orwitbie tree,

“Saule baftard. The low,or dwarfe willow.

| Saulyé: m, Capen fauce made of Sage.

4 Sau ge: f, The bear be Sage. ‘

". Saulge de bois, wood Sage, wild Sage, Garlicke
ÉTÉ RARES A ott this

Saulge franche. Sage rayall  finall Sage, common

AS gle eus à 2 LAN te TA

x Saulge molle, ou: de montaigne,, Stachis, wild or

yellow Horehound. der

« Saulge d’outremer.The hearbe Clarie,or Cleere-eye, |

| «called by Some beyond-fea Sage.


_ Saulge petite. Small Sage (of a better fell shentbe


Saulteur :m, A leaper sumper,bounder ; alfo,a vaulter,
_ tumbler dauncer ; alfo,as Saultoir.


Saultoir :m. Saint Andrewes croffe ; tearmed fo by


rn ec ith S 7 pl 1 Sage
; je, full of Sages + 0
aurons. | hore mA

A faut. perdre vn veron pour pefcher yn Saul-


+ Ron ie, Alecof thecom- | burrescr to leape the better he retires, or withdrawes
© mon garden Mint, mi ay, “Apr A à bi j par is ve e1be more cffeéinall ve:
+ browne Hint el Mint 98 | S sau: 0. ALocfl, or Grefhopper ; alfo,the Jack
… Saulye Wild Sage,wood Sage,Garlick Sages | images Looke Saurcreau. npr
.… alfo,e Ps CR EEE VONT OS :f Awoman leaper,vaulter,tumbler,dann-
---9auige ce Looke Saulge outre mer. ET Saultereau ; (a{{o,a Shrimpe,or Prawne:
ose di Great Sagebvoad Sage, + @Breton.) Looke Saurerelle. Aes vt,
Sans fe ori i Saulterette:f..4 Shrimpeor Prawre,
à th,


J Oridinal.from
ed-by Gor gle STHE OHIOSSTATE UNIVERSITY


yet |.
wR;


AS A v SV A Ve


‘Sauted ec Tomamesill tree, apa by'1) : DR | -Saur sm. faure:€ Sorrell of colour ; whence; H
Satilx blanche. The creat bee une ihe, faur ; sa red Herring, d a
goore Withiès Saure: m. À Sorrell colours alfo,a Sorrell herfe.


Saulx Gatloweba de Gaule, The red-barked Wi- |? were saa bruflé. as Alezan toultade (vader
thie,or blacke withie, alfo,the Spert or Oxier withie ; ezan.)
alfa,the bearbe called ‘Agnus caftus, and Abrabams Saunel vim. The baflard Mackerel.


<Balme, Saurer. Looke Saurir.
Saulx Grecque. as Saulx blanche, Sauret :m. as Saure : Langued.
Saulx jaune. The Cane wishie or yellow-barked wil- oan To make Sorrell, or turne into a Sorrell colour;
low, ” ences
q Saulx noire. ‘The blacke withie, red-barked Willow ; Saurir les harencs, To vedden Hervengs; to lay them
called alfo (by fèmepthe red Spert,or Oxier. on burdles in a clofe roome, and there fmoake them
Saulx viminale, The fame; alfo,the final Withie twig with the dried leaues of Elme, or Oake, o1 with Tax
À Withie Spertor OxierWithie. om bare à vneill they bane gotten their Sorrell
oh." _ Saulx virellines The Cane witbie, or yellow-barked
{ ui peo ons? bs Saint rm. Aredder of Herring;
Saume: € AfheAfe. Saufiffier: m. . À Saucidge-r aker,
Saumée de bled. The quantitie of fonre Septiets; bi the Sauffiere: fA faucer,or little fallet di fh,
l third part of @ Pavifian Muid. Saut:m. Aleape, fault, bound, skip, wmpes as (at


Saumée de terre. LA propartion of land containing Bowles)a rub ; ;alfo,an vacucny or sil pollifhed part of
ia fquare 1600 reedes,and each of thofe reedes eight | © a pretious flore, which im a curious eye difèraces all


. {pannes in length. the ref.
| Saumon: m. 4 Salmon. Saut de Breton. A fall vpon the backe, a faire fall gi- 4
Saumonneau : m. 4 young,or little Salmo; aSalmon | uen one. 1
Trout, Saut dela carpe. A turning topfie turuie, or top ower aft
Saumure,& Saumuré.Looke Saulmure,& Saulmuré. taile, “a
Saune :f. The bearbe called Blite, or Blits; (and fome Saut de ferme à ferme. The manage tearmed a à
i alfo t'earme Helicampanie fo.) Sault,Capriole,or Goats- leape. *
Saunelage. Droi& de faun. The tenth part of goods ‘Saut de hanche. À comming or tarning fidewayes, É
\ “which are faned from fhipwracke, due unto bim that cleane ouer without the belpe of any band. 4
2 faued them, I Saut de mouton, 4 kind of bigh manage. ;
‘2 Saunier: m, A Salter,€*c ; Looke ur € ||. Sautrond. Atwrueaboue-ground, in dauncing, |
| Savon: m, Sope, * : |. Mauvais faut. Donner vn mauvais faut. Looke 4
Terre de favon. Fullers earth. : Donner. . er
À | Savonné : m.ée : & Soped,or wafhed in fope ; ae Trois pas, & vn faut. The Almond leape. 2
ee” thie like fope-fuds,or a lather of fope. » Vn pas,& vn faut. (In managing) a Pafjafalte,Gallop D
FA Savonner. To fope,or wafh with fope. © Galliard Pace and a leape,
Savonnier :m.ere :f. Ofsor Selingibs vnto,fope 82° | En deux pas vn faut. Speedily, in atrice, in baff, a-
fr Herbe favoriitiere. Sopewort cc; as under Herbe, . oe
EX. Savorade : f as Savorados : {Gafcs mefine faut. Moulins eftans en mefineTaut. |
Savorados. A poore kind of pottage extratted only from || Sttindingi inone leuellor turned by one beigbr, Of wa. |


theiuyce of bare,and bollovw bones: : Limofin: @Rab, ||. orer,
Savorée : f, The bearbe Sanorie. Faire le faut. To breake, fill bankrupt, run bis coun- |
Savouré: m: ée*+£ Saworie,thut bath a good fearkese Il trey HE debt; say to mat huimed, fai unplea-
tall; alfo,fauored,or tafled of; alfo; feafoned,
Savourer. To fauor, (mack,relifb,taft of; opt ‘Sane adhe Saulté: LA NE
Savôureufement. ‘Sauority, tafifiliy, taflingly, witb a | Sautcllesf2Looke Stelleote uns: ic?


good flomacke,” | Saurellement; 8Sautclier. Looke ae À
_Sayoureux: a ute :f. ESasqrie STONE fee. Saulteler. ;
hing of a good || Gauter.Looke Sailter. odoasid :
Saupe: f. Mn headed, little. gousbed, blunt- fe, Sautereau : m. ‘4 Graflppers the Jacke ove Pr |
ae dl wh/auorie,and unvbelefome fea- fis, ba ginal, el OL
: golden lites all along fromber gills tober Sautereaux de Brie. The finaines of Brie are fo |
ee ees likened: by foe tebe’ parte à | tearmed;béräufe tb ey commonly make deepe, and long j
- k hers miflaken'forthe fifb whereof Stockefifh is ©” ditebesat théends oftheir lands (for the duining
et: m. Fok (ence, made of Ouions; ver | of their fuperfluows moifure) and Mer map tap,
§ 5 Miss for a roafted Conie of Onions, ||: if they will raffrs;ouer them"
Cuprieeien nd white wine ; 3 generally any kind | : Sautereaux de Verberic: Looke Veiberie: 6
of tait Pace . Sautere!le: fes Saulterelle ; ajo, @\Majons Infirn- !
ss igueter. 4 Jee felons 10 the a Soarpe raft ment, framied like a Squire, yet fo; that, as a pare of |
se ve peewee ote. * santa: sami se epesied, and ee aaa ;


"Säupiqueux = RER E shape bapeatthe Sate’ |,
ier af of eof; feasened Yao teeter; os à Gen! le Sobteair. HO Te
Sb rae aie pete : | |-Sautiér rn leaper, iumper, skipper
sepa mé si comers Sautoir : mi Saint Andrewes MA: termed fp y


|


ner with powder or dup? || Heraulds.


Lei


Cece Sau-


ee ue a 4) :Sautheil.# Sautoir, © #2 cron 00 eee |
| Sie Ayongyor fmall pee | Sauvage : m. ete he: CNET


S A V


SCA


Sauvage: m. Sauage,wild,bagard parfh,untamed, vn-
broken,unreclaimed.
Herbe fauvage. Aweed,

Sauvageau: m. 4 wild plant, fet,or flocke fit to bee
graffed on,

Sauvageinent. Sauagely, wildly, bagardly, barfhly,
skittsfb ty.

Sauvageon. as Sauvageau.

Sauvageté: f Sawagene(fe,wildnelfe ,vnreclaimednefe,
barfhiefft,rudenelfe,

Sauvagine :f. Venifon; alfo,wildaelfe ; alfo,ranknefe,
or barfune(fe of finell,or taf.

Sauvagine d'oifeaux, wild. fowle,

Sauve : f..4 fhoue-net to fifbwithall,

Sauvé: m.éc :f. Saved, fécured, preférued, efcaped,
proteéled oi deliuered from daunger, oes al, fi,
whole, found, fure,

Il seit fauvé parles marets, He hath cleered, or
difingaged himfelfe, but by a fhame full meanes,or in an
wnworthie manner.

Sauvegarde:f. Safégard, (uretie, fecuritie ; din,
proteclion, tuition; alfo, a Scutcheon, Penon, or Flag
charged with the Armes of a Proteétor, and affixed to
the doore of the partie, or on the corner-polts of the
Citie, whofe protection bee hath wndertaken; alfo, a
Letters Patents of protection, whence ; Letires de
fauvegarde.

Sauvelage. as Saunelage.

Sauvemeént: m, A fawning, fafe-keeping, fècuring, pro-
tecling ,preferuing,

Sauvément. Safely,fecurely, furely, without icopardie.

Sauver. To faue, fccure, preferue, defend, gard,proted,
keepe barmelelfe.

Sauvetc:f. Safétie, fecuritie, afurance, protedtion,de-
fence.

Sauve-vie : f Stone-rue,Wall-ruewhite Maiden-baire;
alfo calli it Saxifrage,becanfe it is good againft the

072€,

Sauveur: m ASaliaar, Sauer, preferuer,proteélor,de.


fender,

Sauvoir :m, 4 flat and clofé boat (bored full of little
boles) for the keeping , and feeding of of nb.
dre,


Sauzin: m, A kiad of Oliue
Saxitile : com. por purs breeding the fone, ala
fo, lining, or lurking among flomes, 9. ,
Saxiffage:f The hearbe S e507 Stone-breakes
po age ie kinds of different foape, fayes
erar.
iy beak blanche, Stone-breakes white orgreat


| er dorée, Golden Saxifage, Golden Stone.
grande, Greator white Saxifiage; s'beares


| ens bloffome. (Gerard bath foure fuch; one
which hee calls white Saxifrage , or white Stone-


_ breake; a fecond called Burnet Saxifrage


Saye:m, A long-skirted Jacket,Coat or Caffocke,

Sayete. The fluffe S , +

Sayette : f. The ft Sey; alfo,as Saitte,

Sayne :f. The large fifh-net called a Seyne.

Sayon. Looke Saye,

Sbaraglin: m, An alien Game at Tables yyberin one
addes (ix to euerie cafi be throwes ; as, if he caft 12 be |


playes 18.
Sbie bag A Sergeant,Catchpole,arrefling Marfball or


lin :m. A Buffit,or ioyned, floole to fiton, .
Scabelle :f. The tm or a low buffit, pe floole.
Scabie:£. The (cab,or feabbineffe. -
Scabieufe:£. The bearbe called Scabious,
Scabieufe de brebis. Sheepes Scabious,
Grande Scabieufe. Red-flowred Scabious,Auflrian
Scabious ; alfo,the great common Scabious,
Petite Scabieufe. Small commen Scabious,Mathig-
lus bis Scabious with the pale blew flower.
Scabieux : m, eufe:f. Scabbie, féuruie.
a Large PE bar kt
reux: m. cule: £ ‘Rough, rugge tie,
knaggie ; skittifh,danngerous to Mi com with,
Scace :f, A Scatch bit,
Sçashanss Knowing, witting, expert in, acquainted


Scaiole f. A kind of Allum,
Men + £. A Triangle thesbree fides whereof are un-


Gedones Certaine necke-muskles, whereby the bead is
moued , and bent,

Scalle: À 4feale,a ladder ,a paire of flaires.
Fairefcalle, To a/cend, mount or goe up unto; alja,to
land,or goe afore,

Faire falle en Efpagne. To fayle intoSpaine.
Scalme:m, AThowle; the litile peg whereby the oave
of a Skiffe is flaied.

Scalpelle :m. 4 Chirurgians Pen-knifé,or Launcet.

Scameux :m.eufe: f. Suture {cameufe. The feame
whereby the bone of the temples united with, or di-
nided from,thefeul.

Scammmes: f, Scales; alfè,the nailes, or fmall plates of
old-fafbioned Haubergeons.

A taga er 9 € Scammonie.purging Bindweed,

Scammonie, The fame.

| Scandale: m. Afeandall offence occafion or caufe of a- .

. mother mans > alfoan imputation , or flander

alfo,a flurre,tumult vprore; alfo, a plummet to ps


with,
Scandale :meufe:f, Scandalous, offenfiue, flaun-


Scandalizer. To féandalixe,or offend; to di Hans 0e
gine occafian-of diflike vata; lender + defame,
or un an impusation on.


bec: 2, 4 kind of Opfer bef fit dot taf |
EL bodieof « piller betweene the eu


baje,- : ENT:


tS : m, Looke Scapulaire.
oe ar op bea fall of a peece 3) fn
; precy sow Dal cut into wood,
the ga


afon, & heuing the pr ae
eS ee,

Scaphoide. Os ee 4 pre 1b'infixpmadefome-

Sahat ikea Skifeye


ulaire:m. A narrow, end iar perce pu,
c, worne by Monkes ouer the ref À their
falling on bath fides fiom the necke (whi


it bya flit,or bole made for that purpofé) downe almoft |


to the foot,

Scarbillat. as Efcarbillar. ‘ Le >

Scare : m. 4 delicate fea:fifh (held by ome to bee
ae + ae 3 or Golden-eye) which cheweth like a

eat.

Scarificateur : m. 4 Scarificator, or Scarifier; anIn-
firument wherein there are 18 fhaïpe wheeles , the
which let goe at once dee fcarifie, and make incifion, in

‘ as many feuerall places.

Scarification:£ 4fcarification or ftarifying; a kind
of pouncing, fleight opening, or incifion-making in the
skinne with a Fleame, Launcet, or other Inftrument,
either to gine fome iffe unto fuperfluous humors and
bloud, or to prepare a place for the better extrattion of
cupping glaffes.

Scarifier. To /cavifie ; to pounce, or fleightly 10 open or
make incifion in,the skinne with a Fleame, Launcet, or
other Infirument,

Scariole : £ Scariole ; broad-leaued or garden Endiue,
or wbite Endiue.

Scariotte. as Scariole,

Scarvine: f. A Pilgrims cloake.

Sçaffer. Looke Saffer.


cavaminent. Skil/älly, cunningly,learnedly.
cavant: m.ante:f. Skil/ull, cunning, learned ; wife,
expert, aduifed, of much knowledge, of great experi.
ence,
Sçavantement. # Sçavamment, .
SÇavoir: m, Ski, knowledge,cunaing learning; under-


flanding experience in. |
… Quelque fçavoir que foit en l'homme s’il n’a de I
argent l’on s'en ue: Prov. The needie learned
is but laught at; skill without riches is ridiculous.
Scavoir. To know, keane, wot, underfland, conceiue,
perceiue, difcerne; to bauean infight in, or good ac-
quaintance with; alfo, tomay or can, bee able, banc
power.
Scavoir fa court, To be skilfull in courtlie intertain-
ment ; See Court. ; \
Scavoirbon gré à. To giue thankes, or acknowledge
a beholdingnejfe, unto. -: ude
» Sçaurions nous boire en voftre verre, May we; or
willyou make vs,or will you giue vs leaue to,drinke in
pour glaffe. > à .
‘A fcavoir.Towit,that is to fay. : V


Pain, ve : }
Aflez {ait qui {Cait vivre,& fe taire: Provy Hee 1s
cunning ynough that can line and bold bis peace (for
he that knowes more knowes too much; and, as good
| 4mow nothing asknow leffe.) yor
~ | © Celuy {eait affez qui vit bien : Prov.An boneft man


N


ce” ugh, : i

 Ilnesçaitrienquine va par villes: Prov. Heë no-

| thing 's that knowes not more then bis owne, ©

- | Une fgait ine veut bien faire : Pro. He that
will not doe well is ignorant,

itrien di em doubte : Pro. He that


1 's Sof, . WP DONE SG
{ Scede. 4 woodden table, whereon, in old time, people
| writwithchalke. —~
-Sccdule. Looke Cedule,r Schedule, 2
Scclerat: m, 4 lewd villaine,wicked rogue, ungracious
| wretch, filtbie fellow,nanghtie packe, 202


SCatophages. Durt-dewourers  excrement-eaters : |
} Rab.


‘Sciatique : com. Of the Sciatica,


‘A {cavoirmon ? whether or no? whether yea or me ? |
Il sçaït plus que-fon pain manger. Looke vader


20 fat, à nes


: Artisim


» : Patience Science : Prov, Patience pafeth


Scientement..Knowingly,wittingly,of fet purpofé.


S CH


Sceleré: m.ée :f.Lewd,naughtic,wicked,villanous;is-
bappie ,knauifh,mifebieuous ; unnaturall,gracelefe, or
VAgracions,

Scelete:m. The whole coagmentation of bones in their
naturall pofition; alfo,an Anatomie made thereof’; or
4 carkaffe whereof notbing is left but the bones; which

: we calla Skelton,or Skelton.

Scenicle. The little bird called a Siskin,

Sceptique :m, One that 1 euer feeking,and nener finds;
(tbe fortune or bymor of a Pirrhonian Philofopber.)
Sceptre :m. A(royall)Scepter ; al/o, a Monarchie,king-

dome,abfolute rule Soueraigntie in chiefe,

Sceu i. Krowledge, underftanding,acquaintance,no-
tice of. SL

Sceu: m.eué: f Kzowne,vnderfiood,conceiued,kenned,
perceined, | '

Il n’ay fceu luy perfuader, 1 could not, 1bad not the
power or baue not beene able to,perfuade bim.

Schalupe:f, 4 Shatop.

Schede: f. 4fchedule, feroll, note, bill, (priuate) wri-
ting, |

Schedule : € The fame; or as Cedule; alfa, a placard,
or writing (lucke on a poft ; allo, the Returne made by
@ Sergeant, upon an Adtonrnement or Arrefl; C’eft
aufsi Ja memoire qu'un Procureur baille aw Gref-
fe, ou au primier Huifsier pour l’expedition d'une
caufe d'appel, :

Schelette. Looke Scelete.

Schelme :m. 4 knaue;raftall,varlet,lewd felows(from
a German word that fignifies wicked.)

Schine : £ The linnen cafock which countrey men weare
gathered inthe necke like a Surplus,

Schutinatique, & Schifine. Looke Scifmatique, &


me. eae
Scholarité:f. Schollerfbip, (chollerlineffe, the being a
on i saad i > A Pr
cholaftique : m. 2s Efcolaftre(in the firft fence.)
Scholaftique : com. Scholaflicall, fcholler-like,
Scholiafte : m. 4 Scholiaft; an expounder of, or gloffer
vponya text : Rab, ee.
Sciage :m. Saw-duft; or,a fawing ; alfo,cleft wood, as
boords,laths, vine- props ere.
Sciatique: f The Sciatica ; a gowtie paine in the


Veine Sciatique. The Sciatica veine, feated aboue

« the outward ankle, wean. À
Scie: f. ASaw. à Mn |
_ Scie demer.:A kind of whall which bath a Saw.like |


Scieminent. Wittingly,with knowledge,
Science? fi\Science, learning, learned skill, cunning,
knowledge,vnderflanding, _ adit
Vne fèiencerequiert tout fon homme: Prov. One
ynough for one man.
Diligence paflescience: Pro, Diligence exceedeth
Sciences. : ; : LS
Fy deScience , & d'art, quien raifon n’a part:
- Prov, Looke. | (ter


Sciences \»


Scientifique: com, Scventificall, of exceeding skill,in-
«finite learning, wonder full knowledge. 17.
Scientique: com. Moft learned, skilfull , cunning, ex-
pert, aduifed of great knowledge (efpeciallyin ill mat-
«ters, for wbich this word is molt commonlyvfed.) |


a BR


Scier: Looke Sier.


Ccccy


a

i
ria
1
Sam
x
22


me


S GO
Sciette : f. A little Saw, Queuë de Scorpion. Great Ternefale,Wartewort,
Scicur: m. 4 Sawer,or Sawyer. Scorze:m. A reund lalian corne-meafure, 22 2here-


Scille: f. The Squilla,or (ea Onion,
Scillet: m. The Nut of a(muficall) Infirument,
Scillitic: m.ique :f. Of the Squilla,or fea Onion,
Scinc, &Scinque:m, The Skinkes @ kind of finall
land Crocodile, diners parts whereof are of good vie
in Phyficke, ;
Scintillation : f. A parking ,o7 fparkling.
Scintille :f.4 Jparkesor fparkle of fire.
Sintiller, To fparke,or to fparkle.
Sciomance.Dinination by conference with the fhadows
_ of dead men,
Scion : m. A Scion; a young and tender plant; a fbeot,
(brig,or twig,
| Scionneux: m. cufe: f Full of fcions,er of fhoots;
“ twiggie, (priggie.
Scipoulle. The fea Onion.
| Scirre : m. A bard and almoft vnfencible fwelling,or ker-
nell bred between the flefb & skin, by color of thick
and clammie flegme.
; Scifinatique : com. 4 Scifmaticke.
Scifinatique : com. Sci/maticall.
Sciftmatiser. To Scifmatife it,or play the Scifmatick; to
raifea Scifine,or breed a diuifion, in the Church,
Sciline: m. 4 Scifme ; a dinifion in,or from,the Church,
Sciffile : com, That may be cat or diuided,thats eafie to
cut,
Pierre {Ciffile. Seeke Pierre.
Sciflure :f. A cleft,cut,cracke,bracke,chap.
Sciffuré : mée : £. Clefi, chapped, eut, cracked broken,
diuided.
Sciure. Looke Sieure,
Sclavine. as Efclavine.
Sclirrolique. qRab, Laoke Shilirhoïque,
Scoffon : m.A coyfe,cawle,or bead-tive richly fet with
Jewels. £
Scoletie: f. A kind of {potted Spider.
Scolopendre :f7be Srshpadries gr i
and venomous worme; alfo,a certaine fifh, which ba


rid of it, Jucketh them vp againe ; alfo, as Scolopen-


drig,. » 2 RANA
Scolopendrie : £Spleenwort, Miltwort,Fingerféarne,
Scale-farne,Stone-fêarne, *
| Scolopendrie vraye. The fame jus Vraye, to


make it differ fro Harts-tongne or flone Harts-tongue,

‘ whichis alfa fal porteur SRE Ya ia:

{ Se eric: f. 4 (great)volley ef fall foot, :
peur m. Scordium, water Germander, Garlicke
Germander, 414 de hie Ar 2

Scorie:: f. The droffe,refife,or feumme of melted, or tri.

LL. A little darke-greene fifh(in the Marfel-

; e:f..4 li rke-greene fifh(in the Marfe
lian fea) which bath sesame weake, but venomous


Scorpion : m. A Scorpion 5 alfo, a kind of forall


is) mist D 3 ashi . à 44
on de mer. The fea Scorpion; aved, gteat-
à RTE A
few R verie ecth ; but in tiew t
fbeinarmed with probe ith oo bask,


uinz fwallowed a hooke, vomiteth ber bowells, and


'| Scyomantie : f, Dinination by conférence with the fa


.  dowes of dead men.
Sythe. Lovke Scirre: ) ois
ÿrrheux : m.cufe sf Kemnellienottie. —
Scytale. The Scytall ; a daungerous Sloc-worme,vbofe
» “backe ts full of variable gun ols or marks;
alfa, the Shrew-menfe; alfo,a little round or fquare
- flicke fill of cyphers. ay
| ARelatine of bath Numbers, and euer placed be-
buta Sara a inll fe uompe; He deccines bimfelfé,
or és deceined,


4
‘| Sens. "À Dieu feas. in fiead


‘$C oR


of goe to the Ruble, ‘

Scorzon: m.A {kort blacke Serpent full of yellow (hots;
and fo venomous é flinking witkall, that al! vermine
feare,and(as much as they can)auoid him.

sise à Lafcote in voile. 4 Sheat,

cotin: mine :f Difficult, intricate, obfcure, full o
quirkes and AA “à

Scotte. 2s Scote.

Scourgeon: m. Amell-corne, or Starch-corne  awild
or degenerate Wheat, which is fovone in the Spring;and
being ground, yeelds a verie white,but verie lightand
duile nourifhing ymeale. A

Scourre. La terre ne fe fçait fcourre de cetteherbe.
The one cannot owercome , or bee rid of , tbis
wee ,

Scoufle. Looke Secouffe,

Scripteur: m, 4 Writer,

Scriptule : m. 4 Scruple; the third part ofa Dramme ;
tee Scrupule. Laden

Scrofulaire:f, Scrofilaria,Pilewort,Figwort,Kernell-
wort. 3 |
Scrofüulaire majeur. Great Figwort , or Kernell-
wort; Some alfocall browne Worts, or water Betto-
nie, Scrofularia major. |
Scrofulaire mineur. Figwort,Pilewort,litile Celan-
dine,or Celandine the leffe, 4

Sexofile if. The Kings .ewill; or a Wenne onder the
throat. -

Scrophulaire Looke Scrofulaire.

Scropule : m. 4 itile fharpe fione falling into a mans
fhooe, and hindering bim in bis gate; alfo,.a feruple,
doubt, feare, difficultie, care; precifeneffe, nicencfe,
trouble of confcience; alfo,a Scruple ; a weight amoun-
ting vaio the third part ef c Diamme
Scrupule d’un Arpent.The 48 part of an Arpent,or

ten foot [quare enerse way. à 0. ;

Sarypuleurt an Scrnpuloufly,doubsfully, fear efully,
nicely precifely. agg

ar pooirss im. cute: f Scrupulons, doubtful, feare-
ful confcientious,nice,precife,

Scrutine:£ A ferutinie,or (earch.

Sculpteur :m. 4 Carner,Cutter,Grauere à.


Scutiforme: com, Fafhioned like a Seutcheom, field.


Cartilage {cutiforme. as Fourcherte.
Scybale. 4 bard or hardened turd : qRab.
Scylle :€ The fea Onion

ue: Looke Scine.


Seamment, Fitlcomely decently bandfemel,
Seance: f. Decencie, fcemelinefe;bandfomenefe, come-
|: dimefesa decorum ; alfo,a rocine, featsor place 10 fit in;


| Seant: DAS Decent feemeiesemele Male,
|| nr gracefall, well futing 0 Dr, Se k


tae ;


Gale 4Rab.


~ Seau:


| Seau: m. A bucket,or water pales alfo,a feale,or fignet,
alfo,the chiefe Luminaire (wreathed, ov in works) of

wax ufed at funerals, wed pags Is

-Seau-de noftre Dame, Maries Seale, our Ladies
Seale, blacke Brionie,the wild Vines.
Seau de Salamon, Salamons Seale, Scala coli, white
worl White root. Didi
Seau pendant à double queué. 4 feale hanging ata
double Labell ; al{o,eie that bangs on a Gibbet,”

| _ T'yay bien plantémes feaux, Looke Planté.

| Sebe. 4x Onyon: @Langued, TE

Sebelline. Martre Sebel. The Sable Martin; the beaft

| whole skinne wecalt Sables.

| Sebefte, ou Sebeftin. The Sebeften,er Affjrian plum,

| afinall plumme darke-greene of colour, fweet of tafl,


} and of a flimie or clammie fubflance.

| Scbeftier : m. The Sebeflen, or Affÿrian plamme tree.

| Sebille : f. À fafbion-of woodden bowle vfed in Vin-

ls tage-time, for thé lading or tunning of new wine, and

| em tafting thereof before it be tunned'; Looke Si-'
Mic, : ‘ a t

Sebu. The Elder tree,

Sec : m: A drie thing ; whence;

Employer le verd,&le fèc. To ule or imploy all the
meanes be bath; (fiom them which tomakea fire big
ynough, lay on wet wood as well as drie.)

Sec: m.feiche:f Drie, iuycele{t, withered, fapleffe,
without moillure.

» Pierre'{eiche. A flore laid without morter.

Pique {eiche. An unarmed Pikeman.

Rentefeiche. A rent Seck; Looke Kente.

Son fec. Courfe branne ; or branne wherein, by extre:
mitie of boulting nota whit of meale is lefi, ;

Suture feiche. A fafbion of clofing wounds ; tearmed
thus among Chirurgians, becaufe neither flefb,nor skin
4 pricked thereby, ‘ ;

“A fec. (Aduerbially ; whence;) Eftre àfec. I be on
diie ground ; and thence, to be grauelled, or fpent in
words or meanes ; to haue no more to ay.

Naviger à ec. Aller aux mas, & aux cordes; Our
Mariners fay,to fpoone.
Tirer les vaifleaux à fec. To tow veffells afhore.

Sec. (Interje€t.) Ware that : €Rab.

Secacul. A certaine Indian ,and Ginger.like yoot,which
‘teaten(preferued, as euer it is) enables a man vnlove.
nerie :and therefore baue fome(erronioufly)taken it for
the Eringo, and others (as wifely)for the Skirret root,

Seccer. To faw,or cut afunder ; to cleane,diuide,part,

Sechabot : m, The little blacke vermine breeding in
puddles and tearmed a bulbead,

Seche :f. The Sound,or Cuttie-fifh.

Secher. Looke Seicher.

Secheron. prez fecherons. High, or drie medowes,
Sach as are neither onerflowed,nor moifiened by any ri-
BLOC

Sechot: m. 4 Powt,or Eele-powt.

Secilienne: f. The watering chaine of a Bit.

Seclus : Press f, Secluded, kept or fout vp, from; de-
prined of.

Second: m. A fecond,or affiflant in a fingle combate,

Second :monde:f Second, next after, next unto the
‘the firlt,inferiour another, #5

Seconde:f. The 24 part of a Prime; a verie fina
weight ufed by Goldfinithes,and Jewellers. :

Secondé : m. ée : f. Seconded, ed next, approa-
ched neercft unto ; backed, fuccoured,afifted.

Secondement.Secondly, fecondarilysin tbe fecdd place,

| next after the firfl. Xi 32


See ee gle


| Secouément :m, A fbaking, fringing ,tofjing jioulting,


Seconder. To fecond, follow clo/e or next,approach nee-
hy refi unto ; alfo,to backe,belpe, faccour affift.

ecole: m. ce :f. Shaken, fyung,toffed, toulted, vio-
tently moued or fiirred, ai


» wiolent wouing, io. ging, flirring,
Secouér: Tothake,iolfoult, foie jog, fiir vebement-
«Wa Cheval qui fecouéfon homme. 4 borfè that
trots dagger out of fheath,
Secouëur :m5 4 fhaker,toffer, fwinger, ioulter,
urable :com. Succouring, helpfull, comfortable,
» affifting ; readie or willing to veleeue,
Secourcer. To plucke or tucke vp the coat ; dre, for dag-
ging. Yor! ub ot /
Secourgeon:as Scourgeon, |
Secourir. To fuccour, fecondyreleeue comfort back aid,
belpe,affif,fiurther. Hobe
Secours :m, Saccour,a feconding,reliefe, belpe aïdiaf-
JSiflance,comfort, fartberance. SALE
Secours de Lombardie, Seeke Lombardie.
Le fecours des Venetiens. A refloratine afier death,
vidtualls upon a füll repaft; offer of belpe,or libertie,to
one thats paft the wort, or newly gotten out of prifon ;
§ eye neon + I flo
ecoufle: f.u4ioult, fhog, fhocke, wing,tolle; a
violent iog-or fivindge, a 1 Ever Bref
Bailler vne mauvaitefecoufle à. To give a terrible
iert,or horrible rufh; to worke much mifchicfe , or doe
a mifchienous turne vito,
Secret: m.A fecret ,concealement,counjell,myflerie,bid-
den matter ; alfo,as Mufe.
Secret de deux fecrct de Dieu; fecret de trois fe-
-cret de tous: Prov. we onely fay that three may keep
counfell when two are away. Ch LRRD
Secret: m.ette : fi Secret inward,pritie, clofe, hidden,
concealed abfirufe,darke,myflicall,unknowne, ©
Secretain: m. The Sexton of a Church.
Secretainerie:f 4 Sextriejor Vefivie. oe
Secretaire:m. A Secretarie, Clerke, Remembrancer ;
whereof (belides thofe that belong te infériour Princes,
and Lords) there be many immediate, ordinavie., and
houfbold fèruants unto the French King; tearmed on-
ly, Secretaires, or Secretaires du Roy, and fome-
times Secretaires du Roy, & de la maifon, & cou-
ronne de France, (although in truth they be not Offi-
cers of the Crowne :) Of thefe did Charles the fift m-
flitute a Colledge, or Corporation, by the title of, Le
College des Clercs, Notaires, & Secictaires du
~ Roy, & de la miaifon, & Couronne de France: At’
which time there was but fixtie of them, for the wri-
ting of all Patents, and difpatches of the Chauncevie; À
and their intertainment but fix fillings Parifis a day,
befides tenne pounds Tour. for their Droi& de Man-
teaux,and (ome pettie fees out of the Chauncerité : But
upon the increase of bufineffes Lewis, the eleuenth done.
bled their number; and Henrie the fecond, intheyere |
1554, vai(ed it unto two hundred, giuing them 3001,
wages, invefheét of all fees, In the yeare 1570 Charles
the ninth ioyned unto them fortie more; and Henrie
the third, inthe yeare 1583), fourcteene wnio tbofe,
allowing them certaine vailes out of theCbauncerie


fealeand 150 wages. Henrie the fiurth added onto \


all thefe, firfha2;tben 23 ,then nine (imtertdined at 300 |
]. wages, without any vayles ) dnd in the yeare 1605,
twentie fix, towhom he affigned 1600 1. a mt €
cially for fuch of them as attended the finances 5).
Jafily,in theyeare 1608, be made ten more (which bene
: Cece iy - 3001, |


Originakfrom


THE OHIO STATÉ-UNIVERSAAE RAS


|
A
;
4
a


Sab xe


3001, wages) in refpeët of the reunion of bis omne de-
maine unto the Crowne. The King hunfelfe is the head
of their Colledge ;they and thes (legitimate) children
are eanobled : And befides exemption from all manner
of taxations cuftomes, tolls, impofitions, lones, fines of
alienation, rights of Seigmorie ( for land beld of the
King ;) and a diftharge from the Ban, Arriereban,
Mufters, Harbingers, Eftapes, and Sali-peter-men ;
and the being fee-free in all Courts of Juflice;they en-
ioy many excellent priuiledges.
Secretaires du cabinet. The Secretaries of the Clo-
fet; (uch of th’ordinarie(or extraordinarie)Secretaries
as the King is pleafed to imploy in bis priuate, or fecret
difpatches.
Secretaires de la chambre du Roy. The Clerkes, or
Secretaries of the Kings Chamber; are of a lower
ranke,or,at the leaft, baue fewer priuiledges, then les
Secretaires du Roy. 6
Secretaires dela Chancellerie, The (lerkes of the
Chauncerie (whereto all tb'ordinarie Secretaries ori-
ginally belong) are,as fome doe bold,moft particularly,
the foure and fiftie brought in by Charles the ninth,and
Henrie the third, ;
Secretaires des commandemens; oud’Eftat, The
foure principal Secretaries(who in France doe figne
Letters Patents, as well as difpatches of Eftate)maft
baue beene of the Colledge afurefaid; and, untill of
late, were not Officers in ordinarie but Commiffioners,
executing their functions and receruing their fees,one-
ly during the Princes pleafure.
Secretaires des finances. The remembrancers of
the Exchequer ( derined from the fame fource ) were
likewifé but Commiffioners,vntill the yere 1605 , when
they procured tbemfèlues and their fuccefors, th’ efate
of Officers. ‘ ,
Secretaire, & Contrerolleur general des guerres,
The Secretarie, or Comptroller generall of the warres ,
is to keepe a certaine Regifler, and accountof all bufim
neffes see iy the leuie,muflers,paiments, allowan-
ces,increafe or decreafe,imployment or ingarifoning of.
the Gendarmerie,and other ordinarie fouldiers; and,
bauing grounded vpon that account bis controlment,
. mult, three monethes after euerie yearelie payment,
Jind the fame unto the Chamber of Accounts,and with
it a copie of the Rolls of all Mufters paljed that yeare,
= that it may be compared with fuch as fhal bé delimered,
or fent in by the Treafurer of the warzes.
Secretaires du Roy. Looke ia the word Secre-


taire.
Secretariat : m. 4 Secretarifhip ; th’ Office of a Secreta-
rie, or place wherein he exercifeth it.
Secrete: f. 4 thinne fleele cap,or aclofe (cull worne un-
der a hat ere. ,
Secretion: f. A /paration or fetting apart; alfo,a thing
» feperated or fet apart, from others.
: Secretrice: com. Of a féparating facultie,
Secrette: f, as Secrete; alfo, a fifte (becaufe it u let
aoe 3) alfo,a via or sone poo tes 144
ettement. Secretly, imwardly;priuily, cloftly,
; deb darth ara ical a
§ tom. À Sedlarie; the ringleader,proféffor
D ogc mmm ee or twrbul
| Sete :£ A felt or faction ; a rout,or troupe ; a companie


f 1e.
Segregarion A ae arm fin


8 Ed
SeGtion: £. /eélion,cutting ; dinifion; parting ajo, an


Anatomie.


9 Cops: Gong TS a
Seculaire. leu fecul. which is played but once enerie
age,or 100 yeares. 7


Secularifer. To fecularixe; to make fecular, lap, te


ral,

Secularité :f,Secularitie worldüinefe,temporalluefe.

Seculier :m.ere:f. Secular,lap,temporall,

lierement. Secularly,temporally.

Securidaque :f. The pulfe Axfèed, Axwort, Axfitch,
Hatchet- fitch,

Securité: f. Securitie retchlefneffe,carelefnefe, *

Sedatif: m, ine : f. Quieting, afuaging,mitigating;ea
Jing, appeafing, fiinting. an |

Sedenette : f. The Sea-monfler called a whirlepoole,

Scdentaire: com.Sedentarie euer-fitting,or dowme-fit-

ting. ÿ
luges fedentaires,Ordinarie Judges,(uch as(almof)
euerie day fit in Court. .
Seder. To flsll,quiet, affuage, qualifie mitigate,pacifie,
appeafè. ; 1)
Sedna im, A fitting or fetling of drégs, ec, in the
bottome of liquor shas beth flood. 4
gen ro er Seditionfly, fattioufly ymutinonfly,tur- |
ulent
Scditieux:m.eufe :f. Seditious, faétious, bufic,unqui- |-
et,mutinous turbulent ,tumultuous. ;
Sedition: £ A feditionymutinie, publicke fattion, firife,
contention,tumult,vprore,
Sedon. Looke Ceton.
Seduéteur : m. A /educer,mifleader,deceiuer.
Seduétion: £ 4 feauttion, [educing, mifleading, decei-
“ing. | }
Sed wet zm. Cte:£, Seduced gnifled deceiued,
Seduire. To feduce miflead ,beguiledeceine.
Sedulité :f. Sedulitie diligence.
Sée. Looke Soye.
Seel:m. 4 Seale,or Signet.
Seel authentique. Am authenticke publicke,or appro-
ned Seale, (uch as that of Lords bigh \ufticiers; which
notwithflanding was veftvained within the limits of the
land and Furi(dittion of the Lord thereof , untill the
yeare 1539 , fince when an Editt bath gained it allow-
ance,and made it fit to bold plea,in any place if tb'Ob-
ligor,at the time of th’obligatié made was refident up. |
on the territorie, or otberwife fubiect unto the Furif-
- diftion, of the Lord unto whom it belongs.

- Seel royal. The Kings Seale for contracts crc, execu-
torie,and authenticali,within all bis dominions,
Droiét de Seel. Seeke under Drei&. i

Secllé:m.A couenant made,or contraët palfed,betweene
pattiee> arth inde rs «2 0 dif thing,

Seellé: m.ée: f. |

Seelleur:m. A Sealer.

Seellure: fi A feali

S faire {eeflion. To fall bankrupt.

Seeux. Looke aa, :

Segaline: f. A delicate peare thats ripe in Auguft.

Segle. Looke Seigle.

Segnale : p< a bs famous,renonmed,

Segrarie:f. 4 Verderes{hip; or fuch a like Office of ac-
count in


forrefls.
Segtayet 1m. A Verderer,or fuch a like Officer offome
authoritie,in forrefis. F


SE 1


S ER .


Segregé: m.ée: fi Segregated, feperated, fuered, cul-
! __ ded or taken out;layed ar put apart, i


Scgreger.Tofegregate;feperate, feuer, put orlayapart, |


cullur take out, from.
Segrette: f. An yron feull,or cap of fence. .
Segue: f. Hemlocke,Homlock, bearb Bennet, Kex.
Seguctte: f. A Caue/fom of pren full of teeth, or haning
a fharpe indented cdgéto the nofeward. |
Schi The Elder.sveen
Seiage (ds bleds,) A reaping, or cutting downe (of
corne.)
Scjan, Cheval de Sejan. 4 horfe that brought ill bap to
all that poffeffed him.
Seiche: f. The Sownd; or Cuttle fifh.
Suche poupe, The Pourcontrell, Preke, or Alany-
4 eek, A anti
Sciche. (The Feminine to-Sec;) Looke Sec.
Seiche-frite. as Liche-frite.
Scichemént:m, Aidiying, or drayning of moiflure; a
parchiag ar withering ; a pining or wafting away.
Seichéinent. Dryly, barrenly, witheredly, without fap,
iuice,or moifture. DEF
Seicher. To dry, drayne of moiflure ; parc or wither ;
pine or walt away. ;
Seicher fur les pieds. Ta pine away through fretfull-
nelle alfo,to be in great perplexitie,or much trouble of
eart,
Qui va illefche,qui repofe il fiche: Pio, The tra-
ueller gaines, the loyterer waines ; the labouring man
gets appetite, but floath dryes up the bodie quite.
am : € Drought dryne[fe,want of moifiure,bar -
veanepe.
Seicheron. Looke Secheron.
Seicheur: m, À dryer; one that layes out things to dry.
Seicheur: f. Looke Seicherefle. . one
Seides: £. The briffles, or {life haires of a Horfé,or,Hog,
Scicr. To reape or cut downe,as Corne,erc.
Seieur: m. A Reaper.
Seigle: m. Rye.
Seiple blanc, Amelcorne,Starch-cornes
Scignée: £. Phlebotomie,bloud-letting.
Seigner. Looke Signer. :
Seigneur: m. A Lord; Sir; Signior; a Maifler; a Land-
dt bed, or a Lord of Furifdittion; a Proprietarie, or Ow-
ner.
Seigneurs honoraires. Titularie Lords; fuch as haue
honour without authoritie; fuch as (like our Englifh
Earles) beare the title, but want the poffefion , of a
placezañd fuch as,in-re {pect of their Title(what{oener)
hold not tnchiefe,or of the King, but of fome other Lord
his fubreË, : { 2 :
Seigneurs mediocres. Are Vidames,Vicounts,and
Barbus (not holding immediately of the Crowne) and
Chattelains. «

-Gracieux feigneur. See Gracieux. , ;
Grands feigneurs.Be Dukes, Marquefies Earles,and
Princes; as alfo Vicounts, and Barons that bold imme-
diately of the Crowne. » j :
Petits feigneurs. Lords lufticiers,Lords(onely of Iu-


rife vs |
Vn feigneur de beurre (de feurre, ou de paille)
combat, (vainc,ou mange)bien vn vaflal d'acier :
Prov. (So great oddes hatha Lord of his tenant, or a
Prince of his fubielt,) e
~ Tel figneur tel chien: Pro. Such asa maifter, fuch
Dis man will be. we inps us
De cel feigneur celle mefnie; &,De nouveau feig-
neur nouvelle mefnie: Pro, Looke Mefnic. -


- Aujourd’huy feigneur demain finge ord: Prov. To
day a worthie Lord, to morrow an ape untoward ; viz.
rm abjird imitator of that which be was, or Jhould

ee


| . q&a monde n'ya fi grand dommage que de feig-
+: Meurau fol courage: Prov. There 4 no beaft like toa


Ch ble de »

=e ie de manger cerifes avec fon {eioneur:

Pro. Looke Cerife, : i pi
Jamais ne gaigne qui plaide à fon feigneur : Prov.

«He nener thrines who with bis maifler jiriues.

On ne doit pas laifler bonne terre pour mauvais


{cigneur : Prov. Quit not good land becaufe of à bad


Landlord. ;

Qui avec fon fcigneur poires il ne choifit
pas des meilleures: Pro, He that cats Peares with his
Lovd,picks none of the bell.


Qui de fes fubjetts eft hay, n’eft pas feigneur de
fon pais: Prov. The Lord whofe fubietls cannot well
ek him, finds no place in bis countrey to fècure

im. $

Qui voit la maifon de fon feigneur il n'ya profi
ny honneur: Pro. Ones not the neerer to facies; -
wealth by looking on bis Landlords houfe,or pelfe,

» Tant que le fcipneur dort le vaffal veille: Prov. As
long as a Lord forbeares to feixs his vafalls land ( for
want of homage, dc.) the vafall may lawfully, and
without any wrong done to him, enioy it, and take the
profits of it.
aoe 2 le vaflal dort le feigneur veille:Pro, Seeke

aflal,
Seigneurlage: m, Seigniorie, foueraigntie ; maiflerie,
dominion ouer. ; ate. 5 ;
Droitt de aan as under Droi&; or, Ce
que revienr de bon au Roy outre, & par deflus,
le fin qui eft en la monnoye, & les frais de la fabri-
é cation Are : ‘oral,
eigneurial: m.ale:£ Seigniorall, Lordlie,Lord.

Ge Lord,or Landlord. . —
Droiés feigneuriaux. Ce font ceux qui font deus
au Seigneur;comme fi c'eft fiet,la feudalité,droi@s,
& devoirs; fi c'eft heritage tenu en cenfive.les lots
& ventes, & le cens, qu’ il faut entendre du chef
cens qui eft deu en figne,& recognoiflance de feig-
neurie portant lors, ventes, & amende. . x

Seigneurie: f.Seigniorie lordjbip,foueraigntie,maieflie,
dominion ; abfolute fway of, or power oucr ; a freehold,
full interellor proper tie in,a thing; alfo, a Lordfinp, or
Mannor ; the lurfdittion, or Territorie belaaging to a
- Lord, @rc; alfo, the focietse, orcorporation of (uch as

_ commaund in free Tovenes; alfo,an affemblie,or compas

nie of great Lords,and Ladies,

eigneurie direéte. The eftate of a Landlord;the re-
ceiuing of feruices,rents,or cens for land, ‘
Seigneurie privée. An aétuall enioyment ofor an af.
Sured properite in, a thing; a mans particular invereft
inbisovne. . Das Al
Seigneurie publique, 1urifiliftion ; a fuperioritie, or
authoritie ouer perfons,or their poffeffions.
Seigneurie fouveraine. (A branch, or fpecies of La
publique) the foueraigne anthoritie of abfolute Prin-
ces.


Seigneurie fuzeraine. (Another) the dignitie of a ef


hauing luri[diélion ; the powerof the Lord;or owner of


Seigneurie vrile. The poffeffion,ufe, or occupation of
land, for which rents,e>c,be paied) or fèruicesdone, to
another; the eflate of avalfallortenant, ©"


waite GO gle


HE OHIO STATE-UNIVERSHA


res


SE Ff


Oncues amour,& feigneurie ne fe tindrent com-

+ pagnie: Prov. True toue,and lordlineffe nener held
correfhendencie; fiendfhip,and lordfhip agree not long
together. c
Plein, poing de
Prov. Honour without profit likes fix-pennie rent to
one that bath nothing elfe toline on.


neere, play the Lord,haue power ouer,
Seille: f. À Paile, or Bucket.”
Seillon::m. 4 ridgesor (high) fürrow ; al/o,the gutter,
or hollow furrow made by a plough in the turning of
 devps-alfoya butt, or land, confifting of diuers of thofe
ridges, ur furrowes ; alfo, the narrow trench, reyne,
Vion fierrow left betweene butt and butt for the drayning
thereof. ’
Scillonné: m. ée: £ Furrowed; made into finrowes,
ridges buttsje>c; alfo,plowed up, dinided, cut or.tlo-
uen afunder,as the fea by a fhip. } -
Scillonner. To fixrow; to plough, or turne up into rid-
ges, firvowes; butts ; reynes,or narrow trenches; alfo,
to dinide,cut or cleaue afunder ; wheace; :
Seillonnerlamer. To fayle ; 10 cut,or part (as a fhip
under fayle) the wanes ef the fea,
Seillonner vne prefle de gens. To make a lane, or
* giue a furious charge,through a clofe batallion,or prefe
‘of people.
Scime de vin. The flower, or coat of wine; the white
faffe that floats on the top of it being in Caske.
Sein :-m. ‘the bofome ; the lap ; alfo, the inward mind,or
thought; the beight,or depth of the heart, or affection ;
» alfo,a gulfe,crecke,nocke,angle or arme of the fea,or of
a riner; and, the turning, or bier of a water-
banke ; alfo, feame, tallov, or fet ; alfo, a freckle, or
mole; alfo, a figne manuell ; or as Sing, in the former
fences. t
Cette femme a du fein. This woman wants no dags,
… no bulke,no bombaft; fhe is fimply under layed, .
Scine: f. Averie great and long fifh-net called,a Seane ;
. dlfo,a civ cuitsor compalfe. in: 7 :
Seing. Looke Singe. ÿ
Sejour: m. Adingering,flay,leifiaré,delay;alfo,r efidence,
| tarriance, a remaining or foiourning in one place; al/o,
.…aiplace of refidence, or for abede ; a place to foiourne,
~ reflor flay ites 00


~ Fol de ejour. Amide fom, oneithat bath little to
ee vy eee iS
Scjourné. Lingered, foiourned; faye ined refi-


» «dent in a places
+ Vn homme fejourné. -Refcfhed by reft, or leifüre-


mer toyle,
in; topawf, linger, delay,takeleifure; to intermit ei-
» toleaue,let flay, give leifure unto.
Scifferest dent pale-vedwheat, “i
Seizain: m, 4 quarter of an ounce; or, the 64 part of a


1 Salt. oe cig
alcali, ou A falt made of the afbes of the
Fe “Saltwort, burned with diuers. o-


à


ae En


cm Ammicke ; amedi-
found in long


fcigneurie vaut cinq fols Pan: |


Seigneurier. To féigniorixe rule; way, gouerne, domi- |


\ fuffed wish Jalt, and layedina foadie place vmiill be
+ Aah


~, taking and thereby the more fit to returne unto bis for- |
journet. To (aiourne,tarrie, fléyremaine,be refident |
= ther fludie,or ather imployment ; to make bolyday;alfo, |


| site i


S! Ex Le


gotten in Calabria,a#d Capadocia, SON
Sel Indien, oud’ Inde. The onelyfügar, which Diof.
corides, and other auncient writers were acquainted
with; diflilling of it [elfe from the canes, like a gumme,
in little peeces, and thus tearmed, becaufe refembling
gray falt. ben NÉE
‘Selde Languedoc, wbitefalt, finefalt,
Sel de Lezard, <A medicinable, and able falt,
comming of a Lizard (in Summer) beheaded,bowelled,


be dry, :

Sel marin, Salt made of fea-waters or, ouf ordinarie

eq falt. pS bie
Sel mineral. as Sel gemmé; (and yet one kind of it,
gotten in the Countie of Tirolis, neitber fines, nor is
tran|parent,but refémbles a reddifh Marble.) *-
os anne Niter ; Looke Nitre.

el de pierre. Salt-peeter ; called fo by ifs.

Sel de Poiétou,& de Ponant. AN pre
Sel facerdotal. 4 powder compounded of two ounces
and a balf of Salt, foure ounces of fine (ymamon, A:
meos, Siler Mountaine, Hyfope, wild Marierome, and
Penniroyall,of each halfe an ounce; all dryed togethers
this purges the bodie, confumes flegme, flops the cough,
clenfes the eyes, fiveetens the breath, eafes the teeth,
appeafès headache, preferues youth, and giues vigor to
old age(if (ome Phifitions may be belecued.)" 2%.
Sel sel. An ople that commeth from Hearbe-falt, or
Sel-alcali, frf? calcinated,then beaten to powder and
fer on a peece of glaffe in a moifl cellar. ;
Sel viperin, A medicinable falt, made of aliue Viper,
ordinarie falt, honey, and dry figges,inclofed,and with
fat earth flopped up, in a new earthen pot, and then
baked in a furnace vnto a confiflence of coales, — —

. Efcume de fel. Sea-foame falt ; comes of water left by
atempefluous,and foaming fèa in the holes of rockes,
and there congealed and turned into falt by the Sunne.
Fleur de fel. A brackifh foame or skumme that floates
on Le riner Nilus,and pli ohn 3 of colour yel-
low, fat or oylie of confiftence, and unpleafant in taft ;
the right (for it is often Vopbifticated wth a kind of ved
earth) cannot be refolued but in oyle;the falfé one melts,


~ and loofes colourjinwater, =
ie colour which talieth


* Violerde fel. A certaine
Bike to LaFleurdefel. ©
+ Doux de el, 4 frefh-man, fhallow,vnaduiféd,of little
experience, a nouice,one thats not acquainted with the
courfe of the world, ;
Sans fel. Frefh, unfanorie, vnféafoned, foolifh, idle,
without grace, eo
Manger à vn grain de fel. Seeke Manger.
Prendrefon fLro take his liquor foundly, © "=:
C’eft yn banquet de diables ow il n’y a point de
fel: Pro. The fea/t that wanteth [alt is fit for deuills.
Qui envoye chetif à la meril n'enrapporte poiflon,
ne fel: Pro. i A knaue (or a foole) either |
loofe5,or gaines but à little.
Alight,white,and tran{pzrent fione, eafily cleft
into thin whereof the Arabians, among whom it À-
rowes make their glafe,and glafen windowes,
Sclerin. Locke Célerin, | ds
Selle: €. Afaddle. Gale’
Cheval entre deux felles. À borfe of a middle fixe.
Selle: f. A floolesor feat ; (any ilifzvored, ordinarie, or
®_ countrey floole, of a cheaper fort then the ioyned, or
buffet-floole;) alfoya (purgatine) fioole,or the excrement
- voided at a ftoole. ;


Selle percée, A chaire of eafement,a clofe lool ü
Selle


Original-from


S:EiM


Selle à ribauldes,ou à ricaldes. Cuck-floale, 2
Affis entre deux felles le cul à verre; &, Il eft de
(4 “ meuré entre deux {elles à cerre.Betweene two flooles |
i the a fe goes tothe ground (fay we.)

Seller. To faddleyas.a horfi,&c.


Sellette: F, A foot-fivoleser low floole; alfo,a pad,or fad~_


14 dle for à Cart-horfe.

Sellier: m.A Sudler; ; (teamed alfo,Sellier lormier,be-
cauji he may vent, or deale for, all kind of Spurriers
ware.)

Selon, As,even 45, according unto; in the opinion like to

the faflsonyafier the rate,or manner sof:

Selfir. The rotting Serpent Seps.

| Semaille : f Seed, fowne ; alfo, a crop,or plants, come up
of feed  alfo,a fawing ; alfa, Sowing or feeding times al-
fo, Goffimeare or the Cobweb-like exhalations that float
da the ayre during hot, and open weather ; (In which
fence as alf in fome of the otber tls word i is ufed plu-

rally.)
Droles d'avoine. The fied-time for Oates, begin-
aeth about the 1§-0f March,
Semailles de febves, About the 26 of Februarie.
Semailles de froment, About the 3 of October.
Seinailles d'or ges. About the 5 of April,
Seinailles de pois. About the 3 of March.
Sernailles de feigles. Aye, feed. -time,is about the 18 of

. September,

Seinaine =f, A weeke.

‘Elle a fa male femaine. She bath her flowers,

Semainier; m. One that workes, or does ought, by the

|. meeke,

: Semainier: m. ere: f. Weeelieeuerie wecke,of or be-

“longing to a weeke.

Semaifes: f. Great woodden Far SES of which the Ger-
mans fill their glafses at meale-times. :

Semaifon. as Semaille.

Seinantierc. (7 fed in fome countries fr Cemetiere) a
Churchyard,

Semblable: com, Semblable like alike, fucb,euen fuch,
refembling according unto.

_ Chafeun cerche fon femblable: :Prow Like will to
like; all men a make defire.
ablement. Semblably, likewife, in n Like fort, in
- fich fafbion,afier the fame manner ,alfo,euen fo.

LA ance: fi Afémblance, fhew, feeming,apparance ;

alfo, refemblance, likene[fe, like forme, alike feature,
Ans gs or fafhion.

lance montre folle cuidance:
Pr A prone Looke fhewes the heart's poffelt with


Ru ant; m. 4 foem, feeming, femblance, apparance,
. epuntenance.
Faire femblant. Te feeme,or make as if; Faire fem
blant de. To take notice,or be fencible,ef-
Seumblés Seemed mode foew of


or ua that opinion eue from the be:


seiner To seme 07 take fhew of; alfasto resemble,
Ime; Me thinks, it feemes ta me, F am of
aduife,or opinign,t PRESENT

Semé: m. ée: £ Saveedl or farone ; allo, powdered, fet
tncke,or conered all ower vith ; alfo, fpread, or publi-


abroad.
Se femé. ‘Thinne-(et, or fone ; rare, i =
f{earce.
_ Tee de cesé-bien femée, AStags ined
Ce it eles ak {crotchers on both,


*
Il ¢a-ainG femblé du commencement. Thox |


S:E: M


Qui a femé ces paroles ? whence comes this rumor,
who began or broached it,who was the author of u?
Semeler, To fale a fhao,erc.
aan f The fole of a faoo; alfo, a foot in the meafic-
a leape,
Tufques à la femelle du pied feulement. Sba
ightly,but a verie al es nth
emelles, & du vin paffent chemins Prov. Wine is
the footmans caroche ; a firong foot, anda light bead
vid way apace.
Semence: f, Seed; alfo, fécdiug or fawing time ; alfi, a
Sowing of feed; alfa, the feed, Gece mature of man |
or beaft ; and hence, the seras s beginning, chiefe
root, principall author, of : ous alfo,any thing that
but fmall, or by reafon there but nally accounted


Semence fainête. wormefeed, ae
Telle femence telle moiflon: mia pue bow ou
fow fo fall you reape.
mencé: m. é¢: f. 4s Semé.
Semencier: m, ere: f Of feed, containing feed, 4
Sementine: f. Acertaime Peare fo called, bref à its ‘gh
alwaies ripe about feeding time.
Semer. To fom; 10 fet 5to powder , or couer ouer |
ae 3 alfa, to fpread or difperfe, to dinulge or publifo
abroad. ]
Semer vn grain d'orge pour attraper va pigeon.
Looke Orge.
Semer guerre. To raife,moue, flirre vp, giue occafion
of, warre.
Semer des rofes aux pourceaux.Tofvew pearles be-
fore Swine,
ee fee les bleds à l'avanture: Pro, Locke Bled.
Qui peu feme peuprend: Pro. Litile fo little mow,
Semeftre : m. 4 tearme of fix monthess( This word pro |
perly belongs to she Parliament of Britaine, balfe the
Judges, and. Officers whereof doe fit, and attend par
prepa Wiz. 7 fix rire) ; which eden, te I;
other halfe fuccced, for as long. in their places
Semeltre : com. Ofor Pai tyra à . we Sie
luges femeftres, Such as attend but euerie Bent &:
Tearme,or fit but euerie otherhalfeyeare. + 12 À
Seapets mz A fower ; fetter, planter 5 author, begin- A


Setnidroict: m, Ba/e,or low Furifdittion.
ant: m.ante:f. Wantonly vnquiet, or flirring
euer ss Dia aE or frigging; foalifoly relefegor
remouing from place to place, |
Semillon: £ Aenion firing or rs ruée
figging, fidging,or frigging. 5e 2


CD RE Re t


oan males £ Of, fred. NE 2 ye |
ue RP 2 Pie ES a
wheat,minifredby Phifitions in Panadoes & brotbes ;
ne feldome times ufed in bread; ne
Semoñce:£.4 bidding ltingiings ge marin,
citation, fummons... pre
Semoncer. as Sem Seraondre, ae +
Semondre. To bb ties immense,
cite.


Semanneur; m. 4 Summon er Ararites ae 1

\ingitor or bidder of guefis..

Semoule. as Semole ; meh re wheat shats by
meale and flower, or hath onely the conte 4
fifted fromit.


Sempervive: in Hl Smee :)
Sempervive maieur, Gr i ae 1


S E N


je, Jupiter beard, Fupiters eye.
Sempervive marin. Hearbe Aloes, fea Houfeleeke,
Sea Aigreene.
Sernpervive mineur. Prickmadam. À
Sempervive fauvage. Spanifh Orpine , Orpine of
Fe i i capo? Orpine. :
iternel: m.elle: £ es tos rt , immortali,euer-
leling, perpetuall,continuall aye-during.
Sempiterneux : m.eufe: f The fame.
Vicille {empiterneute. An euerlafiing Hag, a tough
or toothleffe trot. ”
Sen deflüs deflous, Topfie turuie,upfide downe,
Senacle, A beight,or lorie in a building.
Senat:m,. A Senator Counfell of Citizens.
na m. A Senator, or common Counfellor in a Ci-


AIS


v


FAT m. À knaue,raftall,varlet;alfo,a craftie lacke;
or a rich micher,a rich man that pretends bimfelfe to be
verie poore.

Sené: m. A Synod, or Affemblie of Curates before their
Ordinarie,or Diocefan.
Bon gré é mal gré va le preftre au fené: Pro. As un-
der Gré.

Sené: m, Sene ; a little purgatiue fhrubor plant.
Sené d'Alexandrie. Sene of Alexandria ; the beft
kind of Sene.

Senecon:'m, The bearbe Groundfell.

Grand fenegoa Great Groundfell; bath a flaulke

* two foot high, and furnifhed with rough, deepe-tagged,

sited vine ae lefe Groundfell ; ds ordi
etit {ene The lefe Grow erards ordi.

narie,and Path leek Groundfell. a

ehedette:£ A kind of great Wball, which from the
_ top of her bead fpowts a huge quest of water.
Senegrésm: The bearbe,or feed Fenegrecke.
Senelles: £. Heps,or Hawthorne berries.
Sener. To gueld,or [pay a young Bore,erc.
: Senes. Twelue,or two fixes at dice, &Rab.
Senefchal: m. A Senefchall ; the Prefect, or Prefident,
the chiefe luflice,or Magifirate,of. a precinét;and of the
fame authoritie thats eniayed by the Bailli, from whom
| be differs in nothing but in name ; yet ram it
» ~ feemeshe (being in diners places onely a Iudge to
| Bas luficier) was little otber,or better, then the
ard of a particular Mannor.
‘Legrand Senefchal de France. Sowa Le grand
“Maiftre called'in old time.
| Senefchauflée: f. A Sene[challfbip ; the Iurifdiétion of
: > aSenefeball, or the precinét within which begouernes.
‘ Seneffon. Looke Senegon.
|e ote come Sinifter 5 lefts (vobence, La main fe~


nb, dat. à ‘de


FR À


_: tard is made; 5 alfo,the beaïbe that beares it.


al
aa LA = VIEN
| 2 nr Vs


_ Go gle


Sen &&
Sc.) (Sent tif: m. jue: f, Senplies, fencible, fem
| | never odufterd feed,or Senuie feed, whereof muf> |


“Senevé blanc: Common Senuie, field Muflard; beaves
|e ae awhite Sowers: and a blackifb, or
Ss jen véde Tardin, Common Senuie Muptard.
Senevé iaulne. white Muflard, ie lace ie}
a 3 yeelds a yellow fantia


| ec


S' EAN


Sengloter. Looke Senglouter.

Sengloteur: m. Onethat hath the bickocke; a yexer.

Senglout. Looke Senglot.

Senglouter. To yex,or bane the bickocke.

Senicle. as Sanicle; al/o,the little Siskin (bird.)

Senné. The purging plant Sene.

Senné de Levant, Sene of the Eaft, Leuant Sene,the
beft kind of Sene.

Sens:m.Seace,wit conceit apprebenfion,underflanding ,
indgement,reafon, knowledge opinion, thougbt;alfo,na-
turall fence, or feeling ; anda fence, or one of t the fine
Stnces; alfo,the fence,meaning,or confiruttion of awri- |
ting,crc.

Dents de fens, The tenne iaw teeth.
Os du fens commun. The forbead bone.
Sens devant, & fens derriere, Rab. wberein this
word either fignifies,a {melt ; or (Imperatinel,of Sen-
tir,) finell; or equinocates with Cent,a bundred,
‘A tous fens.Euerie way, by all wayes or meanes,in a-
ny cafe,whatfdeuer come of it.
Entous fens, Euerie way, to all purpofes, howfoewer
Jou take it.
En tous les deux fens, On both fides both wayes,
Cela eft bon fens à eux. That is wifely done of them,
or turnes greatly to their aduantage ; and, Ex eft bon
fens à eux de. And their beft,or Safef course is or, it
is wifely done of them,to, |
l'y mettray tous mes cing fens. 1 will implay my beft ||
indeuors in the matter. |
‘A vn fol avantureux n’eft meftier d'avoir fens:


Prov. A foole that is aduenturous needes not to looke À :


about bim, "°°
En amour eft folie, & fens: Prov. Loue is both fond, |
and wiltie ; in loue’s both folie,and wit. {
En petite tefte gift grand fens: Pro. within a litle
skonce,great ski
Il eft bien fol qui à fol fens demande: Pro.He that.

peer a wife hart from a foole, à the more forte a the
two,
Nul n’a trop nmi ay defens a
~ perfor ape wine vfè bath excefie ae on

ome,


Qui pe "ie perd le fens? Prov. Looke under .


sens (Averb. } fens deffous deflus. vo e4 varfie,top- |
fie turuie,top ouer tayle, upfide downe
ue devant derriere, “Prepfleroufys or, as vader |


Senfibles scaly Sensible feeling, palpable; paffonate at;
wbichis,or may be, felt.


fiblement. Sencibly, palpably, feelingly.


fe be À fa
je


re PAS ipiterifeoiahe’
pleafing of So omen anil to the appetite,fa-


tothe
Que s'enfuit il ? what of that ? what makes
“matter? what lowes or comes of it ?
» Senting > finelling, venting , win-


di
es aes fon aller de pis en pis.Seeing be went worfe
and worfe..
Sentant fon coeur. See Coeur.
Sente: f. A bollow patb,anarror (and well been
Looke Sencier.


: >


It mar- 4


S EN


Sentement: m. 4 feelings a fearing, fmelling,veming,

winding; t muouring.

Sentence: if. A fentence, or pithie faying; alfo, a fen-
tence, decree, buslgement, order, oraward of a Court,
alfo,an opinion delmered,or aduife giucn,inamatter.
De fol luge breve fentence: Prov. The foole bath

quickly vrteved hsthoughts ; or the fooles award is gi-
ucn in few words.

Sententier. To fenteuce, ddiudge, order, decree,con-
demne ; to gine fentence deliner bis epinion, pronounce
an award.

Sententieufement. Senatentioufly, pitbily, grawely,
worfely.

Senteutieux: metfes serrage ete
thie, folde, full of matter, aig An

Senteur: f. Sentjodorsfme

Sentier: m. 4 path, or way, Fe a prettie breadth ;
wheace;

Sentier de Boallenais. 1s, by the cuflomes of that
place,to be fine foot broad.  :
? Der de Bourgongne. Js to be foure foot and 4


Sentier de Clermont, & de Vallois « Is, by the cf
tomes of thofe:places,to be foure foot broad,
| Sentier: m. ere: f. Oforimt,a path.
Sentiment: m. as Sentement.
Es of. The fake of a fbip,@rc
tine mere. À tittle Salt- poat,or Barke.
Sentinelle: f A Sentinel, or Semirie;.a common foul-
dior Repainies to fland , and watch in a certaine


Bec @ Abawd,
Lever de fentinelle, To relieue, withdraw, or take
off,a Sentinell ; salle remoue, or diflodge.

Sentir. Tofeele; “alfosto feht, fimelisvent, wind ; alfo, to
taf} or fauor ; “alfoste beare 3 alfa, to yeeld a fent, fa-
wor, or taf} ; or to fent, fauor, or taf, of; tohayea
maken or Spice
Sentir fon bien, Cela fent fon bien. Thats comelie,
feemelie,orderliesor as it fhould be.

Sentir vn peu de boire, To be a little cupfbotten.
Sentir fon Mardi-gras. Cela fent fon &c ; i -verie
À ag 4 handled, or uttered.
Sentir la marée. To-tookelike awhare,. : :
di app à 7 703 To be of theeld fampe; to
Ufêsar be in,an
» Sentir fa an &fa petite ville: See Ville.
Teme fens decetre cheute. 7 fmart,or am the worfe,
fe F feele to my paine, or lams-yet fencible of, this


Scies . he fei vera, gere of feeling,


Sinellin

Sentrille: 'f kindof feflesater ter fife

Séoir. To fit; Se feoir. To fit himdowne.
Il fe peut feoir fans contredit qui femet là ou fon
_ hofte luy dit: Prove Heneeds mot feareto bechidden


he rsbidden;( The like iss)
“ite ien feoir à table quand le maiftre luy
‘com #Proy, Well may be fit bim
be that may [ets dewne.


S de Ter facet, eines alm Bfallon


Es Liege le fep le vig +4
En av. 0 op tbe Vine, there will
be à great deart
Se Dre f as Lee salés baulkejer disifon
Separation: :É£4 rE fepenatin,fenerepgacdersng don,


nc


Go gle:


§ BP


sini diuorce ; je renting, parting, or patting a-


Separatoire: m. 4 féperatories the chizell or Fofira

et wherewith Surgeons cut out the peeces of bones

ie becwmeene the boles which they baue bored aaah a
repan,

Separé: m. éc : € Seperated, feuered,

Separément. Seperately, feuerally, afunder,

Separer. To feperate, fèuer, part, fimder, disiayne, di-
uide,vatwine;diuorce difunite, put afwader.

Sepe: m. The Seps; a broad-headed,and fharp- mouthed
serpent (of many colours, and about two cubites in
length) which rots the bodie he bites,

ye on. mete fs\a
Sepmaine:, £ Looke Semaine,

Sepinainier : m. as Dommas

:m.cre: f. Weekelie each weeke sof or ina
weeke.

Sept. Seaen,

Scptaine : f. The precin£t, bounds, or erties: v. a
Towne ; the compaffe of ground, or circuit of ee
trey, fubieë unto the luri(dition thereof.

Septante. Seventie,threefcore and tenne.

Septantiefine, he fewentieth,

Septembre, ithe month of September.

Le flot de i The great Spring: tydes of ur
Autumne Equinottiall,
Purée de Septembre. wine.
Septembrin: m. ine: f, Ofor in,September.
Liqueur feptembrine. wine.

Septenaire: m. A feuenth, a proportion of feuen, the
number of fewen.

Septenaire: com, Contaiving feuen,in, of,or belonging
to, feuen,
es les chainons feptenaires. fu euerie i
JRC.

Septentrion: m. The North. UD.

EN ne «eq male: f Noraberlie of or inte


Septerée:f. 4 Septier fül of orjas Sefterée.
ne & Septi¢mement. Looke Septiefime. °
Septier : m. A certaine Meafire.s.0f ufe for divers
, and thereby of diuers fixes; (One, being the.
lea | and ufed by Phifitions, comes but to three unes
in weight.)
d'avoine, The Septier af at coining 20
Se nical. be S fe (
ier ni mars Pa corne m (vii,
“ a Barlie) containes in moft
tmelue Roifleaux, vee the craft part.o a Muidesln
= weight it comes 40 220 5 but
nere upon Liuie makes that the seighe nel of
and fayes, that the Septier of wheat weighs 249
pounds. ore sy RGO Foy vom 192


eae
tier oulins, com-
to 16 Boïfieaux. Soi was A
Se jer de terre, Is much chat he pen. 24
er de vin, Coutaines eight pints. : HÉAO
Demi t tier de bled, Containeth fi Boileau.
Demi de vin. er ira te ten |
or a guarter of che French pint. 192687 2

Septicl ne. The feuenth, ts

Senen


Ep me cpm. of fen a or at fac,


Sepia 2 pu Septenaire. scans


Si Ei Q


S EiR


. corrofinesraifing blifters on the skin. ©
Seprirag e, Louke Suragé,
Septtiagchaire: com: Threefcore ana denne. i year


cpeciican The ioint rule , goochmamity or authoritie of


Seuen men.
Septuple: com, Seuen-folds
Sepulchral: m. ale: Sepulchrall of, or jn, a put
chers"
SRE mm, A maker of fepulchers,
Sepulchre: m. 4 fépulcher, tombe, grane, or vault to
lay dead coarfes in,
Cheval courant eft vn fepulchre ouvert : Prov. 4
running we is an open fepulcher.
— Iturable : com. Buriable; readie,or fit,to be buri-


Sepblture: £Scpulture; a burying intombing jnterring,
laying ina graue or in the ground.

Sepulturer. To burie,intombe,interre;lay in the ground,
or intoa graue.

Sequele: £.4 fequele, flowing ,or confequence,the ifque
or fuccefe of athing ; alfo, a great mans trayne or fol-
lowers.

La fequele au robon. Looke Robon.

Sequence: £ 4 fequence at Cards; alfoya certaine game

that flandeth much onfequences,

Sequences: f. Anfivering verfes,or yas s s whereto an-
swer is made,in the Mal.

Sequenie: f. A fiocke er loo/é zacket. of canuas open be-
foe, and worne h Porters, des over the refi LA their

“happarrell. 1e

Seductt, m, ente: f. Sequent, following,

eftration: £4 fequeftration ; the delinerie of a liz
a em thing into the hands of a third indifferent man;
& Ory the feperating of it from the poffeffion of thofe that
contend for it ; (of two forts.)
Sequeftration iudicisire, ou neceflaire, Which 2B
snl dmnpofed bythe fentence,or authoritie of a ludges
Sequeftration volontaire. Agreed on by mutual!
consent of the parties in controuerfic: (There bealfoc
therkinds of. Sequefication dun, as well as in
: Controuerted,cafes, )

Sequeltre: M. eue whofe bands: a thing à fou

a2 red: 18 vs {

Sequeftré: m.ée: cE Sequefired.

+. Tofeyuefter; or Ly afidésto put into ain


different gat re Fete ca
x mm, À talian coyne worth about 10 Qua-
SR mere =
shérèech Powe fo ed AT tof wi sui
inant: miThe fweet- pen Rufhearmed ie
oem


Ww Sbqre 4 yat. ï
rt montain. Siler Mountaine,baflard Loueage, =."
craintes mi tone


be fad boots ae te fiber sal cu.


a b, ait see! ati Th oitersh +5 30 1
5 ne


\ Asie: Wo hold sh 19/75) 54
edor


To re def on


MT à comb of


a 2 mr


| Serfouëtt
aad


Angell; alfo,akind of Limbech, = 0 38 a


Seraphique: coms ere paire épie Scrap;


also, firie, or bur
| Seraphifer. 70 fanéti és confecrate extol, “ete to
the heauens,
Serapin. as Sagapen. *
Serargent. (47 allufion to Sergent) a raped
penny- y filuer-hider ,money-boorder !
Serat. Lai& ferat, Mitke boyled with Garlick, and@-
ayons, and much vfèd in Normandie ; alfo, fowre,or
Sowred milke.


"i


Serbataine. Locke Sarbataine. 7: 127
 Serbin : m. The crimfomor pricklie Cedar; 5 alfo,t theme


fin that ifueth from the great Cedar,

Sercifi: m, The delicate root of the bearb called Goits-
beard,Starre of lerufalem,Noonetyde end Goe-10-béd.
‘at-noone, :

Sercler, & Sercleur. Looke Sarcler, 8 Sarcleur.

Sercleure: f. A farcling; or weeding?

Sercueil. as Cercueil.


Serée: f An evening, e
an euenings PE pets 6; in i a 23


ping,or goodfellovw-like meeting of neighbours(this bt
at one, thatat another, of their MES: whereto
one brings,or fends bis difb.

—_ m. Looke Serain.

erein: m.eine: f,. Bright, faire, cee ec 4

gentle mild, tO at pa eu er se en
Sant, gracious,

Sereine: f. A Mermaid.

Sereiner. To cleere, 48 Dore Avi, looke cheere-
sr li bifome or pleafant $ ne calme, quiet,
pacifie

Serenade, €) f. Eucning Muficke played.at the doreor-un-
der the window of a louelié,or beloued creature. + €
Serenade d’efprit. Tranquilitie of iit vist

Sereñcer, Looke Serancer, . 2


: | Serene: f. 4 Syren,or Mermaid,”


Serene. La goutte lerene.Bindse for i a
a of Pr, caufed by: ebaslterstion w ox 1 à À the


Sereningek enenise reef frie ri bn
Pen Rutty

Serennade: &\Looke Serenade © 21

Sereux : mveuferf: ie man as L-
uing the ry Seman stheenening. |

Serf m. 4 feruitor, 3 or (moft pro-
perlÿ}a ;flane, QUE Se

© to,or bafe attendant onjanotber: \


Serfs fonciers. Looke Foncier.
. Serfs piffeniez; "rhe baflards of ees villes
Sufoët: 1. win bool ideo fll
erfoét: m. A weedi oF bain
Serfoiié: m. éerf. ms needed; grubbed or cus vp with a
Dhs oh "ees eel Bes ET SI


cru rome weeds.’ og


aon of blacke ssi which thus: eure
1
Serge: ft


‘Thelfiaffe called Serge. >: aps, wi am
Ser cant: m. A Sergeant; Looke Sofiemist
tonnclier, ‘hé Coopers Lelfes: an Gres
which hevleth in the hoopingnf Caikes |


Sergent Sergeanterie.beage oeil Ser-
genterie


canteux: m. eufe: Ser, liter fnga Ser-
| Sten aa trs


SER


SER


Seruice which,in our Lawyis tearmed Grand, or Petit
Sergeantie.

> 0e ie Sergentife.as Sergenterie(in the former

eri: m.ie:£, Quiet, mild,calme, fill; faire,cleere.

Pye The fame; whence,Car le iour eft feriau. The
Burden of a certaine Chriflmas Caroll. €Rab,

Serie: £ The ene of a holie day; alfo,the euening,or eue-
ning-tide.

: m, (An'old word;) fouldiors that ferued on

ot


Sergeantife: f. Looke Sergentife. nyt
Sergent: m. A Sergeant, Officer,Catchpole,Purfiyuant,
bparitor ; alfo (in old French) a footman, or fouldior
that fèrues on foot.
: Sergent d'armes. A Sergeant at Armes ; one of thofe
which wait on the King.
Sergent baftonnier. An ordinarie Sergeant , or
Catchpole in an incorporate Towne. ;
Sergent blavier. as Sergent Meflier,ou Meflilier.
Scrgens à cheval. Were, in old time, certaine bor{e-
men inferior to Les Efcuyers, and feruing for pay in
the warres : Now they are officers that ride through all
the villages, and fields of the Reflort, or Baillage,
whereto they belong; therein arreflivg, and doing {uch
other offices, as are performed by the Sergents à pied
within the principall towne,and the liberties thereof.
Sergent chevaucheur.A certaine officer in forrefis.
Sergens dangercux. Looke Dangereux.
Sergent delefpée, Doit tenir les veuës,bailler les
aflignations, faire les femonces & les commande-
mens des affifes,& faire tenir ce qu'y eft iugé,& de-
Jivrer par droiét les Namps qui font prins, & iufti-
cier à l'efpéc & aux armes les malfaicteurs, & fugi-
tifs. €Ragueau,
Sergent feodé, ficffé,ou du fief. 4 hereditarie Ser-
geant ; hath fome kind of Lurifdittion for the recouerie
of the Cens, Rents, Duties,Cuftomes, Royalties, or féo-
dall Rights, belonging to the Lord of the Seigniorie
wherein be refides; and may nominate,and appoint one
under-Sergeant (and in (ome places more) to affift,and
attend bim,
Sergent fermier, One that hath farmed the office of a
Sergeant (which he 1 forbidden to doe by the Law.)
Sergens foreftiers, Officers that may of themfèlues
arre(t the perfons, and feixe the goods, of (uch as waft,


Serieufement, Serioufly,verie earneflly.

Serin: m. A little finging bird of a light-greene colour,
and verie like the Canarie bird other waies; whence ;
Serin de Canarie, The Canarie bird,

Serin: m, ine: f. Silkie ; aifo, as Serein.

Seringue: f. A Siringe,or Squirt.

Seringuement: m. A4 fquirting ; an inielling, or pur
ting of liquor by a Siringe,

Seringuer, To /quirt.

Seriphie: £.Sea-Wormewood,called by fame of our coun-
trey-women, garden Cyprefe. k

Serment: m, 42 oath; alfo,as Sarment.

Serment de calomnie; &, fer, de fidelité, See Ca-
lomnie,& Fidelité,

Par monferment. By my truth, by the faith F owe to
God ; or,by the oath F haue taken.

Sermenteux. Looke Sarmenteux.

Sermon: m. 4 Sermon,or preaching ; an Harang,or O.
rationynadevnto the people.

Sermonner: To preach, to make a Sermon,

Sermonneur: m, À Sermon-maker,a Preacher.

Sermontain: m. Siler Mountaine,baflard Loueage, À

Serofité: f. Serofitie; the waterifline[fe,or thinner parts
of the mafe of blond ( anfiwering to whay in mule)


ee eee ee


Éd AT TR À és ay


À or make bauocke of the Kings woods : Of thefe there which floates vpon it after it hath beene let out of a
| are two forts ; Les ôrdinaires,whofewalkes are limit- veine; alfo, the wheyifh, or waterifh moiflure dravone
Va ted; & les traverfiers, which raunge all oner the for- by the kidneyes from all parts of the bodie, and after
à ut refl; Looke Traverfer. Sime concoËtion tearmed, Vrine,


Sergent franc. Looke under Franc.
Sergents à mafle d'argent. Sergeants of the Mace:
Ce sont Huifliers de Ja Chambre du Confeil, ou
Audience,en Hainaut.
Sergent meffier,ou meffilier. 4# officer that lookes
unto Corne-grounds,and Vineyards,untill baruefi,and
Vintage be fully paf.
Sergens à pied. The ordinarie Sergeants of a good
towne, within which, or the a, eu A not
el arrefi,drc,and are to refide.

ame re officer that keeps,and looks un-
pn Sc for the prefèruation of the bay,and graffe
thereof,
Sergent de querelle. Qui fervoit au fai& des duels,
ou pour les differents des parties: (But this officer is
mow out of date.) |
Sergenttraverfer, Looke Traverfer.
Sergent à verge. Az ordinarie Catchpole in @ good
Towne ; alfosa royall Vfher,or Sergent, who arrefin
drc,within bis circuit,ought to carrie in bis haxd a rod,
or fmall Mace, and therewith to touch him whom be
doth pu :

Sergentaillerie:f. Lafer. Sergeants, Officers, Catch-

poles; or a companie of them.

Sergenter. To arreft, attache, or fammon ; to play the
Sergeant any way. ; ae ;

| Sergenterie: £.4 Sergeanifhip; the office,place,or dutie
of a Sergeant; af (i the cuflomes of Normandie) a
kind of fief without Court, or Furifdittion ; or, that


Serourge: m. 4 brother in law ; one that bath marri-
ed a mans ovwne,or bis wines, fijter.

Serpaut: m.Marriage-good ; tbe apparrell,beds, coffers,
veffell, cattell, or other honfehold-fluffe, or moneables

_whatfèeuer, ginen in marriage with a fonne daughter,
or confin. :

Serpe: f. Looke Sarpe.

Serpé: m. ée: £ Towed off ground, fet afloat, as a fhip
th an anchor, or great booke ; alfo, weighed, as an an:
chor.

Serpeger. To wind, or crankle in and out;towane,wag-
gle;wrigle,writhe,or to goe wauing,ercylike a ferpent.

Serpcillere, Looke Serpillere. ;

Serpent: m. A Serpentsa venomous, or poifonous (and

footleffe) vermine; alfo,the male Lamprey.

Serpent cornu. The Serpent Cerafles, r the horned

Serpent ; See Cornu, :
ent marin. The fea (erpent, refembles a Congar,

but hath a fharper beake, or nofe, wherewith he fud-

dainely hides himfelfe in the fand. :

* Ailde ferpent. wild Garlick, Snakes Garlick,
Herbe aux see Vipers bearbe,Snakes Buglofe,
Il faut tirer le ferpent du buiffon par la main d'au-
truy: Pro. He that will fafély live, muft fhift off dan-

gers to others; or dangers cannot be furmounted with.
out helpes : de
Serpentaire: € The hearbe Dragons,or Dragonwort,
Serpentaire aquatique, ou d'eau. Water Dragons,
water Dragonwort, tis? G's aay
Dddd — Ser=


+e


fe fia
~_——_—_—s e eaoararaeaerere
| S E.R $i ‘Be Rs
qe AT ahi
Serpentaire mafle des Officines. Snakeweed, Bri- Serrant: m, À Greene-finch.
tannica,Biflort. s Serrant: m. ante: f. Shurting,or locking,vp.
Grande ferpentaire. Great Dragons or Dragon- Serratan, Looke Serran.
wort; the ordinarie Dragonwort, Serratil: m.ile: £ Clofing,or Shutting vp clofe together.
Petite ferpentaire. Small Dragons; an bearbe like | Serre: f. A Hawkes tallon; alfo,a firait,or narrow pinch; |
Wake-Robin in all points faue it (pots, which are alfo,a (ave; alfo,the wild Fitch.
white, \ ‘ Serres. À Hawkes talons ; alfo,wild Fitches ; alfo,the
Serpentant: m. ante: f. Crankling,wrigling wigling, thicke boords whereby the infide of the Varengues af |
crooking winding making many turnes, \ a fhip are faflened, and held in.
Serpente: f. A Serpent. Tenir en fèrre. To reftr aine,or hold in fubiection.
Faire la ferpente. as Serpenter. Serre: com.Clofe; whence, Tenir ferre; to hold himfelfe |
Serpenté.wngled,cranckled,wrytbed,turned or wound |  clofè,to reftraine,or keepein,bimfelfe.
in and out. Serré: m. éc:f. Clofed, compaëled, contraëted, thruft
Serpenteau: m, A little ferpent. up together, clapped or put neere unto; reftrained ;
Serpenter. Ta wiigle wagle,cranckle,wrythe,tarne or firaitned ; hard wrung or preffed; faft locked, fhut or
à wind often in and out. f st ot Up.
erpentin: m. The upper part of fome Limbecks,made erré de douleurs. whofe beart is or oppre ed.
be, and wreathed tke a ferpent ; alfo,the cocke of an with griefe. : <a
| Harquebuze. . | Serré. {in flead of Serrément; whence,) Dormir fort
| Serpentin: m. inc: f. Of a ferpent, like a ferpent, long ferré. To fleepe verie foundly. £
| and wreathed as aférpent. , Serre. (Of the Verbe Serrer;) the word whereby fouldi-
- Ail ferpentin. Saakes Garlick,wild Garlick. ors ave warned to clofe themfelues, or draw neere to-~
| Marbre ferpentin. 4 darke-greene Marble, full of gether.
¥ light-grecne (pots. Serrecropiere. Le leu de fer. The clofe-buttock play;
Pierre ferpentine. Looke Pierre. lecherie. .
4 Serpentine: f. 4 kind of Limbecke, or as Serpentin; | Serre-front: m.4 head-band,forbead-band,or forbead-
4 alfa,as Serpentaire; alfo, the Artillerie called a Ser- cloth. . \
: peniine or Bafilukoe, erremént:m. A clofiag, compacting, preffing, hard-
d Petite ferpentine. Small Dragons ; alfo, Cucko-pint, thrufling together ; PIE i 1 OUR jre-


Wake-Robin,Calues-foot.

Serpet. To tow a fhip off ground, or fet ber afloat by a
great booke, or ankor faftened unto another fhip thats
under fayle. ‘
Serper l'ancre. To weigh ankor.

Serpette:f. À Vine-knifé, or Gardeners knife; a verie
small hedging,or lopping, bill. Hs
Serpigine: £ Arednefie of the skin,accompanied with
pujbes,and wheales. ;
| Serpiller. To packe up in Canuas cc ; alfo, t0 gleane af-
ter Grape-gatherers, or cut away from the Vine all the

grapes they baue left behind them. 4

Serpillere:f. À Sarpler, or Sarp-cloth; a piece of courfe
Canuas to packe up things in; alfo, the courfe Canuas
apron of a Grocer , Chaundler, Painter , Dawber,

Ob. ; F
Serpillette: f. À finall Vine-booke, or Gardeners boo-
ked nif

Serpillon. a Serpette.: sid

Serpillonnette.as Serpillerte ; or a verie fall one.

let: m. ‘Running Time,wild Time,creeping Time,
mother of Time , Pultall mountaine , our Ladies Bed-
flraw.


the one bearing a porte ar ‘ i Sens ge
: rard fhemes us no rt s 0) illum,

all which as be calls wild Times (though with fume
 finall, and different additions fo many hold (fayes Ma-


7


. | » .
ym. The delicate root of the hearbe Goats-


thiols) that euerie- ‘is wild:) Some alfo
| tearme Water-mint,and otbers Balfamint, Serpolet


Serpolet fauvage. Wild creeping Time; of two kinds,


firaining.
Serrément. Clofely, firaitly, narrowly, neere one to ano-


ther, contrattedly,refirainedly,in a little 100me.

Serre-nappe: f. A cabinet, roome, or cheft for the kee-
king of table-linnen ; alfo, the basket whereinto it is
put up at the taking away.

Serre-poignet: m. A griping clofe-fifl, a conetous or
clofe-handed wretch. f

Serrer. To clofe,compaét,thruft hard, bind faft, force or
preffe neere together ; to locke, flout or put vp, bold or

. keepe {trait ; refiraine ; contract.

Se fetrer. To goe all on a rucke, or gather bimfelfe up
clofe together. '
Serrer le bouton à. To reflraine or keepe fhoït;to hold
a frit or hard hand ouer.
Serrer les ordures. To fweepe together all the featte-
red filth of a floore, : |
Serrer prés, Topreffemigbtily,vrge very much, drive
vaio a narrow firait, pinch, or plunge; purfue verie
neere; alfo,to be mofl earnefl with,or inflant upon,
Qui {gait Part ferre la boutique; &, Qui ne fçait l
art ferre la boutique: Pro. Looke Boutique,

Serres, 2s under Serre.

Serre-tefte: f. 4 border of Goldfiniths worke,cc,worne
by gentlewomen vpon their coifés or DURE 22)

Serreure. Looke Serrure.

Serriette: £. The bearbe Sauorie.

Serrure: f. A locke. sy + 132

~ Remuer les ferrures. Toplaytbe Polypragmon,er bu-
fie companion.

- Contre coignée ferrure ne peut: Prov. Ne lockes
bold out againft an yron axe;an armed violence forcetb


any thing. > > :
np f, The trade of a Lock-{mith; a making of
pias m, À Lock-finitb. a
Sert: m. The firft courfe,or feruice at Table. >
Serte: f A kind of flat-bottomed boat vfed in old

Ser-


Original from
See OHIO<SFATE.UNIVERSITY
1 ae = te


S E-R


ph : m. Seruitude, flanerie, bondage , thrall-

ome.

Servans: m, 47 Order of blacke Fryers.

Servant: m. ante: fi Seruing attending waiting on,ob-
Seruing obféruant,obfequiors unto; alfo,helping, ftead-
ding,auailing.

Fief fervant. A fief thats held by homage and fealtie,
of a ficf dominant; an inferior,or mefne fief.
Gentilshommes fervans. Gentlemen waiters, thofé
that attend on the King at meale-times.

Tour fervant, & iournée fervante, The day appoin-
ted for the hearing and deciding of a caufe.

Servante: £ Amaid,or woman, feruant (efpecially of a
meane,or inferior,degree.)

Servantin : m. The Sole-fifh tearmed, a kind foole ;
@Marfeillois, © :

Serve. A Stue for fifh; alfo, a Mue for fowle ; alfo, the
hearbe Sage. ;

Servément. Seruilely, by villenage,by a feruile or bafe
tenure, ‘ :

Servi: m. ie: f. Serued,obférued.
Servi de fon homage. That bath receined his bomage
in due time. Y
Entrer de fief fervi. The homage,érc,due by a tenant
at his firft entrie,done well enough by another; as by an
elder brother for a younger ; by a busband for bis wife;
by a guardian for bis pupill,or ward.

Serviable: com, Seruiceable,officious diligent obfequi-


ous From beboofe fill,
Serviablement. Seruiceably ,officioufly ob/équioufly,di-
ligently ; behoofe fully.


wages,or bire for feruice; alfo,dinine feruice,(publi

sd unto almigbtie God; whence; #
a fervice des morts.Dirges, Obits, Trentalls prayers

_ forthe dead.
Service de l’oft. Looke Of, .
Servicede plaids. Apparance made, counfell ginen;
any attendance yeelded, er féruice done, by avaffall in
bis Lords Courts.
Services des vignes. The pathes,or alleyes,which are
made ouerthwart a Vineyard. ;
Cheval defervice, À greathor(e, or borfe of feruice;
due from a vaffall to bis Lord feudal (or sn lieu-of him
60s Tourn: as by'the cuftomes of Orleans, Montar-
gis, Chafteauncuf, Chartres, & Dreux ; or 60s and
a pennie Tourn: by the cuftonies of Le grand Perche;
or 100 s Tourn: as by the cuflomes of Anjou, and
Maine;) And this either once a aLords,or vafeals
lifeor at euerie change of Lord, and vaffall.
Denier de fervice. Looke Denier.
Beau fervice fait amis, & vray dire ennemis : Pro,
Dutifalnefe procureth friends , truth enemies; obfe-
quious attendance winneth loue, true and plaine dea-


ling hate.
Servicial: m, A glifler. |
Serviette: f. Arable napkin. À
Nouër les deux bouts de fa ferviette enfemble.
Seeke Nouër. ~ + ;
Servir. To ferue, attend, wait on,obferue,be obfequious
unto; alfo, to belpe, ead, auaile, affift, fit ones turne,
doc good, be profitable or beboofefull,unto,
"Servir le fief. A man to doe homage, fealtie, and all o-
ther feruices whereto be is tyed by bis tenure,
Servir fon maiftre. To purge, untrufse a point, goe to
the floole. |
* Servir les plaids de fon feigneur, As before, in Sex
__ vice de plaids, i


Go. gle


Service: f. Seruice, attendance; dutie,obedjence ; ae ‘hy


SER


Se fervir de.T0 v/t,occupie make a benefit,or take the
ge of.
Se fervir de routes peaux. as under Peau,
Mal fert qui ne parfert: Pro. He's but an ill feruant
thats not an all-feruant,
Qui fert commun nul ne le paye,& s’il defaut chaf-
cun l'abbaye: Proy, The feruant of a Comminaltie
finds enow to correét his errors but none to reward : 1s
Oui dieuilab |
ui fert dieu il a bon maiftre: Pro. &, Qui F
Roy ila bon maiftre: Pro, Looke Maier voy 1
Aflez demande qui bien fert: Prov. Good fernice,o/
it (elf2,demaunds reward. #
Servis: m. The Cens, and other final yearelie rights,
or duties, payed by the tenants of luhevitances vito
Lord of the foyle,in acknowledgement of bis direét Serg-
niorie,
Serviteur: m.A feruant, eruitor, feruing creature, fer-
uing man; anattendant,or waiter,
Fortune n’efpargne ny ferviteur,ny maiftre: Prov.
looke Fortune.
Servitude:£ Seruitude, flaueriebondage, -
Mieux vaut fervitude en paix que feigneurie en
guerre: Pro, Better be peaces vaffall, then warfares à
marfhal. dE.
Servitute:£ A dutie wherein one peece of ground, and
rs pofeffor thereof, is lyable, or fubie&, unto ano-
er


ther.

Hommesde fervitute. 4 hind of villeins, orférnile

tenants,lyable to their Lords taxations while they line; 2
and when they die, their fonnes muft buy their poffe fix a
ons of bimor elfe he feifes, and holds them; and their


laughters (if they had no fonnes) muft looft the fiyle, 4
eid ee band ad orme ei :


Servivi:m. An aël,or Certificate of the aftuall fern
performed by an officer | who thereupon po De
ue is allowed the priniledges, due unto bis
place. - x

Sery : m. The Shrew-moufé, (Rourguignon, :

em. The oylie pulfe, or graine Sefamum,

Sefamin: m, ine: £ Of Sefamum.

Sefamoide. Baflard woad; an hearbe of two kinds, a
great,and a little one; either of them diuided into two
other kinds;viz. the great one into great bafard Woad,


nd
PO ere D


rm


(4


Lo 2


ET etes re


à


(ge pre GS


and barren weld; and the little one iato {mall baftard
Woad,and Buckhorne Weld which is Mathiolus bis Gr-
tle Sefamoides._
Sefamoïdes, Os {efamoides. Looke Os. me
Sefel, & Sefeli, The bearbe Sefeli, Seféleos, Hart-
wort.
Sefeli de Candie. Se/éleos,or Hartwort of Candia. “iy
Sefeli Ethiopique. Shrub Se/eli, Hartwort of Ethio-
pia. Sega ,
Sefeli de Marfeille. Marfellian Sefèli; large, and
broad Cummin, . à | fon
Sefeli dela Morée. Hartwort of Peloponnefics,
Sefeli Peloponnefien. The fame. aaa
Sefne. The mother of wine; the white or mouldie fpots cu
which float on the top of old wine. ;
Sefqui tere: com, Ove and a balfe,or halfe as much a-
gaine ; as three in refpect of two, crc. tee
Sefquin: m. A kind of bafe coyne.
Sefquitiers: m.erce: £ As much,and a third part more.
Selle: com. Sitting, féeming to fit; eafie to fit on; of a
low flature. : ,
Verruë feffile. A hind of hard, broad, flat,and blackifo
wart. LACS
Dddd ÿ Sef-


| | gee 3
; xe a Sa : Le
SEV | S ;E Xe :


|


En feureté dorr.quin’a dre: Pro. Secure
fleepes be that bath rte v|
n'eft pas en feureté à qui ne Pa, one
qe Prov. He that hath. bad mo ill lucke is in)


Sevronde. Laoke Severonde. a


Sefterce: m. The foarth part of the (auncient) Romane
pennie, worth about three half pence farthing of our
money.

Seheréc de terre. The fourth part of a Saumée ; a
meafure for land, fomewhat lelfe, then. the ordinarie


Arpent.
efticr. Looke Septier. Seurté. Looke Seureté: | SR
. Seftine: € A Seftine,or flanxoof fix verfes. Sexagenaire : com. Threeeoreyeares a Hi


ses m. À fex,or kind.
extaire: m, Anauncient Romane measure containing
fomewhat more then our pint, s :
Sexte: f The third quarter,or fixt boure of’ the artificial |
day, being about noone all the yeare long; eittt. aid


Sete. The Quitter-bone ; Around, and and hard fwelling
upon the Cornet (betweene the beele,andquaiter) of à
borfes foot.

Setier : m. Brifilie,rough,harfh.

Seton: m. A rowell; or the rowelling, or roping of a


bruifed,or flrained horfe. proportion of fixm Mufickeérc. ..

Setton. The fame; alf,as Se&tion. Sextement. Sixtly. ke Be ae a
Setule, Looke Sete. Sexterce,& Sexterée. # Sefterée. 1 2 ‘à
Seu: m. An Elder tree. Sextier. Looke Septier. : |


Seve: £. The fap, inyce, or moiflure of plants; alfo, the
bleeding of aVine. -«

Seucil : m.Thethrefhold of adoore. :

Severe: com. Sexere,auftere, flerne; graue; LOTO;
rough, fharpe,bard; ;itlefe,untraélable,inexor able.

Severement. Seuerely, flernely, rigoroufly ; foarpely,
vatraëtably, pr

Severité: f, Seueritie, ar pne(Je,rigor',aufleritie, fern-

mele fiercenelfe,untraltableneffe; ; grauitie,

Severonde: £ The eaueseauing,or eafing of a houfe..

pie m. eue: £ Sappie inicte, full of naturall moif-


Seuil m. The threfhold of a doore.

Sevir, To rage, or be mad at; to be extreamely angred,
fierteseager ; to torment extreamely, deale moft cruelly
with; to tyrannixe ours

Seul: m. feule:f. Sale, fingle, onely, alone, onely one ;
meere; fingular, feuerall,byitfelfe. à
Homme {eul eft viande aux loups: Proy.The lonelie
man becomes a prey towoluese
Fortune ne vient feule: Prov, One misfortune hales


on another.
Hafte ne vient feule: Pro. Looke Hañè,

Mieux vaut eftre feul que mal accompagné: Pro
® Better alone then in ill companie. Fe


Seule: fA thre alfa, 4 groundfil ;. or
eee of arabes ts compaljes the bat sorte


Seulement. Solely, onely, but, but onely, bit ff a-


Sextule: À réa of foure feruples, or the fra pes |
an ounc
Seyé: mn des £ Réapedior cut,as comme. +
Se le bled. Toreaper et dae cr Or ats ye A - “VIS
Seyette: £ Sergesor Say. b> PTE pile CE:
Seyeur:m. 4 reaper, 140 ;
cu as a Eu, Pr

eux: m.eule: f. S
Sezain: m. Theil, open tern ap,


as ; Aa A Fe
sapiens Sn RATE ae
Seziefme: m. 4 fxteenth; a PPT TE Hg


: Vn fezieme daulne. Three yaches and (as onr Neale

of the yard) the leaft diuifion of the French ell, and the
” deafl.meafure for cloth.
Seziefme: com. The fixteenth in rate umber er :
Shilithoique. Gourte sh. 4 kind of cold Gomt. |
Si,(Sometimes a Subfantine; whence,) Pax vel fi que. |

mie that. perf,

n'a nul fi, He is without fault or defiét, no |

) oS ype es defor-


mitie about
Si. An peastape! fingle,and in anfivere to a negatine
… demaund, or fpeech be shee Is ‘ous n° se Le 3
fait celà ; they anfwer, fi; yes férfootb bane 7, or yes À
«that 7 bawes ta which fences it bath fometimes alfo the: | Se
, eMule of other words; as in: anfwer to one that


"Yer bt cannot, or will not doe that, or st will ay


MORE à Gee


be ; they fay; Vous verrez ¢ efi; you fhall fee


I can or will,or,that it wil, Hout dc. ‘ae
sites der f, Sole ton iin pa Pre ne Ja te a 2 me a fpeechnow and then implies, |
ras en alle ds ees joe telgries auncient Authors) a kind of certaintie,er |
e d'une de fing, auch $y fe. Fiebinccn ceiour mefine que le | —
nn) rem will beare a gare of Hay. ‘heraut ya a ie Ueda it ue the sverie fame.
Elder tree elie dal iy 8 AE day whereon the nest er
Ney AD we m


: ——

| Si. if fobe

| Bee as |
times)a mn ngsor threat


sas ive Example a


v i =
ge aba ea feb j


Si fauril faire cela. That muft needes be dont, orsyou
mul of neceffitie doe it. | a
«Si que.Whereby, fo as in ; - 4
st oa tabel ciel amit

i 4
He bad an excellent nie, ata |


“Il eftoit avant, & fi eftoit vaillant aux armes. He
was both learned audvaliant, or, learned and valiant
withall, or,aot onely learned, but alo valiant,


fance des lettres, He was neither clarke, mor any way
learned.
Quant à &c, le Grec n'a rien de tel, quanta &, fil

à ; oe: The Grecians uf? not oc, but & they furely


sith’ ‘A fon fibi. (as the Latine f ibi.) To bimfelfe.
Sibille:f, 4 ae and tafing difh in the time of Vin-
tage.
1} à le nez rouge comme la fibille d'un prefoir.
(Fitly applyed to a drunkard; one kind of finffe dying
both bis nofe and that difh all of a colour.)

Sibilot. (The name of a foole unto the French Henry
= third ; and thence;) an affe, dowlt, fop, ideot, nin-


| Siboule. as Ciboule,
Sibylle:£ sybill, one of thetenne Sybille, famous in
their times for prophecying ; hence alfo, a Prophetefe,
oe 28 that bath the fpirit of prophe fie ; alfo,as Se-
tie,
Sibyl m. ine: f. Propbecyingsf a Sybilla,or Sybilla-
ike
Sicap. De leur ficap. Of their owne head, after their
owae fancie according to their bumor,
F es f) Siccitie, dryneffe, drought,or drouth, want of
| fap suyce,or moiflure.
Siciliane:Looke Ceciliane.
Sicilique: f, À quarter of an ounce.
Sicinnie: f 4 dauncing,and finging together.


Sicinniftes: m. Such as dau and fa togethersor,as
hi: Siticines, Rab. .
is? Sicnie. Looke Sequenie.
a Sicot. as Bricot,


Sideration. Looke Syderation.
Siderite. The yron-like lone Siderites, which, as. fome
imagine bath power to fet men at oddes; alfo,the Load-


Sone,
2 | Sidre sm, cider; drinke made of Apples.
os hess OE
ie de mer.
| es mée: Samed or emt afer area | 3
. done.
‘| Siecle: m.4# Age; (commonly under fled of 100 years
Fe SN nae te
Cet accouftrement luy fi fied bien. This garment
dt Sie befits, or fits him well.
| Siege: m, À feat; a chaire, floole;or bench to fit on; al-
‘Wan fo; a Fribunall, Court, or Throne, the feat of ‘Fuflice ;
| the Towne,or Place wherein an ordinarie Court of Iaf-
| riceiskepts alfo, the buttockes, arfe, fimdament, the
i binder parts, ov part of the bodie whereon we v(e to
ft aif the fiege of a towne ; af, the fifh Gax-


jourd huy en fiege, demain en piege: Prov. To
laine, 10 morrow a Capiine.


ar _ bis place Fregeot ; (sme being proper to Popes,


as Regner à fir Kings.) »
Siement: mm, A fawin aareapingor casting done
of cornes. 9 05 RL SIS


| |sienm “A mans comes that which be bath in bis owme
mee ET i re ct uaa
Et, & gree tohinsselfe,


AT Uy ; “à si G at a Le 7,
Sob G


Il weftoic point clere, & fi n'avoir nulle cognois:


eme ae The Parliament ter, J


Chafeun y a mis du fien, Ewerie one bath added
! fomewhat of bis owe unto it.

Qui perd le fien perd le fens: Prov, Who Lofet bis
pence forgoeth bis fence,


ei i cnne: f. His, bis owme, of or belonging to |


Des fiens. Of bis fattion, fide, partie, falowers,
I iouë bien des fiennes. He freely playes bis prankes,
he does euen what be will.
Siement: m, A faving,or cutting afunder ; alfo, area-
Diag of corne.
Sienite. A kind of rich Marble gotten about Thebes.
Sier.To faw,or cut afunder(as with a Savas) alfo,to reape,
+ or cut downe,corne,ec.
Sier en arriere: C’ eft, aller le FES devant ;
74 fhieue, or fall a-fierne; (à tearme of Naniga-
ion.


_ Siefer, To become, fit, fit on,


Siette: f. A little fam,
Sieu: m. The fuet Dire SR tre
the greafe of Capons,and of {uch other fowle.
pa 5 jie À alice :
ieure: f. Saw-duft, pinne-duft,erc ; al(o,a ‘amin, : ;
Sieurel: tu. The oho rose Sa es g =
Sieurie. Logke Seigneurie,
Sieuté. Poiflons d'une £ Of one fxe,orgoodneffe.
Sifflant: m, ante: f. whiflling; whizzing ; biffin
Siffant en paume ie me rendray à vous. Pyt but up
the finger 1 am for you,
Sifflantement. Hiffinely with awbiflling font
Sifflé. whifiled ; whixxed; biffed.
Sifflement: m, À wbiflling; pin; ; hiffing.
Siffler. To mhiftle ; whizxe ; bife at.
Sifflerie : f. 4 wbiflle,or whiftli
Sifflet: m. A whifile afo,the meafon,or woind-pipe,


Siffleur: m. ae eee ‘ite,


a Nowpe,or Bull-finth.
Sifte. Looke Chifre.


Sigillatif: m, iue:f. siti, fa, ne, |


made of wax,
Sigillé: m.ée: f. Sealed.


, Signacle: m. A figne, (eale, RSR chavaéter,


Sal m. A fignall, fignes tokem;marke.
nale: com. as Segnale,
alé: fi, ée:f. Notable, famous, renowmed ; of
er of marke: 3 (An Fralianifne ; and derined from
the yi 0 vb Souldiors in auncient Garvi~


fons, L
sipnaler. Se fi igi. To make himfelf 10 be noted, or fpo-


Are of; 10 get bec aname.
ignamment, Namely,


y, pre apecaly paru


i a PESTE AE de LE Se Legis
e fubfevib
Seip (iron ian ns
 bookes (aitten when but a few could write) it hoe
- a feale,or fealing,


Signe: m. 4 figne, markestoken,or note an ar


a prefages a winke with the eye, becke with the need
nod with the bead; alfo,a pledeesor pawne.
Vn figne au de. 4


Ni x
ge pacibutare iA Gibbet, or paire Gale


Det ie
Les vertus oat les fignes:


to the conuerfim of


Sigñé: m. ce? Send, frie: smart branded, es
& DR oe ae


‘noted, flamped-on,


rm A


ne in the Zodiake, acelefial


Prov. worth ex-
ceedeth wonders ; example prenailes more she Sig


~


+ de. 4 a
Ce tre TE Lt MERE


Jt> À
rime Re ni al


arty
5
L


HAE
A pe


7) k nwa
he tall ee


HET thee ‘4 AWD.


oe) Fisk


Signer. To figne, fubfèribes marke, brand, fet-bis flampe
on,or hand unto ; alfa, to note ; alfo, to skarre; alo, to
ag vnto,or by fignes to bid one approach,
Se figner.T'o bleffe,or croffe himfelfesto make the figne
of the Croffe on (ome part of bimfelfe,
| Signer de fon tang. To figne with bis bloud;to afure
| the truth of his promifes, or words, by mot uthement,
| Pca or effetluall demonfirations,
Signet: m, A fignet, feale, [lampe,marke.
‘Signet de Salamon. sclamaes feale, Scala cæli,
white-root,or Wotte-wort.
| Signeur: m. A figner, fabferiber marker, brander
flampers alfo,a crafer,or bleBer,
Signifiance: f. A fignification, or fignifying ; adecla-
Ting, a betokening ; alfo, an argument, figne, or token
oj.


Significance. as Signifiance,

Signification: f. A fignification, fence, meaning; ade-

| Claration aduertifèment, information,

Signifier. To fignifie betoken, fheww,note,meane ; to de-
are, denounce,wzrnesduertife informe.

Haine de prince figni € mort d'homme: Prov. A
Princes hate portends the bane of man.

Silence: m. Silence, peace-bolding Tillaefesquletneft
alfo,a deauelinefe,or folitarineffe.

Silenes, Boxes in.Apothevaries flops painted on the-out-
fide;with diuers odde figures.

Silentiaire: m. 4 filenciarie, a patron or patterne of fi
lence.

Silenticux: m.cufe: f. Verie filent, full of filence, moft
quiet, bufbt, or [ill ; that vfeth to (beake but little ;
where no noy(? at all is ufed,

Siler. The hearhe Sefeli, Sefeleos, Havewort ; fome alfo
call Spertor the Offer withie fa,

Siler de Candie, Hartwort of Candia.
rs de Montagne, Siler Monntaine, baflard Loue-


Sili” v yellow earth (found in gold and filuer mines)
whereof, being burnt, Painters make a kind of Ver-
million.

Siliquaftre : m.Guinnie Pepper Calecut,or Indian Pep-

7 ; alfo, as Guainier.
| sitiqu ue: f. The huske,or cod of ne gy ee
parsicalarl tbe Carob,or Carob Beane cod, he fruit


the Carob tree; alfo,a poiftiamone Phiten. Wacker


Ps to foure graines.

yeux.To feeleor [rw opsthe epe-lids;(ér thence
alfo) to boodwinke, blind, keepe in darkne[fe,deprine
of fights alfo; to pinke, as 1 ES lh A 9
Sunne,


Sion: m, as Seillon ; affa gli


ene: tm, The rauening Jheat | bal e of the. 1
Simagrée: £ À wry mouth, or fltbie face, the.counte-
|! mance of a Clowne.


inaPlay,made sedis
a a 3 alfa, a fare countenance, crabbed vifage,


9 4 tafe: le,


| | rime sf hs and begining of mate


| ns Sy or propre of ay Sig


+6 IM


name. of the whale. es MO ie
Se e:f. À finilitude, conparifon; 5 te fis re. k
é ance. x
Simiotique, Medegine fie ‘That part of Phifecke : 510
which intreats of the fisnificant markes 0 Hepes "À
pal rr what is to come, as well inregar d of bealth, |
as 0) effe
Simme:£ ue top, or tuft on the top, of a tres he cop,
__Tidge,or height of a mountaïne,érc.
Simmetrie:£ Simmetrie the iufijand mutuall proper
tion of euerie part in relpett of thewhole,
Simmifte: m, A Secretarie,or priuie Counfelr, — -
Simoniaque: com, Simonift,one that Seles bg
Church preferments enc.
Simonie: f. Simonie ; the buying, or fling rival 4
fünélions, or preferments, PA
age A fimple in Phificke,a Phificall drugs, aa Je a
ein dauncing,
Simple: com. Simple ;


fiagle, pure, i innit,


vacompounded , of one fort, of it fe LE al,
plaine, round, bluat, fincere, onfuined 5 leffe,
innocent , without welt or gard ; low, unsku-


ie > ignorant , foolifh ; af À rude, homelie, meane,
bafe,
Simple donation, An abjolute gift; a thing thats
ce without 42 rejpe other then. of thie Aences
good.
Simple gagerie. Abare diftraining, itn car Mi!
ing away of ibe diffrefe,
Simple heritier. 4 heire by difcent, Ne by dote or
Simple laid elles. Sle
imples plai sjou ucrelles.: Sleight fintes, or con: |
Ph fies; “Ala duff fps epee à La
d'importance, & criminels.
Simple yendition, ‘A ladifference de celle qui eft
faite fous faculté de caine ou de celle qu eft
faiéte fans efchan
Beneñce à fi fample | conlime The place Pe Pre
hin or Cannon ; a benefice without the charge of
ouLes,
Default fimple, où pur..4# abjolute, or meere de
fault ; S’ obtient par le demandeu, contre le defen-
deur, & par l’appellant contre l'intimé, | MED : |
Amendefimple. Theordinarie, or stcnlonedaier: ve


Les of 5 sol Moses nist À. are He
fimple, Looke } Fg
Fan px Simply, fingly, pur Sr SE ey f
mixtures plainels ro y tnfainedlybarme-


Lf neces alot Lys radelameately, | +100


Simpler. To coufin,cunnie, gull,deceiue,beguile. ;
Simpleffe: f Looke Simplicité, -
Simplette: £ 4 tittlefimple sor bomelie demon das
tsapt.to beleeue.and thereby femme dece ine
Simpli licifte, a a Simple tr * S VER va
Simplicité : f- Simple je “fongleneffe, cighinefes |
Pine er vudenefses L lmefe,harme=. 1
mene, vaskilfillnepe , igno-


Si mpl le: | ASimpif, or Herbal one that wnder-
oem tovnderfand;the mate amples,


$ ne VE a one word. 2 fi f ‘
imulachre: m. The image, pi were, oF counter, ite "7
man or woman ; the figure, femblance, vefemblance,


à ge. Lodke onder Paffer..


| Singeot:m, A little Ape.


S ION


| Simulateur:m, 4 diffembler, cogger, \glofèr, flattèrer


hypocrite, fainer,or connterfeiter of that which hoes
“i meanes not. à
Sitnulation +f. Simulation;ciftemblingscoggi orne
\ sflatteric, bypocrifies a colourgor. prelente; Aie)
j ‘counterfeiting, of what oners;or mednes,not.


Simulté :f.4 zradge,inward conceit again, pimieba—


red or difpleafère , giltoner with a countenance or
Jher to the contrarie, :

Sinalles Looke Senclles. :

Sinapiler. Yo renine a mhovtifletplace, and diate frefh


| bumors and caloar unto it, bpayilailer ‘Of maftara feed,


| = Ge; Heacoulfo, wraife blifters , or bring fmart, by
Suchplaifters; and, tobe fpritklejdredge, or fire ouer
| with Rocrpe yand-jmtarting powder, 19.1
+ Since 2 KA fhec low, fone.clowtsclowt 10 wipe done
‘tables, or torub tive boufe. #H30 €
Sincer. To wipe, to rb, 10 make cleane witha clow?. |
Sincerese: Simeerité Looke Syncere,& Syncerité,
ncopé: m, dé xf Cut off, .
Sincaper. Towur off,
Sinclles. Looke Senelles. : : ;
Sineulle: £ The handle whereby fome kind of wheelesjor
» wheele-like Enginvs,uré tired,
Sing =m, 4 jiguemavke, note ehirradter ; a Saperfevepii-
on, ftampe,or fiçue manuel; ‘alfo, a fpot (of what co-
lour facuer) on the face, or vtherpart of a ntw-borne
infant; alfo,a bell or the foundof abeli; whence, Toe
| ending, 427 Allarum bell ; aad; ;
| Tun’en as pas fait les fingsfonner. Thou haf not
‘tried it atthe crofepor made all the world ving of it,
| _ thou diddeft notgreat Jbjor brag of,it.
Singe: m. An Ape ; alfo,an imitatorsemulator jcounter-
pi at ih a Sieger eres hoje
Singe de mer: 4 ‘vough-skinned Ray, w
longeand flat taile fomewhat réfembles a Pi
(0, friskes, gambuids, tumbling tricks.
/ Ocuvrede finge. Anidte; foolijis, lewd, ov impure
ait, ots *
Patenoftre du finge ! A dilldeving, or chattering
with the teeth. mt


| Vin de:finue: neoke Vins 2. >


= Branflaneles levres comme font les es de fe-
3 en Wagying their lips like Apes that ‘ttle 10
“yy oe, 4 red é > ê
. Contournant latefte come vn finge qui avalle
piles Pre bis bead team Ape that’ fwallaweth
US ARS Vp" ~
empantles babines comme vn finge qui cerche


poux en tefte. Srirringhis chapy ke an
kctb ahead for lice. : 247.184 ÉUSTSIO
ag rl pate et bit
_ Aujord'huy Seigneur, däin finge ord?) , 2
To day a govdlie Lord, 1 an ongle 1H
'Oncquesvieil finge ne fit bellemouë: Prov. Old
age cannot be gracious, comelie,louclie,
Singeotre:f. or Monkie-faced winch,
like-wn- ape, >


piesa : À Apifh irickes, idle teyes ; or, as Mohirioye
À sig io 1: 110?


finge.
SingelTe:  apbewper >


Singeur: m. AA Apifhmome pr ya keeper of Apes.
| Sinslages 470 ina | 4 oP Uinidiny of, the
Jess alfoa Mariners bite wages; ov inert 507,
the carnefl.or preffe-moncy, giuen bim when bt is in-
À °tertained, ee:


pecrelefe, pafing others;


= | Sintcone, 4 kirdof bloudie fix,
Monnoye de finge. Mopping mumping,mowings al. |


Ape that loo.


Singlant:m.ante 5 Sapling, dinidln'g oy cuiting the
Las allevbiskineslafinag jerking swhence;
Verge finglante, 4 feuicher, {wilch,or fwiteber,
Voix finglante. A fbrill voyce, - Vs

Singlé: msée:£ Saitedon;cut ordinided, as water by
; bata tte, Scurched Jafhed,ierked,fwitched

_ Jiourge AL

Sine ta Singlemetit, © «6 bos?
ing à, À fajling, or cutting of the fea fay-
_4ng; alfo,a whisking, lafhing, Pre fateh eat

Singler. To Ale, vo cut the water, with a full woind ; al.
50,10 3 sor wbixxe, like the wird among fayles ;
ancdstofwitch,tafh, whip dere, Jeusch,ofeourge with

ar | , 1,» 24


Sine m< A {iutch laf, wbiske, yerke or ierke with a
r Po. LA LEME SED WEE A sharon à :
Singleure. Locke Singlement.


Re sf. Singularive, excelencie, prete ;


Singulier: mere 16 Sin ur, excellent; exquifie,
argent peu


y . Per EN TEEN EN
Singulieren fes opinions. 04ffifare, wilfil, opini.
onatiue, ; RUN
Singulierement. Sixputarly, excelently, “‘exgnifitely,
ene fl, onely , peculiarly , c{pecially | abawe dtbér
things. ;
Sinipion. A kind of difeafe peculiar to childven,
Sinissome. Bleed Thifile, Carduus benedi@uss
Siniftre : com. Sinifter zuninckie: :
Siniftrement. Sinifleroufiy , valuckily; alo, in euill |
parts 20% : ha, RUE
Sinon: Sauing except,but onel) onleffe,


Sinople :m: Sinople,greene colour(in Blaxom). +


Si fe:f. The pricke, onyting of confciencesror as
Synderefe, ea el ety ae |
Sintre. Looke Cintre, Seer Tea:
Sinuëux :m.êufe:f, Boforrie, intricate, crooked, fl
of bollow turnings voir es or crinkle crankles,
Sinuofité : € A bollow turneng, or winding ; a bofomie
srooking, or in-beading ; ah indenting ; an imtricate-
nefie. * : Seo
Sion : m. 4 fcionor fhooterejas Son, | |
Sions. "The doiferaus incounser’s Of (300 flroagwinds, ei.


therfidetone, or acroffe, Ve :
_Siphach, Tb'maer LE gare wherewith all the


ue ve eg ANUS Hite Sites
Si .Thet ‘of a Condait, the faucet
per Lada rte to
sites iy ‘ ith: rye » | : nt:
dition, à giuen onely to the King ; but. with addition,
nia AMIS Treanor, ce Site Pietre,


Site Simon,&c; ) end unto Knights teSire
= Chévalier ; ) #nd'unto femme fear Je ne 4


Seigaiories (here. le Site dé Ponts en Guyenn
16 OMe ew ol More inen Ti vin
(whence, le Sire da pais, offen ved the
Lacie country ;) And as it eppeares byauncient
Frenc and Bookes all Lords wwharller of Ter.
itinouë:f4/4 Or My ay pea Ls
Sitingué : m.€e:f Siairted jbiréted, AMEN à
Sicinguer, ToYé#itf,or mieë with ffinge, 1
Sirocco rods A Soutb-eaf seid, 0e
: ANE: fA Rind of Pomentation, estas Em
Sifalle.
-
HEORI FEU FA


17" ” he Ne Dr ~ Rae ÉLMER: | 4 4
+ os ye ees «0
SIX SOI
Sifalle. grive fifalle.A Fieldfare; or a kind of great,and | Deatb equalls plough-driners with purple-wearers,


Doue-coloured Thrufb,which vjuaily makes ber neaft Sociable: com, Sociable, ¢


inwalls,

Sifame. Looke Sefame.
Sifeme: € The Throfileor Manis : GLionnois,
SiRaleaee: com, Without intermiffion , in motion :


Ra

sea m. À kind of brafen Timbre,

Siftre. The bearbe Spignell or SpickneL, Mew,Baldimo-
nit,and Bearewort,

Sit: mA fite,or feat.

Sitibond: monde:£ Extreamely athirfl,

Siticines: m. That apes Trumpets , or fing unto
Pipes, at Funexalls:

Situation :f. 4 ftuation; a feat, fîte, or flanding ofa

lace,

Site. m.ée :f. Situale, or fituated, feated, Ri flan-
ding,placed.

Situer. To fituate, fite, feat;place. s

Sivé : m. A broth, ot fauce made of tb'intralls of a hog ;
alfa,broth, ov fauce for the forepart of a fried Hare,
made of wine, vinegar,verinyce,hearbes and [pices,e>
Jerued with tofts, or fops ; alfo,feame,or [wines greafe.
Dufivé d'huiftres. Oyfter broth,or broth made of boi-
led Oiffers.

Sive : £ À Chiboll hollow Leeke,Scallion,

Sivele:f. 4 buckle: @Langued,

Sivette : À Ciwet; alfo,a Cinet “Gay alfo,a Chine, or finall
Chiboll.

Siviere. Looke Civiere.

Sivot : m. À Scallion,a bolow or unfet Lecke,

Six. Six,balfé a dozen.

Sixain:m, A fixt, a fixt part, the proportion of fix ;
Hence,a Poeme, or ftango of fix verfes ; and, the halfe
of a Sol,a coyne ‘worth fix Deniers, or fomewhat more
then our balfépenie, fi

Sixener. To yeeld fix for. one; alte come forth by balfe~
dozens, or by fix pil together, f
Sixiefine : m. A fixt,or fixt part ; a proportion of fix.

‘| > Droiétde fixielme. Anyearelie rent of fix pence due

Be Seats affranchifed inbabitreffe of Henault unto
Earle thereof, in acknowledgement of ber former

» edie ad a5 a gratuitie for ber new- -gesten oe


sisi ine: com. Thé fixt,or fixth,
~ Droiét da fixiefme denier, The fixt peniesor part of
the} pe ha of alsened seats (infome Places). bee the
© Lord of whom it is
| Sixte: m. À fixt,e proportion of (ix,in ese
| Sizement: m. A fitting, fetling, feating,
| Skclete. Looke Scelete. a TON ra he 72,108
: Smirge : m. Louage,or Parfley of ‘Macedonia, -
‘| Sobre + com. Seber temperate continent, flayed or fet-
_ ded in bumor,well
Sobrement. LT eter a


Socurorge. Looke Soror,
Sofiftication: £ de or Pphificaing; an
Sofifti


5 fe ufesor


SE ee


companable, familiar,courte-
er dlie, f


Societé : £ Societie Plomb confort ,companie,
Socque:f Afôcke orfale af durs, er cari cleaning to
the bottome of the foot in a cloggie way,or in à &


clayie foyle
Sodalitée if Sodalitie, felowfhip, focietie , brotberlie
companie,
odomie: f. Sodomie, buggerie. ;

Sodomite: m. A Sodomite,Ingler, Buggerer.

Soéf: m.foëfve : £. Sweet, plaufible, delicious, delicate,
Jote; gentle,courteous, mild; (6 oft, (mooth,
Soph (Aduerblalyy Gr in flead of Soéfvement;pwbence;

ae ru marche gr ok The wearieOxe

treads gently or gingerly ; goes faire and oft i

Soéfflairant;& Soëffleurant : m. ante : te fra-
grant,delicately finelling.

Soëfvement. Sweetly,delicioufly, finootbly,gent

gone Penn décor,

enefe ; gentlencf$e,mildneffe, finootbnelle.

Sdeil du fr line. Looke Sucil, ra: rl \

Socur : £ À fifter. |
Le frere veut bien que fa focur ait, mais querien
du fien n’y ait: Prov. The brother would — fil
ter thrine by any meanes but by bis,

Soeurette : f. A little fifier.


ous,gentle, fri


adulterating,or img.
iquer. To fophifficate, ore mare ge
Sogrenu : muë: fi Looke S augrenu.
Sogrenué :f. Aieaft,
Soiage: m. The reaping of corne, dc.
Soie de porc. The briftles,or fliffe baive, ofa bog.
Soler. To reape,or cut downe corne.
Soieur:m. Area
Soif:EThirfi ; a bentb,er drougli; a defue to sink,
_ Endurerla foif aupres d'une fontaine, 7 ouffer
wantin the middeft of abundance.
Il n’a pas {oif qui de l’eaune boit: Prov Hees not
athir(t that water drinkes not,
Onabeau mener le boeufà l'eau silt na foif: :Pro,
ual aoe fc moulin il
+ Qui mieux aime autruy que foy au ilmeurt
de foif: Prov. Hee oy ape otbers better then bim-
Self dies atbirft on a Mill~damme,
| Soigner.7o care becd,regardatiend.fèe 10,prouide for,
take paines in,be diligent about,
| So eufement, arc, beedfily,diligeniy paine-
»[erionfly,laborion ly, fludioufly.


Soigneux: :meufe :f, Carefill,heedfill,regardfilll cir
cuinfpectattentine,marie, folicitous diligent,vigilant,
eli


ne la


of the skinne ly fe-
opel it mer


Sr
LT REDS rip


Ge im. The enening.
Nul foir fans r Prov.No dawning without 4 day.
Les paroles dfffoir ne refemblent pas à celles du
matin: Prov. Erenight cur morning flile is chaun-


IA CA fr vob: at night iit manning, frome


S 0 oL2 SeL


:Lerouge foir, & blane matin, &c: Looke Matin. or fea (aule, fea Bells, few Folefoot, Scottifh Scuruie-
Telritau matin qui au foir pleure: Prov. Some affe. |
laugh amornings who ere night foed feares. Soldat: m. A féuldier ; one that fallowes the warres. À
Soird, Looke Soireux! =. | sige oldat de fortune. An aduenturer, or voluntarie ; 3
Soirée: f. The euening,or enening- tet , one that ferues without payor charge, : 4
Le Soireux : meufe: £ Of or ns earring aie abies ! LA jeune foldat Vieil cheval: Prov. A ‘young fouldier ;
À towards night. “apould be fitted with an old borfe ; (both tatemper bis .
% Soiticr: m. 4 Silkeman. “heat, and tobelpe bis ignorance.) 4
Soitier :m.ere: fis Setier safe ar rfid of; fie, Soldatefque:f, Souldierie ; 3alfo, a troupe or companie
3 Soiture : f. A reapingef cornei | offèuldiers. >
À Soixante.Sixtie;threrfcore. . SRE com, Souldierlie, of fouldier, Puldier-


Sol:in, The foile, graurid land, Ré botteme of


. the French STORE whereon


< a place; the floore,or loweft flerie of a house; alfasthe


 Sieane; whenceyyn Efcu solya’ Crowne of the Sunne;
litle aes or. Sins,
is figured,


Sol:m. 4 Sous; dite French billings whereof tenne


make.one of ours 5. (But this is-t0 be vaderfiéod' of the
Sol Tournois, tbe mofi general, and beft-knowne {ol
in France; and ener vnderflood when the merd {ols
ufed wi itbont addition.)

Sol Barrois. Is 4 fixt part.in twentie lefe then the
A Quraois, whee fonnetegne ate morth twentie of
theft...”

Sol Boutdelois Is worth balfe as inuch as the Sol
Parifien. '
Sols forts. Looke Forte monnoye,uader Fort.

Sol dé guerre, 4 Lorrainecoyne of fmalivalue.


owSolneret. Laoke Nexet.


Sol Manfais. Is worth two fols Tournois.

Sol Parifien, owde Paris... The Parifian fol; is.as
much as the Tournois,and 4.quarter ; for twentie of
them amount vato twentie fine of thither. .~.-
Sol Tournois. ‘The tenth part of aur fhilling > or one
part in fix better then our penie; the moft erdinarie,
and'mofiknowne Sol.in France. \

Ilfairde fix fols-vn refton. He makes a Noble of
nine-pence ; (applidble to an induftrious thriuer.)

I fait de fon tefton fix fols. (The contrarie, and
meant of a riotous untbrift, of whom we fay) He will


Sonldierly,
sli uement. $0 erly fouldier-Like


| ée: f. Souldierize wldierced made ouldier ar.


Soke TRUE a cane La oy
Sole: £ Sd sealers or under part of the


"sale jee of timber ee ae pe


betweene "Soles. Par ye ibe
.Pafque deS Palmes sun 49
Tant @arpens à la fole. The} proportion: of |
which is 10 be fowed that. yeare ; (là many parts


France they fow enerie yeare jo third part of 1 ther


arrable.)
Soils m, The Sue; alfo, Gold; called fo by Alibi:


Soleil de mer. A certaine fifh,or fea-verminewbich
cr a apainted Sunne.

Biens au foleil. Lands, grounds, leafes, catiell, ec;

any p he ei ons which lie without doores, and are often
bebe


by the Sunne; differing, therein from money,


vbbich be bit éldome lookeson. .


“Herbe au foleil ; &, Fran JR dl


Herbe.
Re: du foleil. The bearbe Sand, Ras 8 folis,
© Touthwort, called in the North, Redrot, and j Moore-


SET cul au foleil. Slotbfill, lazily, litherly,


‘carelefly, playing the idle and flonenlie loxell, ae |


Mis satin Is. à


à à \ quickly bring a Noble to.nine-pences : bis breech in the Sunne.
Solacier. fe {ol. To falace ymake meriie recreate bime Te l'envoyeray bien grater le cul au foleil, 1,
‘See {elfes fend bim packing,turne him ont a graxng, im ;
| Solacieux:m. cule: f. Socios ereatine delighfil gor [hake bis eares abroad.
3 uqpeiiriebla : oy dans oran yi Le ventre au Es Ily pres yentre au fol.
olage : m, as Solaige ; a//o; foy 07 800 gr He was flaine,or left dea place, .
Soluce: : M, pt gi Sunnine[le; th elenation,a Ilne sali ro fadebre ea folcil. Hee har t
q fixcesor power of the Sunne ; th effects of Sunne- not the dayes debt to beunpayed at io 3 bee wine de
; vpon a places... pay readily, lowes to be foone out of de le, |
; Solaire far jambe. The greatef of the fix hinder muf |. Soleil qui luifarne au matin, femme. lets.
d kles of the leg,ending in the fole of Le font the whichit tin,& Enfant nourry de vin, neviennent point à
fèrues to extend, |" bonne fin: eis A glaring marne, a woman pati- UE
Re Solaire : com. Sunniesof or belo me 0 the Sue. aient om crie bad 1 wi
à Herbe Solaire. The Marigo Tel eftle ere comme dar
‘à Ment Solaire. An Eafterlie wind. . Looke Gendre; 2 |
lane sm. The bearbe Nighifhade ; or as Solatre, Soleillant :m. ane: f ‘Ssang, Sunnie. -
Solane grand. Dwale,deadlie Nighifhade. Soleillé: m.ée sf. Sunned; aired or weathered rhe


Solatte: me Garden: Pig btfoade, Horrel » pettie Mor- ed or warmed at,layed in, expofed-onto,the Sunnesa
warme, Sunnie,fhining or sh Lu the Sunne,: >


atre dormitié Si ie Nighifhade. As |. Solciller:ToSunnesto aire or weather in,drie or warme
re an Neher. 9 great Night. at,expofe vnto,lay out Powe Sune, ca

par (pes eme Soleilleux : m. eufe : f Sunnie ; open enter ne
olatre furieux. Raging Nigbtfhade. in,the Sunne.

Sold: m. 4 Sous; Looke Sol, Solennel ; m.elle : f. Solewmesot alee ae doe

Soldade. "A la foldad de. Souldier-like 5 brent commonly vnderfand it, but)anmualhyearcle, ordina-

antly; frag geri rie,woont,ufed, pes shee done c publichly and Aba
Soldan: Looke Sou certaine time,


Sold anclle: £ Sea wishiewind, fea Bindoveed, jaa Cole, | Solennellement, Solemnely; publicky 5 comely,
4 >


Go gle he STB HO sma VERS


$ O.L


S O M:


dinarily, vfuakly,sccaftomably.

Solennité : £ A /olemnitieor folemne feat; alfoya pre-
Script forme,precife manner, ordinarie cuflome, v{uall
fafbion kept or beld.

Solennization : £ A Solemmizgtion , or Celebra-


tion.

Solennizer. Tofolemnixe, celebrate, obferue folemnly,
v{e reuerently.

Soler. To fole(a fhooe,or flocking.)

Solerets : m. Looke Sollerets.

Solerre: m, The Eaft wind.

Soles. les foles. The greundfill of a boufe,

Soleyé : m. €e:f Suaned ; aired in, heated by,expofed
unto,the Sanne, 2 ;

Solfe : f. A Solfa; a note in finging.

Solfié : m. ée: £ Solfaed ; alfo,diflempered, |

Solicitation:f. Afolicitation,or foliciting, a meuing,or
importuning unto ;an inflant purfuit, the following of
‘a fait.

Solicité : m.ée : f. Solicited, importuned,often and ear-
nefily moued ; inflantly purfued or followed; alfo,beed-
fully or carefülly looked unto,

Soliciter. To folicite,moue,importune, intreat tnflantly,
purfue carnefily, follow bard; alfo, to beed fériouf}y,
looke verie carefully vnte.

Soliciteur :m. A Solicitor, or follower of a caufe fir a-
nother ; alfo, the mower impor tuner, or inciter of ano~

b


ther.
Solicitude : f. Solicitude, care, carke, thoughtfulnepe;
_-beanine(fe, penfinene(fe, fretfulneffe, perplexitie or an


gui
Solidaire: com. Solide ,whole; in for, liable to, the
le


whole. |
Solidairement. Solidely, foundly, furely ; alfo,holly ;
or(as our Bond-Latine in Solido) for the whole,
Solide: com. Solide, found, whole , fa, firme, full,
flrong tough, fiiffe,bard, füre,pithie maffiue.
Solier : m. 4 fèUar,or low garner; alfo,as Plancher; al-
fo,as Soulier, HS
Solifuge :F. A kind of Spider, or vermine like a Spider,
in the filuer mines of Sardinia; tearmed thus,becaufe
it euer flies from light, r
Solifeque :com. Sunne-following,
Soliftine.Diuinatio by a falling on the ground of bread
imen unto chickens : qRab,
Solitaire: com, Solitarie,lonely, deauelie, defert, pri-
uate, without companie,all alone.
Paffe folitaire. Looke Paffe, : ‘
Solitude: f. Solitude, folitarinefe,Jonelineffe, prinacie,
want of pan er leaueline[/e; alfo,a defert, wilder-
neffe,uncouth and vbabited place ; alfo, a forlorne, or
fuccourlefe eftate. QUE
Solive:f. The peece of timber called a Girder, or Joift
(betweene two gs oD i
- | Soliveau: m. A little Girder,or Joift.
x Solle. Looke Sole,
Sollercts:m. Swpeters; foot-peeces of Armaur; Armor
- for the


| forthe feet.
13 Sdfene 4 little fole.


~~ Lafollette d'un efperon. The vnder leather of a


| Soller +m. err low parer.

j loiioir: m. A falting,or fowcing tub :ŒRab.
_Soloeciesm Steno incamgaie 138
Sols. Leoke Sol, |

| Sem Satin: olan poe, er flay of the


Go gle


Sunne; the longeft or rteftday of bebe or the
feafon wherein t ph be at she Longe, or tbe foor-
, ‘


inthe Solflice. 4 /
Solu: m.ué:f Loofe, free carele[fe,of cope.
Oraifon folué. Proje. . A
Solvable: com, Payable,anfiverable, fufficient, able to
pay bis debts ; alfo,warranted,or made good,
Solut. Loofé rc ; as Solu; whence;


Clerc folut. A lay, or fecular Church-man; one thats


not tied unto the Church, nor bound to attend a Cure;
Prebend,Canon,Deacon, ee,
Solutif: m. ie: £ Solutime ; laxatine ; looffing, diffol-


“ing. +
Solution :£.4 difcbarge,or paiment; a refolution,or an-
Swer ; a diffolution releasing, looffing,”


Solution de continuité.The dinifion of an intire,the |


opening of a clofe,thing,

Solz. Looke Sol,

Som :m. Branne.

Sonate, 4 bedie: ERab. auc

Somayer. Looke Sommayer.

Sombre: com, Clofé, darke, clowdie, muddie, fbadie,
duskie,gloomie,

Sombre-pres. Darke-blue ; alfo(of the skie) thinly dar-
kened,or ouer(pred with clouds.

Sombrer:To darken; alfo,to dig up a vineyard, (the firft
grasse fi toit) thereby to fupple,and fofien the foyle
thereof. ' D

Sombriere: m. A (broad-brimd)bat.

Somiere: m, Looke Sommiere.

Sommade : f. A borfe-load : &Langued. x

Sommage : m,as Corvée; or drudgerie,or a drudging
feruice,

Sommaice : m, The top efatower, &c.(v.m.) :

Sommaire : m. A fummarie; breuiarie,abridgement,e-
pitome of the whole; a breefe and jill collection of
words,or things; the fianme, fubjlance, cliefé point or
knot of.

Sommaire: com, Summaries cbiefe, principal whole,
‘full, all-comprebending ; fuccindt, compendious,


Vn procez fommaire. À proceffewberein no forma- |


litie,or formall proceeding bath beene ved,

Sommairement. Summarily ; fuccinétly, briefly, com-
pendioufly ; alfo,throughly, wholly, fully, a
Proceder fommairement. C’eft qu'on dit en
droid, de plano ; afçavoir qu'on peut traifter à l
extraordinaire, & ou le Juge fe trouve fans atten-
dre le iourde l'ordinaire : Et en cecy ne convient

les exactes folennitez de droi&, ou de
pratique, ainf apres l'adiournement libellé faiét à
celuy ss eft appellé devant le luge, les parties doi-
vent eftre ouyes fur le champ fans mimiftere d'A d-
vocats ; & par briefs delais leur doit eftre prefix,&
ordonné, ce qu'il convient pour parvenir au iuge-
ment definiti les
de delais,d faire de plaidoiers,ou efcritures.

Sommarer. To plough, or breake vp the earth.

Sommation:f. A fumme,or, the fumming, of money;

alfoya fi ing or serrage. 7

ommayer. To put boopes vpon boopes, or, to a
vefiel be boopes called Sommier, ” "ca

Somme: m, Sleepe,reft.

Somme: f, 4 fumme of money, cre; the fumme of an
account; alfo,an Arithmeticall produël; tbe fumme
produced by,or comminy of ,anumber multiplied; alfo,
a (borfe)load, or burthen ; alfo, the fumme, iffue, oe

conclui-


, par multiplicité


@SSTATE.UNIV


Solfticial ; ou,Solftitial: m.ale:£. Soficiall; ofjor -


SO M


S ON


~ conclufion,top,beight, fulne(Je,confummation, perfelti-

on of things. , ù
Chetaude fomme. Sumpter-borfés, or Carriers,
horfes.
ue route. In briefé,to conclude.
Servir à fac,& à fomine.To hold by vile,or drudging
feruices;to be bound,by bis tenure, to till bis Landlords
ground; to inne bis corne and bay ; to carrie bis wine,
and wood,erc. \

Sominé:m.ée : €. Summed; fummarily reckoned; alfo,
fummoned,or vouched ; alfo,topped, fürnifhed or coue-
uered at the top with; alfo, come, or growue, to it full
height, whence ;
Les pennes d'un faulcon toutes fommées. Full
Summed, full growne ; and ; Tefte de cerf fommée;
C’eft quand le cerf a tout ce qu'il doit porter.

Sommeil: m. Steepe; alfo,a flumbering.

Sommeillant :m, ante:£ Sleeping; flcepie.

Sommeillard : m.arde:£ Sleepie, drowfie, fluggifb;
negligent, flothfull beanie-headed,

Somimneiller : m, 4 Butler.

Sommeiller. To fleepe; to flumber.

Sommneilleux: m.cufe: f Sleepie, drowfie, fluggifb,
beauie-beaded, fill of fleepineffe , much giuen to flee-


| _ ping.

© FSommelerie: f. À Batterie, ,

Sommer. Tofimme, reckon, or caft up; tobring to a
bead, or conclufion ; to make a {ummarie, ar colleéh-
on of; to fill up to the. top; alfo, to fummon, denounce ;
gine notice of ; and to vouch,call upon, challenge war-
rantie of.
Tanttravaille, & tracafle l’homme, qu'en fin il fe
rompt, ou fomine : Proy. Aman fo long doth toyle
and {winke, till under bis ovone charge he finke.

Sommet: m. The top, cop, beight, or highe(t part of a
thing ; and hence,the ridge, or the roofe ofa houfe; &,
the crowne, or noddle of ibe head.

-Sommette:£ A little famme,or fummarie,

Sommier:m. A Sumpter-horfe ; (and generally any
toyling,and load-carrying,drudge;or groome; ) alfo,tbe
peece of tember called a Summer; alfo,tbe Sound-boord
of an Organ ; alfo,a Truffing-hoope; tbe double boope
which is next aboue the head-boope of a peece of caske,
and which, being directly ouer the Croes, doth beare
more fireffe then all the reftof the hoopes.
Sommiers. He al/o,double hoopes ; or hoopes put vp-
onthe hoopes of aveffell, to flrengthen them,and toin-
dure, in carriage, all rufhes without breaking them;
alfo,the Enfigne-bearers of a marching Armie; tear
med fo to put a difference betweene their toyle and th’
cafe enioyed by the Roman Enfignes, who neucr held
their Colours but when they were,or were fetiin a tea
dineffe to fight. ‘ HSE

Sommiffon :f. À fvbmiffion,an bumbling,

Sommifte : m. 4 Sanimift ; an imitator, or underflan-
der,of Thomas Aquinas bis fumes.

Sommité : £ as Sommet; ova Summitie, or bighneffe,

Somnifique : com, Sleepe-caufing.

Morelle ifique. Deathes bearbe, Jleepie or
deadlie Nightfhade.

Somption : f. A taking,a reccining.

Somptüaire :com. Sumptuarie, of or belonging to coft,
breeding or bringing in expence. ;
oe Sumptuoufly,coftly expenfiuely, gor-

geonfly,excefiuely, = =

Somptuéux: m.éufe:£, Sumptuous, cofllie,expenfine,
gore cous macnificent, prodigallexce/fime.. °°


Somptuofité:£ Sumptuoufnelfe, cofilinelfe, buge ex-


pence, prodigalitie, fuperfluitieexcefiuentBe,
Son: m. Branne ; (and thence) alfo, the fiurfe, or little
Seales in the head, &rc,called Dandarfe.


Son gras. Pollard; or, branne that bath fome final! |


uantitie of mealeamong it.
on ec, Looke Sec. |
Son:m, Afound; voyce, noyfe, dinne ; tune, muficke,
melodie, 2
Sonefelarant. À great crafh,clafh,crack,or creaking,
a violent clap, a refounding bounce or thumpe. _
C’eftle fon des cloches. (Said of a thing that may
with eafe be diner (ified or altered feucrall wayes.)
Son: m. fa :f, His,bers belonging unto him or her,
Sonde :£ 4 Mariners founding plummet; alfo, a squirt,
or fringe 3 and, an infirument whereby virginitie is
tried,
Aller toufiours la fonde en main. To proceed adui-
Sedly, to. goe warily toworke, : -" i


Sonder. To found,proue, trie, féele, fearch the depth, or |


bottome of.
Sondre, The Linden tree ; Looke Soudre.
Songe:m. 4 dreame.
rags font menfonges: Prov. Dreames are delu-
fions.


De fot homme fot fonge: Prov, 4 foolifh man hath


fooli(h dreames.
Songé: me :f. Dreamed.
Songeant. Dreaming,or in a fleepie vifion,
SRE m.. Acontinuall dreamer, or a dreaming
ow,
Songeard :m. arde : f. Dreaming,of or in a dreame,
Songe-creux : m.One that’s in his dumps,or in a broven
Sludie ; alfo, a dreaming, fleepie, or heauie-headed


gull. ~
Songe-malice : m. An imaginer of mifthiefe, a con.


tinuall plotter of villanies. :

Songer. To dreame; alfi, to peake dreamingly; alfo,
to plot ,contrine,deni{e inuent ; imagine, ;
Songer creux. Tomufe excecdingl, meditate feri-
oufly, thinke verie much upon, Vine
Toufiours truye fonge bran : &, Truye ne fonge
qu'ordure : Prov. Looke Truye, NE

Songeur : m. A dreamer. Fe
Vous me logez (ou vous me mettez bien) chez
Guiillot le fongeur. You make me fearchall the cor-
ners of my wit ; you drine meintoa great dumpe, ora
great fiudie.

Songner. Looke Soigner.

Songneufeinent. Carefiully,thought filly. ex
Sonnaille:f. A little bell; and particularly, the bell
bung about the necke of a Weather,ar beard-beaft,

M enr Atinkling, or the tingling of a little


Sonnaillier: m. ere: f. Carrying a bell; whence;
Mouton fonnaillier. 4 Bell-weather. .
Sonnalier. The fame. rey en
Sonner. To found, noife,tune,ving,refonnd ; to ting as a
bell, firike as a clocke, chinke or gingle as money; alfo,
tocall, À
Sonner les fings; &,fonner latuile; Looke wader
Sing,& Tuile. aay si
Sonnerie: f, Afounding tuning, ringing,vefounding ; a
tinging,chinking,gineling. abe
Sonnet: m. À fonnet or canzonet,a fong (mofl common-
bof 14 verfes. à ;
Sonnette: f. A little bell, Antham bell, Sans or facring
bell; any {mall tinging bell; as the bell about the necke
of a Bell.weather,eoc;whence,Mour6 a la pote te,
tta.


Original fro ñ
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


=


poss ees CL FN PIC


TM


eee Shy EE RE


SOR


Attacher la fonnette à l'oreille du chat, 4s Mettre
Ja campane au chat,under Chat.
“A fol ne faut point de fonnette: Prov. A foole
needs neither bell nor bable ; bis words, and attions
quickly will difcouer him. ;

Sonoreux: m, eufe: £, Sonorous, lowd, fhrill, roring,
ringing. :

Sont. Mefsieurs denon font. Imperfel?, or prickleffe
men,

Sophie: wifedome; aifo,the bearbe called Laxwort,
Piixsort:ie Flixweed ; alfo,the Dace,or Dare-fifh,

Sophifine: m, A fophifine, fallacie, tricke of fopbiftrie;
a fophiftication ; cauill,or quidditie.

Sophifte : m. À Sopbifter; a cunning,or cauilling difpu-


ter.
Sophifterie :£ Sophifirie ; a cunning,or captions argue


- ing
Sophiftiqué :m.ée :f, Sophiflicated, adulterated, fal-
fified ; alfo,cunningly bandled,or camillingly uttered.
Sophiftiquement: m, A fopbifticating adulterating,
lfifying.
Sophiftiquer. Te fopbiflicate, falfifie counterfeit adul-


ly, argue cunningly; to deceine,
Sophiftiqueric:f. Sophifirie, argute canilling, [ubtile
cunning ; alfo, a fophiflicating, adulter ating, counter-


feiting.
Soporal: male :f. Sleepie,of or im fleepe. %
Soporifere : com, Soporiferous, fleepe- procuring,
Soprefin : m. Superfine,thred of gold,or filuer.
Sor. la pipée du for, Thefeafon wherem the weather
growes cold.
Sor. Faulcon for. A foare Hawke.
Harenc for. A red Herring.
Sorbition: f..4/üppings al/o, broth, cale,pottage,
Sorceler. To charme,inchannt, forfpeake,bewitch.
Sorcelerie :¥. Sercerie charming,inchawnting.
Sorcellage : m, The fame,
Sorcier:m, ASorcerer , Charmer , Inchaunter , Wi-


xard,
Sorciere: f. 4 Sorcereffe, Inchauntreffe, Charmerefe,
HaeWitch, ;
Sordide: com. Sordide; fonle, filtbie,corrupt, inking,
naflie, fluttifh; vilenaughtie bafe ; alfo,pinching, mi-
Sevable,miching nigar dhe, clofe-banded, full of ,or gi-
‘wen to,paultrie dodging.
Sordidement, Filthily,mafily, naugbtily; bafely, mife-
_. vably, for(deere)lucres fake.
Soré:m.ée:f. Reeked,made redor forrell, as a Her-
ring by ihefinoake. = sites
sel im. The bearbe Sorrell,or Sowre-docke.
* Sorel du bois. Stbwort, fowre Trefolie,Cucko-meat,


Alleluia,roood Sorrell, wood Sov7e. ;
Sorer. # reeke; to drie,or makered(as Herrings)in the
odke.
Sori. Locke Souris.
Soriciere :f. À Moufetrap.


“bread fleeped in Peafe brotb,then firayned with wine.
; eae es, ianamon, Ginger, and otber Qices, all put
ot with the Ecles cut into peeces, and (4
sing with Safron, and falt) 1


ierate,corrupt; alfo,to play the Sopbiffer,difpute fubsil- |


: Sopnpue: dre enr À fied Onions, and toaf- 3
er


SOR”


Sorner. To iea d, frumpesg ll fell bar aines,fpeake
ae ae he ante ios > . nat:
Sornette : f. Aieafl, boord, mervie word, (portfull con.
a pleafant fpeech; a tale, fib, foifl, mockerie,gul.
rie. : À :


Sornetteux :m, eufe:f. Full of ieafts,or pleafant con-
ceits ; that lones,or vfès to tel merrie tales, .

Sororge : m. A brother in law ; the busband of a fifier.

Sororité : f, Sifterbood, ap

Sorrat : m, A great, fhort.faowted, fharpe-toothed, and
moftranenous Hound-fifh, |

Sort:m. A lot,or lotterie; alfo,fate, lucke, baxard, for-
tune, chance,cafualtie ; alfo,a charme, incantation, or

fpell; alfo,the flocke,or principal of money in banke,or
atvfé, | «4.

Sortable: com. Sortable, euen, fit or befitting, futable,
equall,proportionable,

ge ga Sortably, fitly,be fitting, futably,propor-
tiona |

Sorte :f. Sert,mamner, forme, fafhion,kind,qualitie,con-
dition,calling, ; ,
De forte que. So that. |
Chafcun demande fa forte: Prov, Eachto bis kind,
as words to wind,

Sorti : mie : f. 1f{ued,gone or burft out; alfo, deliuered
or brought ont of; alfo, furnifhed or fitted with.
some fil,& d'aiguille.. Fully prouided ofall ne-
cefjaries, ‘ 4
Sorti de mauvaile femme. V#happily matched,
peflered or troubled with aw enxill wife,

Sortie: f, Anifue,egrelfe going forth,

Sortilege: m, Witchcrafior diuination by lots.

Sortir. To ey fallie,come forth, goe beyond, depart or
goe out of alfo,to affort, furnifh,or fit with; alfo,to de.

liner,or bring, out of. i

Sortir effeét. Tofucceed,or take effect.

Sortir des gonds. To flie off the bindges ; 10 be impa-

tient violent jouer vehement break into outrage or ex-

treame tearmes, forget bis duetie or himfelfe,

Sortir hors de propos, To digre/é,wander,extrana-

gate it, fall from the matter,goe from the purpofe.

Il ne peut fortir du fac que ce qu'il y a dedans:

Prov. You canbauenomore of bim then there 1 in


eon a Of charge ra ae.
it: m.24f fot,afe,dunce, 4 erbead,
ph Si qi» ; Car een le,


| 4
or vice in a play; and,any fond, vaine, or trifling fl. |


low.

Va ailleurs cercher ton fot. Looke for fome otber to

laugh at, 1 am not the gull you looke for.

Le fol eft fot quant & quant, mais cout fot n’eft

ee The foole is fare ynough a fot, but eucry
t's no foole, eee

Quand les febyes font flories , les fots commen-

cent leurs folies : Prov. 1m Cuckoe-time when Beanes

doe flower, the evacke-braind fèoles build up sbeir


Sot :m. forte: € Sottifh,dull, dunficall; greffe, abfard,
pil ate d, vaine, frinolous; wanton,
ch LI nh | $
De fot homme on n’en peut faire yn bon conte:
Prov. An affe does nothing worth the (peaking of.
De fot homme for fonge: Prov, The dreames of
s ave but meere fipperies.
forte fe cognoift à la corte: Prov. The robes
fooleries be-


 So-


that women doe array , their private
wry. |


6 Te, Bag A


| _ Cocke donerell ninnibammmer 3 or as Sortart, -
Sotbriquet. Lloke Sobriquet.
Sotiner. To play the fat.


Sirditie, folie, foppifhne fe


foolifh lob,
Sottelet :m, A little for.


Sotterie,& Sottie. Looke Sotife,
Sottiner,& Sottife. Looke Sotiner,& Sotife,


French fhilling ; Looke Sol,


up of a thing for their common vfe ; as in Soiiater,


Soüatter. Looke Soiiater,
the throat ; alfo,as Sousbarbe; and as Soubride,


ket vp an ininrie, [wallow downe a wrong.


flatelie beds,


roomes aboue-ground,
Soubattué sf 4 furbate ; or, furbating.
Soubatture:f. 4 furbating; or, furbate,


or foure parts ia one.


Cathedrall Church inferiour to the bead Chauater,

Gardez le foubchantre, (Said when a man floopes

S low or firaines fo bard, that be is in danger 10 let a

fart ;) ware crackes boe. hat
Soubcontrolleur : m. 42 under Controller.
Soubcurateur : m. 4n vnder Gardian ; one that hath

the tuition,or charge of a thing under another,
Soubdain. Looke Soudain, ee

ainement,& Soubdaineté. Looke Soudaine-


ofa kitchin, : ‘
iacre:m, A Subdeacon, -
Soubelin. vn car foubclin. A great er mightie Cat,
oubeliné : m.ée :f. High loftie, bantre; or, extolled,
' lifted up, fet on bigh.
Sougardien: m, davnder warden, vader Keeper,un.
der Gardian, —
Soubhaiter. Looke Souhaiter,
Soubhaftation :£, Open/aleor port/ale, fale of tbings
Son feited rc, by an outrope,or outcrie. —
Soubhafter. To make epen (ale, or portfale of, tofell at
an outrope or outcrie,things forfeited, coc,
Soubieét: m. A fubieét ; Looke Subject.
Soubiedt: m, Ge: Subielt ; Looke Subje&.
Soubicétion : € Subiedlion ; Looke Subje&ion.
Soublevé : mee : £.Lift,raifed,bouen or beld up; eafed,
Ligbtned,belped, fupported;peifed,or weighed with the
hand, ,


vo Go gle


Sotart: m. A neddie peake, witiall, cockscombe,wood- | Soubleyement : m.4 lifting beauing raifng,a bolding


Sotife : f. Sottifhne t,dotage ,dulneffe,blockiffonelfe; ab-
| Sottart:m, 4 dunce, foule for great affe, blockifh lnske,


Sottemett. Sottifhly,blockifbly, groffely, abjurdly ; fi-
uoloufly,


Sou : im. Hogs feet in pickle, or fonce; alfo, the Sous, or


‘Soilater. To partake with, or be a partner in; alfo, to
jayne with,or together, after the manner of cowntrey
peafants who bring cuerie one a borfe or tre for the
making of a teame which no one of bimfelfe can furnifh,
Soüaton : m, A partner,or partaker with; alfo,one that

joynes,or contributes with bis neighbors,to the making


Soubarbe. f. The part chats betweene the chinne and
Endurer vne soubarbe. Te indure an affront, poc-
Oubaflement de colonne. The bafé,or foot of a piller,


Soubaflement de lid. The bafes of a bed;that which


bangs downe to the ground at the fides,ér feet of fome | Sou t€coup : m, À dowae.ri bt blow, (v. m.)


Soubaftement :m, 4 foundation or ground-worke; a
low building within the ground for the fupport of


Soubchanter. To fiag under,or after, another; to bold
the bafe or ground unto ; to follow, in a fong of three,


Soubchantre: m, An vnder.chaunter; an Officer in a


-Ment,&c,
Soubdefpenfier. 4m under Cater, or an under Clerke.


sov


Up; an helping eafing, light ning;alfe, 4 peifing,or weigh-
ing with the band 3 alfè,a commotion injarteélion, >.


i
Soublever, K il A holdup; alfo,tobelpe,
a €4801en,0r leflen the burthen of; alfo,to pei

or weigh with the hand. santa tae
Soublin. 4s Soubelin ; whence,Marte Soub.a Sable,
S a im, An under Maifter, an Vfber in a
choole.


Soubmerger.to drown,ouerwbelm, Sink, boulge, plunge,
ubmettre. To fubmit lay under, put below; under-
fetenderprop ; debafeoumble, fubdue. ’
Se foubmnettre 3.70 vaile bonet, firike fayle,crooch,
gine place or obedience applic bimfelfe, unto; 10 come
Under the lee, iurifdithon, or sof
Soubminiftration :£.4 fubminifir ation,an under fer-
hice,
Soubininiftte :m. An under mini
underling in Office. ier, eerelenen
Soubrniniftrer. To fubminifler unto, to minifter or
s fee ue under rip ;
oubrnis: m.ife : FSubmitted,bumbled,abafèd under:
inthralled, fübie éied,or yeelded,vnte, nds
Soubmiflion:£.4 Submi ion bumiliation,or bumbling;
4 putting or fetting under,
Soubors. Leoke Sabors,
Soubpenduë :f, Longe Soufpendué,
Soubpefer. To pe fe,weigh,ponder diligently,


Soubrefault: m, A Sobrefault, or Summer fault; a
Gamboll, or friske ; an alliue or nimble tricke in tum-
bling, cc.

Soubrefaulteux: m, 4 Tumbler ; or, one that fetcbeth

" many an odde,or nimble Fiske, 2

Soubride:f. Achecke, nwitch,ierbe, or iob ginez 10 à
bor{e with bis bridle ; alfo,as Sousbarbe,

oubriquet. Looke Sobriquet,

Soubrire. To file,

Soubris : m, A fmile,or fmiling,

Soubs. Vnder,érc ; Looke Sous,

Soubs-acazement, & Soubs-acazer, Looke Soubz- -

s er aha a gy Fina

ouDs-age: m, ec: f. Vnder age,not yet of yeares.

Soule atte: in. An under Aide the Aid oye tenants
pay unto their mefne Lord, towards that whichis due
both by bim,and them unto the Lord Paramount,

Soubfarrenter.Ta let out at an under vent,to let goe at
a low yearelie rate, |
. clerier :m.An under Buster or a Yeoman of the
ellar, :

Soubftription:£ 4 fubferipsion,or fisbferibing.

Soubferire. To fubferibe,

Soubs-fiefver. C’eft bailler en arrierefief partie de
fon fief; {Ragueau, : €

Soubfigner. To /ubjigne, fubfcribe, fet bis bandymarke,
or figne manuell under. |

Soubslevement: m. Looke Soublevement. :

Soubs-tnajeur: m. (1s in fome townes) a Magifirate of
autboritie,or dignitic, next unto the Maior,

Soubs-maiftre: m. 4x under Maifler ; or,an V her in
a Schoole,

Soubs-manant: m, A tenant vaffall or fubic& unto a
Lord ; (an old Picard word,) à

Soubfon,& Soubionner. Looke Soufpecon,& Sout
peçonner. Fa

Soubspoictrine : f. The flanke-peece,or bottome of the
brisket of an Oxe,crc. 2

Ecce -Soubfle. |


4


a
VAT


= =e.


2


Éd, si tad


SAN


Soubftenable,& Soubftenance. Look Souftenable,
& Souftenance. i

Soubftenant :m. .4n under tenant; atenant unto a
tenant,or to a mefne Lord ;alfo,as Souftenant, *

Soubftenement. Locke Souftenement,

. Soubftenir,& Soubtenir. Looke Souftenir.

Soubterrain: maine :f, Which # vnder the ground or
within the earth,

Soubterrer. Looke Soufterrer.

Soubtraire, To withdraw ; nimme, purloyne, filch clofe-
ly,conuey away priuily ; alfo,tofubduce,perucrt,alure,
intice toll away.

Soubtrayant: m.ante:f, Subtracting withdrawing;
nimming, pur loyning, clofely filcbing; fubducing, allu.
ving,inticing avap.

Soubz. Beneath; under ; Looke Sous.

Soubzacazement: m, À dead Ficf, rent fecke,mefne,
or under vent,

Soubzacazer. To raife a mew rent fecke, new feruices,
or a new Cens vpon the letting,or aliening of land al-
readie fo rented,or liable toféruices or unto Cens.

Soubzacazeur : m. One that raifes, dre; as in Soub-
zacazer,

Soucens,& Soucenfier. Look Surcens,& Surcenfier.

| Souche:f. The flock,trunke,or bodie of a tree; a log; al-
fo,the maine flock,or direét line of a pedegree,progenic,
or familie; alfo,as Souchet; or the root of the wild,or
Englifh Galingale,

Souche commune, The defcexs of many brothers or
coufens, from one falber,mather grandfather or grazd-
mother.

Tant que tige fait fouche, elle ne branche iamais.
Looke Tige.

Souchet : m. Ciperews,or Galisgale ; a Bull-rulh xhofe
root fm2Us verte fmeetly; alfo,as Souchon; al/o, kir 4
of Impofition,

Souchet de bois. Set-foyle,Tormentill ; an bearbe,
Souchet d'Inde. Indian Galinçale ; whofe root re-
Sembles Ginger , and which ta {oops is tearwed Çur-
cuma,

Souchet Romain. Swett Ciperows.

Souchette: A litele flocke,trunke,or log.

Soucheux: meufe : € Full of facks logs, or flumpr.

Souchon: m. Theflumpe of a tree,ere.

Souci: m.care,carke,thought ; regard, led ; perplexi-
tieanxictie,or trouble of mind ; alfo,a Marigold ; (for
which looke Soulfi.) 2
Enfans fans fouci. Careleffe childre, retcbleffe fel-
lowes, diPolute companions ; thofé that care not how

much they wrong themfèlues, ér abufé others ; alfo, a
certaine rakehellie generation of lugters,or Tumblers,

Soucicle. as Soucie.

Soucie: f. A little yellowifh bird hardly as big as a wren,
and called by fome,a Ninmurder ; (Looke Soulfie.)
Soucier.To _ with cark,to affict with caves;wbeces

Cetemps foucie Je moade. ‘This wnféafonable wea-

= ther doth trouble the world; viz.doth vexe,and binder
the moft that would be abroad. ANS

| Sefouciér. To care,beedregard, reckon or ate

count of, prouide or take thought for be diligent, cnri-


À ows,or carneff about ; vex,per plex, trouble,or
Dr rem sperples, or difquice


| Ceux qui ne fe foucient depuis le nez en amont.
Men that the prefent, men tbat pr
ee ee
| Soucieux :mcule:€ Cee ugh, facto,


b a *


bye"


‘Soudard. Looke Soldat.


| Souét, Leoke Soëf,


SOV a


gee | og The Marigold, La Sad tis

Soudain: m.aine: {.Sudden;unwares,umpremeditate,
unlooked for ; quicke,(wifishaflie, Peedi, =

Soudainement.Suddenly,at unawares;in a trice,in the
twinkling of an eye, ere you can haue (aid,this ; baflily,
Swiftly, RAT te byandby = .

Soudaineté:f.Suddennefe,balgreat [peedquickneffe,
violence,


Soudan : m. (Ia th’ Egyptian, and Morifh ce gaan


Jignifie)a King Prince,or Soueraigne ; a Si


Soude. Looke Soulde,

Souder. To foulder,

Soudefpenfier : m, An under Cater ; or, aninferiour
Clerke of a kitchin,

Soudiacre : m, 4 Subdeacoa,

Soudic ; m, An aunciest title for a great Lord,or Noble
man, ‘

Soudre. The Linden tree.

sous : com, Ouglie,deformed,moft foule, loathfome to’

One On, + ~

Soudre. To looffe,e>e; Looke Souldre,

Souduire. To feduce,

Souduis: m.ife: € Seduced.

Souduifant:m.ante:f. Seducing.

Souduifeur: m. 4 feducer; (old words.)

Soudure:f, A fouldering ; Looke Souldure,


Soucfflairant: mante:f.Mof fragrant, fiveetly finel-


ling.
Soucfleurer. To fweeten.per fine, bemuske imbaulme,
Souer. To bring a Boare unto the Sow; (whence, ne fait-
tez four la truye; Let ber not baue the Boare; ) alfo,
to gueld,or [play a Sow,
Sonévement. Sweetly, finootbly,mildly, pleasantly.
Souffire. Looke Suffire.. .
Souffle : m, Ones breath,wiad,blaft,or breathing ; alfo,
afmell sale telfesgiliar flaw of wind,
Ce font fouffies.'} befe are but idle words, find brags,
vaine tearmes, paulirie tales, j
Souftenir le fouffle à. To maintaine, fapport,vpbold,
$ car in viens s hed, blafed, blowne, puffed
oufflé: mée : £ Breathed,blafie e,puffed out;
alfo, founded ov winded on a ae in =
Sou‘flemboyau: m. 4 Pudding-maker : (Rab.
Soutflement :m, 4 blowing, flrong breathing, puffing
out: awinding of a borne,ere, ;
Souffler. To ot ongly,) puffe out, fend forth
pu 3 10 found, wi Fu en ec alle,
"10 kif bebind,


Soufflez. (The Imperatiue of this Verbe ; vféd fcor-
ningly or in derifion) Tis but a icaft , there is no fuch
matter; or,be brags moft vainlp,prates mol fondly ; bis
words are but wind bis boafis little gtber then finoake,
1! fouffle. He playes the Alchimift.
Souffler au bafsin, To make present paiment, gine
readie money for,

er les chouxen dormant, To puffe, or blurt


attocentoir Looke Encenfoir.

7 i re TT ES wn met a matter while the
time fevueth; to affilt in feafon intime,
Soiltfler les fourmis dans leurs fourmi
Fourmilliere. rs.

Souffler en l'oreille de. To round, or whifper in the


Souffle: m. Apaire of bellowes ; af, a box, cuffe, or
wbirret on th'eare, DE our


out


&


Orig nal from


S$ OV


Souffleté: m.ée: f.Often puffed,or blowne ; alfe,cuft,or
clapt on the eare.
-| Souffleter. To puffe,or blow often; alfo, to cuff? box,or
clap on the are. 1
Souffleteur : m. A cuffer,boxer buffeter.
Souffleteux : meule : £ Blowing ofiem, or puffing vio-
_ ently; alfo,readie,or apt to uff
Souffleur: m. 4 blower, ufr. reatber;alfo,the whale
tearmed(otherwife)Gibbar,
Vn{ouffieur par derriere, A Prompter.
Souffleux : m.cufe: £ Often puffing much blowing.
Souftrance : € Safferance, for bearance,patience, tolle-
rationinduring,abiding; alfi,need,ponertie, fcarcitie,
penurie, ~ ou 0
Souffrance du Seigneur donnée au vaffal. Repit
of bomage; or the Lords permitting of a tenant to enioy
bis effate before bee bane done bim homage; which
to the tenant is as auailable as if bee bad formally
done it, $
‘Articles cenusenfouffrance. Time giuen-unto an
Accomptant (Receiuor) for che producing of fome ac
quittance (of no great moment) wanting to the per.
Section of his account ; as alfa when it is found that be
bath done bis indeuor (thongh it be not fufficient) for
the bringing ia ofmoneyes that be due. \
Souftre. Looke Soulfte. ,
Souffreter. To be in great need ,or penuriz,to pinch it,
Souftreteux: m.eufe: f, Pennriows, aeedie,poore,wan-
ting,wretched,in a miferable cafe.
Souftrette : f. Need,penurie, pouertie, fearcitie, want
of neceffarie meanes.
Souftrir. To fuffer,beare,tollerate,abide,indure,
Se fouffrir de. To forbeare the doing of.
Qui plus vir plus a à foufttir: Prov, The longer we
line the more we haue Vindure. *


Children ave punifht for their parents faults.
aoe Looke are
ougorge. Loo: usgorge,
Sale me A wither défie.
Quiviened fouhait. 4 bappie fuscefe of hopes, a
profberous iffue of expectation; a matter that falls out
pat,or euen as one would baue it,
Si fouhaits furent vrais paftoureaux feroyent
Rois: Prov.1fwifhes might preuaile poore fhepbeards
/wonld be Kings. ’
“A povre coeur petit fouhait : Pro. The poore mans
‘beart hath low thoughts meane defires,
Vin fur lai@ eft fouhait, Jai@ fur vin c'eft venin:
Prov. Milke before wine would twere mine, milke
taken after is poifons daughter. é
it com. Wifhable,defirable, fit to be longed


ot looked for.
Souhaité :m.ée:f wifhed,caneted, longed for, much


defired.
Souhaiter. To wifh,defive, long for, conet afier,
Souil defanglier: m, The foile of a wild Boare; the
ler ar ¢ wherein he hath wallowed,
Souillard: m. 4 Scullion.or kitchin boy; alfà the name
ofa dog ,betweene which, and a bitch called Baude,
race of the Ba ite,and excellent bounds) was


begun, eer

Souillardetie :£ Sluttifbneffe,naflinefe,greafine(festhe
babit, flate,or exercife of a Scullion.

Souillé:m.ée:f Sorled,flurried, durtied, fmutched,
berayed, diflained,blemifhed ,contaminated,

Souillement: m. A foyling, fluirying durtying, finuteb-
ing beraying,begriming,


Go. gle


Si truye forfaiét les pourceaux le fouffrent : Prov.


Souldeur:m.4


so Ve


Souiller, Tofoyle, flurrie,durti j
defile er fans dencre a .
sr fouiller, (Of a fivine) 10 take fèyle,or wallowin tbe

re.

Souillon: m, 4 Scullion, or drudge in a kitchin: (and
NE, a greafie, filthie, aafie, por ae


Souillonne :f. 4 drudge,or kitchin wench,
Souillonnerie:f. Sculionerie, drudgerie; flnenrie,
Soul Er note ,
tillure:fSoyle, fitr ineffe, eveafine[fe durti
pollution, fluttifhneffe, green dentine,
Souiffe :m. 4 Swifft,or Swifer. .
Soulacier. To Solace; comfirt,recreate,make merrie.
ene m. Ce: f Eafed, lightened ; recreated,com- |
ed: 2 À
Soulagement : m. An eafement or eafing, aiiebienin
of toyle, a leffening of paine ; a pe be .
cheering up. cn WE *
Soulager. To eafé,lighten,leffen the paines or vr
to recreate, rm dete 1 : en
Illa foulagea le bras,ou;du bras. He led, beld, or
bore, ber'vp by the arme, :
Soulas:m,Selace,comfort,confolation, contentment cafe,
recreation, Bs
Nul foulas mondain fans helas: Prov, Noworlilie
comfort without croffes,or corrafiues. w
Soulaffer,& Soulaffier. Leege Soulacier.
Soulci: m.care,thought heed, fludie segardscarkeanxi-
etie,trouble,perplexitie vexation of mind ; alfo,a Ma- À
Soulcicl,& Soulcide :f, The |
oulcic e:f, The little yelowi(hbirdcal. |
led a Ninmurder, re pis he
Soulcie: f. The fame; alfoya Marigold,
Soulcier. Looke Soucier. 7
Soulcicux : m.eufe :f. Solicitous carefull, thoughefill,
perplexed,much in dumps.
Sould : m. Souldiers lendings,intertainment or pay ; (an |
old word.)
Souldan. Looke Soudan,
Souldart: m. 4 fouldier.
Soulde: f.Saltwort,Glafewert,Crab-graffi,Frog-graffé, |
(an bearbe ; )alfo,pay,intertainment or lendings for |
Souldiers ; alfd;as Soulte. j
Ils font toufours à la chafle des fouldes, They are |
euer bunting after intertainment,they greedily con-
tinually purfue the (traps of bountie, Moi - -Ÿ
Souldé : m. ée:f. Sauldered; confolidated, © io
Souldée:f. as Sould, upeis
Soulder.To foulder; confolidate; clofe or rether.
Soulderer. ME Sori |


Souldeure:f. 4 fouldeving. FRS deal
Souldoyer: m.4 Souldier;one that fights,or fèrues ,far


pa :
Souldoyer. To intertaine, pay, gine wages or lendings
unto, Souldiers. 07! :
Souldre. Tolooffe, unfold, expound, refolue, cleere, or
Joile, a doubt,e>c,
Qu'ay ie à faire, ne que fouldre avec toy? what
baue Ito doe with thee? ,
Souldure :£ 4 fouldering ; and particularly ,the kaot of


- foulder which faftens the lead of a glafie window,

Soulet : m.ctte : £Sule,alone private, folitarie, without
companie : €Langued, ae

Soulever. Looke Soublever.

Soulfre : m, Suipher,Brimfione. EN
Soulfre artificiel; ou contrefai@, Artificiall Brim-
flone,or Brinfionemade with fire,

Ececÿ  Soul-


S OOV2


ah 2 Tr


RL


SON


3


Soulfre iaulne.asS.contrefaidt;, and yet fome call
fo the naturall one, becaufe its yellow within.
-Soulfte naturel,ou vif. Naturall Sulpber ; afb-colou-
red without yellow:fhwithin,and slifte
pliked Glawarmes:s.>\

Soullreus jm cule: f. Sulpberie, fl of brimflone.

Soulfriere :f 4 Sulpher pit or mine; the place wherein
brimflone 1 gottensorthade.

Soulfureux. as Soulfreux.

Soulier: m, 4 fhooe,

Soliets 2 bet de cañe. Looke under Bec.

Soulier cambrez, Polonian fhooes, bigh and bollow

heeled Jhooes,

Be Souliers à clique corde. Shooes open at the beeles.

Souliers à pont-levis. as S. cambrez.

Souliers 4 poulaine.Shooes open on the footyand tied
omer UP in Gap witha latcbet.

Souliers à trepointe renverfée.Turnauers,

Tenir pied en loulier, To keepe within bis limits, to

be continent, flayed,adnifed,

Le beau foulier blefe fouvent le pied: Prov. The
goadtie hace doth oftemhurt the foot; (little know you
3 where this new Pres wrings me, quetb Merellus to a
E friend of his}:

ae Lebeau fouliet eens en fin favate: Pro.(Se beau-

fig endeth in deforminé.)

“A telle forme tel foulier : Pro. Like leauen like paf;
Such as the fhade fiuch ws she lafl,'

Le tou trop ouvert fous le nez fait porter fouliers

= defchirez: Prov. The hole tao open under the nofe,

breeds tattered fhooes,and raged hae, ~.\
Soullier : mere: fi Fit for,or belonging unto,a fhoue.
Souloir. (4 Verbe which, befides shasInfinstine, bath
onely th’ Imperfect tenfe of the Indicatine mood ; viz.
Te fouloye, tu foulois, il fouloir, &c; ) to bee
one or \accuflomed ; 10 ufe verie ‘commonly , doe

- vetie often.

184 Soulphre. Looke Sonlfies

ie” Soulphrer. To befulpher to mingle with,or make of Sul

ee pher ; to powder, or beftrew with Brimflone,


LA


Soulphricre Looke Soulfricre.


Ts Ouls..m. 4 Sons,or the French Shilling Looke Sol.

Fe f Scull, The Marigold;Ruds.

Bess VAR aquatique, ou d'eau. The: yellow. willow.
ia Re noi ern Willow: :::


e:f.4s Soulfi; afo,as Soucie.

Moineau à la foulfie. Looke under Moineau. -
Soulte:f. Souldiérswage;pay , or intertainment ; C'eft
aufsi, en matiere d'efchanges, le ‘retour que l'on
-vbaïlepour la plus-valeur d’un heritage; whence,
TEEN Efchange de terre fans foulte ; ? Land exchanged
ig without boot, without aay paiment ouer, without any


a ‘onerpluis paid, without any money giucn in regard of


Bus inequalitie or ia confideration of oddes 5 gland exeban-
: gedonely for lend.
: tmobilisire, Aretyre,er ansaid ineuables,
= ar in money nade by a cohciresor ner that hath
agreatertobim that bath a leffe, part in Wolandipen
uF ee ee Ae
Soumettre. Looe Soubmettre,


= 3 | ee pean Cet er cyte spe,


jos ia. 1h r}


ing, or fining |


ry LF hag ».3


gle 2e


= ee CL JE er.  : ee . L 7 ~~


upçonneux :m. eufe:£5 ieusd. ent,doubr
Ni unes a
Sew *f, A fap; a peece of bread in broth,or in browiss ;
d,pattage,or broth (wherein there fiore of fop: ips 07
Sats; Jalfobroms,
Soupe aux aulx. Garlick broth,or browis ; is made of
Garlick fodden in white wine with marre, Jops of
breada Partridge Clones, Fax alittle Cinnamon,
and good fore of Sugar.
Soupe defpourveuë. Bromis, or fops of bread ficeped
eng Parfleysæbich baue beene bayled 19.
~\ger,& the Rarfley fried with butter before the boiling,
Soupes dedevrier ; & foupes de prime. Seeke Le-
vrier,& Prime,
: Soupe vermeille, 4 difh,or fauce made of reds wine,
_ winegar, and Cinnamon, fir ained together, and boiled
\ with marrow;@ then, wish Small peeces of Chickens,
© Pigeons,or Partridges well fugared,and ferued in,,
sous en vin, ae er Snaple Clauer,. «'»
vre comme yne loupe, 4s drunke as a Sopsor tof.
De mefme pain soupes ,On Juy a fair de tel pain
foupes.Said when a babler is put done with words,
4 lyer confined by.bis ove allegations, a deceiwer 0.
werraught,a quareller cudgelled,or 4 proud feab oner-
pera a foupe.. Looke Sat
Il ne faucera fon pain en ma, ween
De la main àla bouche eaten la gens:
Prov. Many. a bit mifcarries betweene’t
pos. lip; we often loafè sane wee pie any
Soupé. Suppedior, bauing fappeden… se ;
Soupendre. Tabangon;or oner x 1a inttie or bearye out,
to land or leanebapond 3 alfo,to baila upon hall:
lers yvaults;érc, :* =
Soupenduë : :f, Apenthou; i iuttieorspart of a building
that muttieth beyond er leancshouer', the refi; alfo, a
UPON , Or ober; A. ur
leaning, out or beyond ; Louke enduc. .
Soupente :f. The fame (ime fl fence.) mone?
se m. # fupper. Lied
Souper de Marchand, A lag, eplentfl faprer,
. eaten,er ms


Qui garde fon difner il a mieux. à fouper : Pro, He
«that keepes bis dinner bath the more to bisfuppers he
ae ans Renn be'syoung may the better end: wien
ees 0
Qui toft vient 3 fon hoftel mieux uy, en eft à fon
fouper : Prov. He that comes earlie 10 bis Inne bath
Fu ee & isso} i hen’
. 0
Ce né ue difnénous fo! erons. we will end
where we begäor bold on the courfe wherin we bega; |
or keep,in the online the order we vfed inth'otber.
Mal soupe qui tour difne : Prov.Looke Difner.
0


banging, or building


| Sou a? chee moa /
Sou tie ad ibe
à Le D
oupoi poitrine,
mé aie pay lgmaal became. lind
Sorel ietitSoppendre, 1 at \w sare
Souppendué. Looke Soupendué,
sare, née Comte
bis bread in the beefe-pot
olan Se tom: Supe, limber, tener, fin nb
mtr ten mt. ake
enesspliantnes, flexib
lencs; & <a A apes
tricke,


Ofiginal from


Table QE STATE UNIVERSITY


S O V


Souppous. Looke Su a
Sou He if, A DE ave, frocke,or Gaberdine;

fc a one as our Porters weare, pret
| Source: fi 4 fource; bead, originall,beginning, of; a
ing, wellbead, well-/prings a feminarie ; race of


pring, i
Source, : mc: f Sourced, (prung or begun from ; alfo,
originally dravone from,taken from the fource of.
Sourcens ; &Sourcenfier. Looke Surcens; &, Sur-
*cenfier. à
Sourcer. Tofource;ta fpring ; to begin; to ifluesor draw
it originall from. ;
Sourchelons: m, The Frounce; a Hawkes difeafe.
~~ nee Niamurder ; ayellowifb,and verie jimall
ara, " oO
Sourcier :m. A Sorcerer. nifty
-Sourcil : m, Am eye-brow ; alfo,tbe ridge of baive grow-
ing therean; alfd, a frowning, furlie,or fowre counte-
nance.
Sourcilier : mere : € Of,or on, the eye-browes.
Sourciller. To mone the eye-browes up and downe, :
Sourcilles : £ The eye-browes,
Sourcilleux: m.eufe: FHaning verie great eye-brows;
alfo , frowning , or looking fowrely on it; furlie, or
prond of countenance ; alfo, raifed,aduanced,or lift vp
on bioh,
Sourd : m. The Salamander.
Sourd :m. fourde : f. Deafe,bard of hearing, or, that
cannot beare; alfo,lifileffeunattentiue,becdleffe; al[o,
dumme,without dinae or noife; (whence,in moift wea-
ther,they fay that a Tennis-court is fourd;) and {v-
lide,or without found, as a fiill bodie, or veffell well
filled; alfo,dull,ia{enfible, vnfauorie ; alfodarke,pri-
uie,prinate, (ecret, under-band,
Afpic fourd. (The Afpe,fayes Gefner , byreafon of
ber exceeding drought 5 accounted deafé; but that one
Afpe is deafer then another Trcad not.)
Lanternefourde. Atheeues Lanterne ; the blacke
Lanterne of yon which theeues,e> other priuate night.
walkers vfe to carrie about them,
Nombrefourd. Afurd number; a number whereof
a perfect (quave cannot be made.
Teinéture fourde, The courfef kind of dying, with
nought but bearbes:
Sourd comme vn tapis, As deafe as a doore-nayle
(fay we.)
Il n’eft point de pire fourd que celuy qui ne veut
ouïr : Prov, No man's worfe dea fetben be that will
not dre =~ sin } if fom
Sourdant. Springing up, rifing or arifing,
Sourdaftre pas Der hpbstbicke of bearing.
Sourdault. Somewhat deafé, thicke of bearing.
Sourdement: m, A vifing, arifing, fpringing vp,appea-
pearing out of. ; :
Sourdement. Deaftly; afo, unattentinely ; alfo, pri-
uatelyonder-band, in buggermugger without any din
or noi sal dub infenpiry. .
Sourdent: m, The fiumpe of a broken tooth.
Sourdefle: f. Deafene[fe,
Sourdeté: f The fame.
Sourdin: m.ine:£. Deafifh, thicke of hearing,
Sourdine :f, 4 Sourdet; the little pipe,or tenon put in-
tothe mouth of a Trumpet, to make it found low;
alfo, a Sordine or a kind of boarfé, or low-founding


Trumpet.
‘A la fourdine. Prinately, fecretly, clofely, without
much dinne,or noife,


Sourdife : f. Deafeneffe.


Fr


Digitized ny CO gle |


S OV


kind of little el fo.
Sourdoyant. Kifing,ifuine, fpringmg ont orvup; moun-
ting, arifing appearing aboue ; aifo, raifing, 1
Sourdre. To rift, ifue, (pring, boyle, come, out or up; |
tomount , arife, afcend, appeare, or hew it felfe a-
boue; alfo,to raife,or put up; whence they fay when 4
Hawke 3 a wing,or les for game,Qu’on luy fourde
des oifeaux, -
Souretier :m. ARat-catcher ; a Moufer, or catcher ef.
ice,


Sourdon:m, 4


Sourge. Laine S. New fhorne,unwafhed, or greafie
wool; wooll that is yet fall of it owne greafe.

Sourgeon : m, The young fhoot, er tender and vp-fhoo-

ting plant of a tree; alfo, tbe fpring of a feuntaine; or

one Telngybeyling.or (pouting up of water in a fpring.

Souriceau : m, A little,or young Monje.

ouricier: m, À Moufer,or Moufe-caicher.

Souricier : mere: € Of Mice; whence; Vermine fou-

riciere ; Mice, he

Souriciere:f, A Monfetrap.

Sourien:menne:£ Moufing; louing Mice ; bunting
after Mice. :

Souris: £4 Moufe ; alfo,the finewie brawne ofth'arms;

alfo,an Engine whereby a draw-bridze, downe, is bin.

dered from being pulled up againe.

Souris araigneufe. A fhrew Mouse,

Les fouris du Palais. Aduocates, Counféllors, Pleas }

ders, Pettifogzers. ;

Oreille de souris. The bearbe Pilofèlla, or Moufe-

eare,erc ; Looke Oreille.

Queuë de fouris. Moufe-taile Bloud-[lrange.

Lafouris qui n'a qu'une entrée eft incontinent |

happée : & Toft atcrapéc eft la fouris qui n’a pour .|

ifte qu'un pertuis : Prov. (So ll a Proteélor 15 1m-

‘onidence.)

egrand defleing vnefouris : Prov. (as the Latine

Parturiunt montes &c; ) AU that mountaine prewes
but amolehill. ;

Souriffeau : m. A little or young Moufe,

Souriflon. The fame.

Sourte. Looke Soutte.

Sous, Vander ,beneath,at the bottome of.

Sous terre. Vnder-hand,priuily, in buggermugger.

Faire tout fous {oy. À clald to beray himfelfe.

Se f, as Soubarbe; alo, the tbroat-band of

idle.

Endurer vne fousbarbe, To indure an iniurie.

Sousbride :f. as Sousbarbe, in the later fence; alfoyas
Soubride. ; 3

Souschambriere tf Akitchin wench, or drudge toa


_ houfe.
Souschanter. To fag vader,to bold the bafe, or ground
unto} or as Soubschanter.

Soufclavier: m.ere:: f. Vader the Kannell bone.
branch of the f


a


%
pike * »

CE # A

à ae 5. |


of bie,
ots bebe


Arterefoufclaviere. The afcendant
great Arterie. ;
Mufele foufclavier. One of the muskles which, in the
fetching of by eath,dilate,and fir eich out;the breaft.
Veine foufclavicre. Locke Veine, 9
Soufcoeur : m. The Pericardium,or thinne skin wher-
by the whole heart i concred.
Soufgorge d'une bride. The threat-thong,


or throat. |
band of a bridle. tro
Soufgreve :f. The leffe bone of the leg ; alfo, the calfe. of |
the leg.
Souflevesaentsts Souflever. Look Soublevement,&
Soublever. : vad
Soufpape: f. as Soupape. ”
Eeee ly


Soufpe. |


Originabt


THE:0HIO-STATE:W


S VOOV :


Soufpeçon: f. Sufition, iealoufie, diffidence, doubt,
, Pa ery fe, ;
Soufpeconné: m.ée:f. Sufpeëted, mifirüfied, bad in
iealonlie.
Soufpeçonner. To/üfpeit, feare doubt of, diftruft, mif-
trujl,bauc in a iealoufie,
Say mr — Sufpitionfly, icalou(ly, doubt-
û ¥, diférufifally.
Soufpeconneux : meufe : f. Suppitious dowbtfil,dif-
’ fident jealous, diftruftfull,
Soufpendement: m.4 banging or leaning ouer; a iut-
tying ov bearing out.
Souspendre, Looke Soupendre.
Souspendu: m.ué :f, Hanging,or bung ouer ; inttied,
or jèt out beyond, es
Vne defmarche foufpendué, 4 flealing pace,
Soufpendué: f. 45 Soupendue ; aff, as Surpendué,
efpecially-in the lall fence, ‘
Soufpente. Looke Soupenduë,
Souspefé : m.ée sf Peifed, weighed, pondered.
Souspefer. Topeife, weigh, ponder diligently; Looke
Soupefer.
Soufpir : m. A figh; alfo,a fhort breath; alfo, a Minime
refiin Mufice.
Demy foufpir. À Crochet reft.
Au dernier foufpir. At the lafi gafpe. :
Soufpirable: com. Fit 10 bee figbed for, wortbie of
moine,
Soufptrail. as Soufpiral.
Souspiraillé : m.ée : f. Hawing boles vents, open win-
dowes,or other paffages, for aire to come in and out at.
Soufpiral :m, An overture, or paffage for aire or breath
to come in and goe out at; a vent, or breathing bole;
Hence,the tunnell of a chimney; the window of a fel-
lar; the mfouth of a caue,or denne.
Soufpirement : m. 4 fighing.
Souspirer. To figh ; alfo,to defire vchementh.
‘A coeur dolent la bouche foufpire: Prove Sighes
in the mouth, (orrow atthe heart. | :
Soulpliévm. ée: f. Bent, or bowed under , fubieët


unio, ~ ;

Souffigner, Looke Soubfigner.
| Soutte: A prop, flay,or trefle of wood, PION,

Souftenable: com, Suflainable, fupportable, abidea-
 Souflenance :£ 4 prop, fupport, flay,maïntenance,
Ron balance. ) The checkes of a balance;
the vee upright peeces betweene which the needle
plaieth. jaa
Souftenant de bride. The cheeke-peece of abridle.
 Souftendrons.: m, The fides of the bellie under the


for vbs. ;
Souftenement :m. 4 fuflaining, fupporting, upholding,
maintaining ; induring abiding, 4
Souftenir, To /uflaine, /upport, vphold, ay or beare vp;
indure,tollerate,abide; alfo,(in fiaging ) to bold
Le; and(in manage) tokeepe a borfe , being rifen,
om comming too (done to the ground. _
Souftenir & abftenir. Looke Abflenir, -
ernery. She that gives fucke to anew-borne child
1 for two or three dayes,and untill the mothers milke be
(oa a ee
| Soulterter, 76 put, lay, burie onder, or mithin, the
re ~~ around, ms ty | SER CRESS, :
| Souftien : m. ibid which a Plaimtife puts into


RER D


ji
f
(4
à
i
r


x


son


Souftraire. Looke Soubtraire. 144 40

Soutane:f, Along and looffe coat, or cafocke,fuch as |
Church-men weare under their gownes,

Soute: f 45 Soutte; alo, a framke,or hogs-flie; whences |
Pourceau gras rompt fa foute : Prov, (Appliable
tothe unvulie bumors of pampered, or bigh-fed crea-
tures, Sah,

Souteft. as Pericraine, à ’

Soutre. Looke Soutte, _ : we

Soutte:f. A binne to keepe bread in; alfo, the roome-of |.
a fhip, wherein the prouifion-bisket is laied, -

Souvenance : f. Memovie, remembrance; alfa Ring
with many hoopes whereof a man lets one bang downe
when be would be put in mind of a thing, 21

Souvendier : m. The hearbe Cichorie,

Souvenir: m. 4 remembrance. ac.

me 0 remember,put in mind,bring to the memo-
rie of. À
Se rh Toremember, haue in memorie;cal to
mind, suis
I fouvient toufours à Robin de fes fleutes : Prov:
Looke Robin. |

Souvent. Often,many times.

Souvenu: m.ué :f, Remembred,called tomind or me-
motie, :

Souverain: m, A Soueraigne; one that acknowledges
no fuperior ; (and yet in old time a Prefident of Juj-
tice, or any in Office abone others, was tearmed fo)

Souverain: m. aine: ££ Soueraigne, Princelie, chicfe,
rh dr x paffing, excellent, bigh, notable, fiugu-

r


Souverainement. Soneraignely, Princely , chiefely,
4 principally, moft highly , notably , fingularly , excel-
ent ‘ye _
Souveraineté: f. Soueraigntie, principalitie , higheft
authoritie, chit fe gouernement, fupreme power.
Droiéts de Souveraineté. Are generally fix; viz.
Th’ enatting of,and di with, Lames; the crea-
ting of Officers ; the making of warre.and peace: the
bauing of le dernier reffort de-la luflice ; the coy-
ning of money ; and the raifing, or impofing thereof 3
whereunto fome adée, Confifcation fia Herefie, Trea-
Son,exc ; the granting of Priniledges, Faïres, Markets,
and Letters of Mart ; la Regale ; right wnto all
wreckes, and fhipwrackes; an intereft in th’abfolute
fealtie and bomage of the fubied ; power to naturalize
rrainers, legitimate baftards, ennoble Roruriers, or
peafants ; a tenth in all manner of mincs that baue
 beene,or fhall be, opened throughout al. France; and
diuers other Royalties, EUR:


“Soy. Him oil ber, ber fel


Retourner fur {oy. To returne the fame way be came. |
Sove Site lo ru Dil, goss au
liquer foye fur foye.Tolecher,
Mefler la foye avec lé fleurer, Fo iumble good and
bad together. A - CAEN ra
Soyer. To reape cornes
Soyes: f15,imtbe throats of fivine, a difeafe that flifles
them, if it benotprefenily cured ; alfo,as Sais.
Soyeux: mente sf, Silkie; brifilie; fill of filke or of
Soymefine. Him(elfe. jf aber 2
Soÿtier : m. ere :£.0/ filke,or dealing with filkes.
Spadaires : m. An Order of white Fricis which
weare on their babites a reprefentation of two rea


Swords, .
Spadafin ; or, Spadaffin :m. A cutter,backfler, fimag-
ean fii ser mn a . = à sine


 Spal-


OFigimal. from
sp ttt OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY
~~ - - ee.


aaa SVPOIE?

a 1 | Spaliner, To breeme and g'aue,or make cleane a fhip.
OR aillonsf. The purple fo; (not the parle ill
but a kind of finall Guilt-head, or yellow Sea-breame,
which bath a biacke {pot on her tayle.)

Spargirie € Alchymie ;.exteathion of quintefensess

sas com,.dn Alchymifi or extra6lor of quint-


oe effences, :


Spargivie Terre fpar. Terra figillata ; Leman
Carih, Ms {


i Spariée: f. A fea-wrecke; or,asNaxech,
À Sparte : m, as Sparton, 114 Vingt
{ Sparton: m.Spanifh.broome,or baftard Spanifh brome,
whereof bands to 1ye V'inessand (as in old seme) reapes
- | > for [bipping ynay be made salfo; Matmeed. +
| Spafe,ou peis Efpale. The féa-fox, or fox dog-fifh; afh-
My où coloured on the backe; and white on the: bellie: little
ay mouthed, but fharpe-tocthed ; orter, and thicker bo-
died, but hauing a longer tayle, then any other dog-fifh;
Sor that. (fomewhat Lke a fhvrt, and crooked fword-
_ blade) is langer then ber bodies @Gafcon.
Spafmarique: com. Troubled with a crampe,or a con-
vulfion, < \
Spafing am. The crampe; a conuulfion , (hrinking, or
plucking up of the finewes...\\ ‘
palin: m. ée : £ cramped; or,as Spafmatique,
‘Spalneux : m. cule: £ Full of the crampe ; or; conuul-
Siue,cramp-breeding. ; \
SEMicnlenauc, Spacioufly ; widely , amply , largely,
1044


Spatieux: m. eufe:£ Spacious, roomie, wide, large,
ample, broad, r


Salues,érc.

Spaze: f. A fivord; and as Spale, Gale,

Speans d'une vache. 4 Cowes.duddes.

‘| Speautre. Looke Efpeautre,

Special: m, ale: f. Speciall, particular, proper, peculi-
ar,chiefèsefpecial. |

Specialement. £ (pecially wamelyschiefely, particularly,
peculiarly,

Specicux: m.eufe: f. Specious, goodlie, faire,gracefull
in apparance , outwardly beautifull, honourable in


Em ; eset 2 ‘
Specifier To fpecifie, particularixe, declare, fignifie,de-
note.


Specifique: com, Special, particular.

Sheciememenr Specially, particularly,

S >com, Vifible, worthie the feeing, noteable,
goodiiesy ’


enowmed, TE

Spectacles m. A fpectacle; a publike fight, fhew, page-
ant, play. , . ;
Spectateur: m. A fpellator bebolder,on-looker,.

Spectatrice: f A fheélatrix ; awoman that giues a

sApublike) thing the lookingon, | site

e: m. An Image, or Figure, féenc either truly, or

~ but in conceit; (thence) alfo,a fpirit, ghoft,vifion,appa-
Tition, Mes . = c ü

Speculaite: com, Cleere,tvan(parent ; alfo, helping the


Pierre fpeculaire. as Pierre à miroir, vader Mi-


| roir.. ; F :
Speculateur: m. 4 fpeculator, contemplator, obferuer,
GTR do BF ' ’

Speculation: f. Speculatioa,contemplation ; a confide-

ing; or obferuing ; a viewing, watching, or pying out

from a high place. ; shai: >
Speculatrice: f. 4 fpeculatrix; a contcmplatine,obfor»
_ wing, aduifed or watchfull woman. zie


Spatule:£.-The flice wherewith a Surgeon fpreadeth Sphe:


rie


S CP H


S et. To (peculate, contemplate, obferue, confider,
bee out; Peer hard; looke aes
Sfarre,efpie a farre off, — ; ait
elonque: £ A hole inarocke ; a wild beafls denne.
Speltre: m, as E{peautre,
ngitide. ERab. Looke Sphengitide, en
ea com. Spermatick ; containing,or full of,
ere, ‘
Veine fpermatique. Looke Veine. Lime
— To jpermatize ; to foed, ciedt, or inie®
ETC, i
Sperine: m. Sperme, (eed, nature, gencratine moiflure:
Spet: m, 4 flender, long, rauenous, great-eyed, fharpe-
nofed, crooked-toothed, white-bellied, blackfh-backt
Sea-fifh,called by fome the Spit-fifh, and by others (be-
caufe it fomewhat vefemblesa Pike) the ‘fea-Pike.
Sphacelé: m. ée: f. Mortified by inflamation,
Spiaceioe To mortifie by inflammation. .
phatule. Looke Sparale,
Sp itide. Transparent. &Rab.
Sphenoide. Os fphen. The cuneall bone.
Sphere: f. 4 Sphere, tials bovele ; any round fi.
gure,or thing. hme
“Spheres. The rotmd knobs on the borders of forme
Fiench-boods. ns 5 j
Sphere droiéte, That sphere wherein one fees both the -
pie re his borixon;the Equator flanding iufl oner
ad. i .
Sphere oblique. An oblique Sphere ; that whereinone
of the Poles is raifed aboue our horizon, and the other
hidden under it,


mae: com, Sphericall , orbicular , globe-lije,
rouna, ; ;


Sphicie: £, A kind of spider like a great wraspe,. |
Sphinge: m. The Sphinga,or Sphinx; an Fndian,and E- |.
thyopian beaft, rough-bodied like ax Ape (of the kind
whereof be i ) yet haireleffe betweene bis necke, and.
breaft; round,but out, faced; and breafted like a wos
man ; bis unarticulatevoice like that of a haftie fpea-
| 3 more gentle and tameable then an ordinarie Ape,
yet fierce by nature, and reucngefull when heishurt :
hauing eaten-meat ynough, be referues his chaps-füll to
feed on when be feeles bimfelfe bungrie againe.

Spicaire. Roman Spike,or Lauender.

Spicquenard: m. The hearbe Spikenard,

Spinal: m, ale: f. Of or ia,the chine,or back-bone.
Spinale medulla, ou mouélle. The marrow of the
back-bone§ derined from the braine, and Ake a maine
locke, from which all the finewes under the bead doe


grow, ;
Spinelle: f. ti of verie red Gurnet.
! ens eu


ineux. as Efpineux mea ioe?
Spinul: m, A Splent in a horfes leg, 6 2
Spique : £.:Spike;Lauender,Lauender Spige, - >
Spiquenard: m. The bearbe Spikenard. «|
Spiquenard vulgaire. Lanender Spike. > 1.
Spirals : m. A breathing bole; a hole to let ayre,breath,
or fmoake in and out ; alo, a hole that euaporates a
Tong or peflilent ayre ; adamp-bole. À
sp le: com, Giuing breath, breathing life, infafing |
vit into, i Dae OS
Spiral: m. ale: £ circling,wreathing about,vwinding or
turning round, tors Sab


Spire: f Arandle, round, or circle; a turning or win-
ding compaffe ; the coyling, or making up of a Ca-
ble ; alfo,a Quadrant, or Square inthe bottomeof a
Pillar Let


Spiriteux. Looke Spiriuëux. DORE ENT


MU


Original fram
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSE as
Laer > he


SP.


Spirituel. La Chapelle blanche fpirituel d'Anjou;
viz.within the dioces, or fpirituall 1urifdiéhon, of An-


ou.
Spirituel .m. elle: f, Spirituall, ghoftlie, diuine; eccle-
fafhcall.
Spiritueux: m.eufe: f.Spirituall, breathfull,breathing,
in life; giuing lift; alfo,quicke,limelie, vigorous, fill of


it.

pro: f. A hind of fmall Artillerie.

Splanade: f..4 plaine,champian countrey,leuell ground,
euen plot.

Splendeur: f. Splendor, light, fhining,lufler, gliflering,
brighineffes alfo,bountie, nobleneffe,excellencie ; alfo,
bonor, glorie, renowme.

Splenitique: com. Troubled with the fplecne; alfo,of,
or insthe [pleene ; whence,

Arterefplenitique. Seeke vnder Artere.

Splenique: com. Ofor inthe milt,or {pleene.

Veine {plenique. The {pleeme veine ; one of the fix
branches of the liner veines or,as Veine fplenitique,
under Veine.

Spode: m. The heanitr foile, foot, or oare of Brafse, ga-
thercd onthe floores of melting-houfes. |

Spodizateur: m. One that maketh Spode, or gettetb
foot, &c, fom Braffe, by trying,or melting it.

Spodon de canne.Artificiall,or éounter eit Spode,made
of the reotes of reedes and Ox-bones burned...

Spoliateur: m. 4 fpoyler ; ficipper, defpoiler 5 theefe,
robber ; pyrate. 5 2:

pres : f A fpoyling; defpoyling, firipping; depri-
uing of.

Spoliatrice: f.4 (poyling,or defpoyling woman; wench
that lines on the fpoyle.

Spolier. To fpoyle ; defpoyle, firip, ranfacke, rob,warobe;
to deprine,or bereane of ; to difseife. 5

: Spolin: m. 4 kind of gold.or filuer thread.

Spolentes. Looke Pfoloente. (Rab.

Sponde. ‘A fponde. sidewoaies or edgelong.

Spondilles, ou Spondyles. The knuckles , or tur-

ning ioyats of the chine, backe, or neck-bone ; alfa,

the heads of Artichokes;al(o,the unfauorieor ill-tafling
œflers Gaideropes.

Spongethere: £. 4 certaine little fea- fihwhichrefem-

bles the fea-fpider, and is faid to guard, and gouerne

the fpunge.

Spongicux: m. eufe: f. Spungie; light, puft ups full. of
finall holes,or eyes, like a (punge.

Os fpongieux. The bone Étmoïdes, placed in the
top,or upper part of the nofe.

Seas : £, Spunginelfe,or {pungionfneffe; a [pungie
igbineffe.

Sponfeur: m. A volunsarie promifér, vadertaker, or
furetie for another. x j

Spontane : com. Voluntarie,of free will ; natuvall not
forced; without belpe, or conjlraint.

| Spontanement. Voluntarily. ery
Sporte: f. A fafhion of hand-basket,or frayle with han-

dles,ufed for market-imployments 3 alfo, the load of a

… Cammell,or Mayle, comming to 375 pounds, after 16

_ Ounces to the pound.

ale: £. Money, or meat giuen ordinarily by Princes

-* go the people,or unto their followers; (moft properly the
former) boord-swages,or a pecuniarie allowance in lieu

of dinner and fupper ; alfo,the fee ginen by a Clyent vn-

+ bis 3 alfo, a little maund, or band-bas-
pete d .

Spouillereffe .48 Efpouillerefic. orate

Spurrie: £. Spurrie,or Franke; a Dutch hearbe, and an


2
4
4
4


f


4 14
a) ©


=i Gor gle


= 4 — nd


Spyrate. Rab, kind of flux in the fimdament;or more
properly,as ; ’

Spyrathe. The dung of a Sheepe,or Goat.

Squadron: m. A (quadrom; a fyuare troope,or band,or

Squaran

Squelette. Looke Scelete.


Squenente. Looke Squinant,
Squenie: f. The Frocke, long Jacket, Coat,or Calfocke


fants,érc.
Squille: f, The Squill, or fea-Onyon; alfo, a Prawne,


Squilles d'os, Little éales, or fplints of broken bones,
Squillin: m. Vineger fharpened by the fea-Onyon, or


Squillitique: com, Of, or feafoned with, or wherein


Squina


Squinance: f. The Squinancie,or Squintie ; a diftafe,
Squinant: m, ‘The fweet rufh tearmed Squinant, and


Stalle, À feat,or flall to fit on.


SIM


excellent fodder for cattell.


battaile of fouldiors ;alfo,in enery companie,the troope
thats under the commaund of a Corporal, .

chon: m.The finooth-{helled Crayfifotearmed
a Pungar,Grit,or Grampell.


(moft commonly) of Cannas, worne ontmoft,or over all
other clothes, by Porters, Carters , Horfe-keepers, Pea-


a 3 or a generall name for ail fifhes of that


ina,
Squille commune. Our ordinarie fea-Onyon; lefie in
forme, and weaker ia operation then ph seta bis
Scilla, which Mathiolus bolds to be onely that which
growes on the fea-coafis of Spaine.


Scallion.


there is the fèa-Onyon.
de. Cancre {quin. The long-legd, and rough-
coated Crabfifh, tearmed by fome, a Fryll. Marfeil-


lois.


Cammels Hay.

Squinaude. Looke Squinade.

Squine. Bois de fquine, The knotiie, and medicinable
root of an Fadian,or Chinean bullrufb.

Squiopetins: m. An Order of Auguftine Fryers.

Stabilité : f. Stabilitie, edfafineffe, firmene(ft, fire-
nefe, conflancie, fafine(fe.

nn = re firme, fire, fledfaft, immoueable,
conflant,affured.

State; or, Myrrhe flaéte, Looke Myrrhe.

Stade: m. A race for men, or borfes to runne in; alfa, a
proportion, or meafure of ground , whereof there be
three forts ; viz.the Ftalian,containing 125 paces; the
Olympicke of 120 paces; and the Pythick,of 200 paces;
all after fiue feet tothe pace.

Stafilade: f. À la{h, or thwacke with a flirrup-leatber,

Stagnant. Eau ftagnante. The water of ponds, poles,
motes, or ditches; water that runnes not, flanding
water. ;


Stanbouque: f. The wild Goat Ibex; Looke Ibice.

Stance: £ .A ftation; a lodging, dwelling, or abiding
lees ; aff, a panfe, or flay; alfo, a flan, or flaffe of
verles.

Stangue d'un'ancre. The fiaffe of an Anchor.

Stanguette: f The eye of the branch of a Bit.

Stap one Stanesaker,Licebane,Low/e-wort, Low

if


er.
Étapbifaigre fauvage. Wild Licebane.

Statere: m, An Athenian coyne of filuer, weighing
half Ar ounce; alfo,a coyne of gold worth about xv} s
ji

Starre: f. A Roman, or Goldfmiths ballance ; Troy:
weight.

Statif: m. ine: f. Standing, pitched,or et.

Station: f À ation land, fending place,or pawfe;al/o,

a


Original from


THE OHIO STATE.UNIVERSITY


Le


s*


| Statuer.Tocflabkfh,


| Si T | |


Shea refartyabade,or lays iy; a manfion,dweellingsar \
idling, laying’ alfoya roadior bay far foipping, sete


siscomave com, That bath a flanding, or place ofia~


bode ; mené hits es Prime tot


Leite, m. Ce: £ Set or felled, planted or pitched
ina place, appointed a place to flandine vin» \ 2p:

Stationner. To fet or fètile, plant or pitch a place; te
\apporata fla ding uitiea.. dun rie oo)

Sratuaire : m. ASIabiarie, Stanerensser Statue-ma-


Starusire: f, are emanate eA oY Stages


king.
| Statué: £4 Statwes, soning maintenu


tall, yuorie,or flqnei..


plant, fetile, orfès fspmrats ep Mérgeÿ\er
thinke afjurediy of, ,
hotel fi Stature, pb, height, or Dreparion of i. |


sim. Arrefs,ouftacuts de querelle. Judgements g i-
menandentred'méafes of unpeached poffeffiam. : 112

Statutaire, Amende ftat, as Amende couftumiere ; i
(Auttilde Li


allow.
Steccade: € 4 face railed in for a Combat, or Lifts
Stechados. Stcckada ar Stickadoue,Caffidonia or Cafe |
hae Ye French, Laucader , or the fiveet flamer |
thereo
Stellage. Droit de ftell €. Tallcarne;and oll-fatt ;
aad ah fall upon cuerie cprier Sema within
Buillon; dae tothe Duke


Stellingues: m. Libertines ; for fa did the Saxons,upme
tuber tie of conftience graunted them by Lotharius the
Emperur, tearme themfelues.


an enuious fellow; or one that cannot indure another-
Should be the better, by him; fromthe Stellio,whichbax
uing (as he doth halfe-yearelie) capt bus skin(a foucraign
temedie for the falling fickneBe)jxefently deuoures itsto. |

~" depriue mankind of it. -

Stellionar: mA coufè eninge counter iting of marchan-

- dife; an vninft or deccitfull gaining ; à malicious or
… ffandulent bereaning another of his money, wares,due
prowifian,or bargaiue.

Stentoré: m. éc : (fewhence, Voix Srentorée. A buge

. voice, fach aaneas the Grecian Stentor had.
ercorin: mine: f Excrementall, turdie.

Stereomettie: f. Themeafuring of fatide bodies,

Sterile: com. Sterilebarren, fruitleffe,

Sterilite: f. Sterilitie,barrennefesunfiuitfillnelfe,

:m. Thera pant of an ounce; or. tr NT

foure fifis of a graines a meight among lewellers,

Sternomantie: f. Divization by.amans breaft.

Sternutatoire:m. 4 fneexing medicine,or pret

Sterometrie:f LovkeStercometrie.

Sterph aC

Sticines: m. Fluters, or Pipers, (Rab.

Sticonomantie vf, Dinination by wards mritien on be
barkes of Sepia xd ve

Stiersm, as ther, ‘Bourguignon, :

Stigmatizé: m. ée: f.. Branded, marked,burnt pin a
hat yon ; defamed, infamores.

Stig matizer. F0 brand, burne, ax marks wish a red
bot yron ; ala, to. défames


opealys. publikely.
Stile The tonnes de of pleading; anof


e" .


cuatlordaine,afigne,appointspitebs


Ss teatome: m. 4 impoftuine whofe mattar is like fasor


lagier: Le rt © he Duke of Ballons |


Stellion: m, The pasted, or flarrie Lizard Stelios, alle |


SATTI:


; Proceedingin Laws | if
| ‘Stile: m. Es Style. Frot
| Stilé: m.ée : well acquainted wae, iol tayedsmach
5 A achat penuredsor vfed un r ini
Le + Com, Stilling diflilling dropping, $
se ide: mm. The nues é
| Sulli itique. Vinaigre {t il, Wherein the prepared fea-0-
te | ayon bath beene efleeped. .
| Stim’ tpricher forwards; a prouoker,egger,
urger,in igator,inciter, : :
| ation: f A pricking or fourring formard ; a pro
in cine gaine urging
| dis jan 'infligatrix.
Stimule: m. 4 coe, pricke; fling ; (purre ; an urging,
“gins 3 inciting’; 3 ain. infligation ‘or violent motion
| Stigrahees To pricke, infligate, incite; ( {purre forward,
fone ré fhinne ov 3 alfo,a kind f inall fifh.
Ince: 4 ;
iwc Fief fpal Which defeends toa direlt heive or
ill continues in the Pofeffion of thofe which are of te the
‘nine locke of a
Sti ipendié: m. A ipendiarie;or bite
Scbendiften: ée: fi, Hired, aged, i
wages.
Stipendier. To bire,wage,intertaine.
Sieg Stipicitie,coftivencRe,obfruftion,
| See ule: f, The fea Onyon.
ti pe Droié de ftippes,& nobis;&, Droiét de vins,
‘s eS.) ide en Droit,
Ë di ue. Stipticke, re, ritline floppi
‘Sept Cquewanting, requiring,» rte
ulateur: in. 4 flipulator ; be that atintending to bind
another by words, asketl biewbether be will sites or
Z PEN he ba?
| Stipulation: 4 /ffipulation, dois promife, rs
grrr a demaunding of the perfirmance of
couenaats ; a bond for the hou of munity peifor-
| ~) Mance of comenants,
Stipulé: m.ée:f. Required arcarding to lel bargai-
; ned contratted conditioned ,couenauted. :
| Stipuler. To flipulate; te require a thing in sdinerie
Dr of law; alfo , to congnant, or promife effec-
tua
Stirage: m. Tollor cufiome due 10 the King, oe, upon
Pr Septier. 6.
ocfiz : im. Stet
Stoechados. French Lanender,Steckador, 5 Stickadae,
Caffidonie, Caft-me-dowrte, remy
Stole: f. A flole; along rob cemrataeslii ey
tothe an ss or hecles.
impale: f Sram oral of orinthe ;


Si
‘ftomackes; rat ha pe
Moi Rontabdls vs nt om tebe


presen in bei


jertained with |


oo ae ique. imi a oe
wees orange L'idloa
ur arise ™


Stoques.4 borrowing;or taking open pair
sea Faire ftoques. Sa toburrom,: :
“The \Storax à 0 4?


Storax calamite. The beft kind of Storaig boone :

from Aleppo, - kept in canes) or EURE

reedes.

Storax guide Lil s Storex ; 5 a Myathe fade

(under Mythe) Ses brut
tra-


é alkfram
THE:OHIO;STATE-UNIVERSITY


i Ce


Origin


S TR


Strabouite: m. A fquint-eyed fellow; alfo, one whofe
altions,as well as eyes,are awry.

Stradiot. a Eftradiot.

Strambot: m. 4 7yg, Round,Catch,countrey Song.

Strangulation: f. 4 firangling, flifling,choaking.
Strangulation de la matrice, The fiffocation of the
Alatrix,

Strap. Rab. Looke Seraph.

Stratagematique: com. Stratagemicall, full of fira-
tagems ; of, or like to, firatagems,

Stratageine: m, A firatageme ; a wittie tricke, or fhift
in warre.

Strepite: m. A "9fe, dinne, or bruit ; a cracking, crea-
king, rumbling,rufiting,

Strette : f. A pinch, nip, wrinche,twindge gird,

Strident: m. ente: f. Crafhngslafoingscree ing.

Scrié: m. ée: f. Chamféred channelled made full of gut-
ters,or holes,

Stricure: f À chamfering, channelling , firrowing in
ftone,or timber.

Strin: m. À baflard Dyamond.

Stropes: m, The loopes whereby the oares of a Skiffe,erc,
doe bang,or hold,ta the Thowles.

Strophe. The fretting of the gutsor belly-acbe,


4 Strophule: Ê The Kings euill,


Stropier. To lame,or mayme,

Structure: £ 4 firudiure; fabricke, frame,compofition,
building ; a proportionable ordering , fit couching,
feemelie compacting of things gone

Strumofité: € The fivelling of the throat,

Stryge. 4 Scriche-owle.

Stüc:m. A fiae, and fhining Potters clay; alfo, acom-
pounded mor ter or clay made of lime, fand,paper, and
other materialis ; verie fit for Fmagerie.

Studieux: m. eufe: f. Studious, parmefull,carnef,care-
‘full; defrrons or greedie of, addiéted or deuoted vnte,


} Stupeur: f, Stupor, mamne (fe vnfencibleneffe,dulinefe,


aflonifhment,aftoniednefe.
Stupide: com.Stupide ,benummed, fencele[fe;dull, bloc-
ifh Lumpifh ; amaxed,appalled ,aftonied, ait
Stupidement. Sencelefly, dully, blockifhly, Lampifbly;
with much amazement.
Stupidité, Ssapiditie, fencelefneffes dullneRebiockifh-
nelle ; aflonifhment,amaxemènt. Pak,
Seygial m, ale: f Of; in, or belonging to, the Stygjan
aye,
Stygien: m.enne: f. Stygian; or as Stygial; whence,
emmne ftygienne. A moft fell, cruell, or diwellifh
5 queane. cod petits
ieux, 45 Sty
Sy m. as Stil, 6


Style: m., The pinne of a paire of writing tables ; allo,
pees Ronan toting clash
" firitt forme or der, or courfe obferued in indiciall plea-


dings and proc


Saas


À Soylet: m. 4 Sriletro; the al end foarpe-pointed dag-


er, forbidden in many townes of fralie,
ate: £, Tbe footftall of a Pillar;or the whole frame
t 2 :


o we |


Su. a S


«tee?


Daa Things which haue an ordi


SV B


Suadeur: m. 4 perfuader,aduifer mouer inducer.
Süages: m. Sweatings ; or, things which procure fivea-


tng,
Suaire: m.The peece of linnen wherein the face of a dead
man is wrapped; alfo, a band-kercher, or linnen cloth
2. |


towype 0

Suais. Looke Suays.

Siiant: m. ante: f. —
‘A-poulce süant. By ynch, or thumbe-meafure ; the
breadth of a thumbe ginen betweene euerie yard in
meafuring.

Suafeur: m, À perfuader inducer aduifer.

Suafif: m. iue: f. Perfuafiue ; able,or fit to perfuade.

Suafion: f. A perficafion,aduifé,exhoriation,

Suafoire: com, Suaforie, perfuading.

Suave: com. Sweet, pleafant, palate-pleafing delicious;
finooth; courteous, gentlemeeke {of}, :

perio Ge Softly; fmoubly;gent- ¥

,conrteoufly.

Suavité : £ Suanitie, fweetne[[e,delicioufneffe; fofinefe,
{moothnefe ;courtefc, gentlenee,meckenefe

Suays: m. A kind of frogs which be feene onely in fome
parts of France.

Subalterne: com, Subalerne, fecundarie under infe-
rior, fubiefl unto others,


Subarbe : f. The muferoll , or nofè-band of a bridle,


Subaudition: f. Part of a mans meaning expref[ed,and
the ref underftood ; or, fuch an expre,

Subcoftale: £ A thin,and finooth skin, which clothes the

‘inner fide of the ribbes, and conefs the vitall parts con- |
tained within the bulke.

Subdelegation: f. À fubdelegation, or (ubjlitution.

Subdelegué: m. éc: f, Subdelegated, fubfiituted.

Subdeleguer. Tofubdelegate, fubflitute, appoint ano-
ther under him ; or tore, em ouer a bufinefe,drc,com-


mitte
Subdial: m. ale: £ Al-open, wholly diftouered; without
. the houfe,abroad in the ayre,

Subdivifer. To fubdiside; to make a fecond dinifion,or a
diuifion of adinifion.

Subelin. Martres fubelinnes. Sable-Martins; the beft
wed Martin,

Subet: m, 4 Lethargie,

Subhaftation: f, 4n Outrope, Outcry, Portfale; or the
felling of things by Outrope, dc: (The auncient Romans
ufed fefpecia in time of warre) to hold their Ontcries
under a kind of Speare,or ianelin,

Subhafté: m. ée: £. Sold,or paffed away, by Outcry.

Subhafter. To paffe away goods by Outcry, or Port-
fale ; to fell things mile to them which will gine


moft.

Subiacent: m.ente: £ Subiacent; under-lying.

Subic&: m. 4 fubiect, vaffall ; underling ;
thrall; and pr ‘ant wobo being bound,
by bis tenure, to pay-fcot and lot unto bis Lord, is not
bound 10 follove him tothe marres without pay.
Qui de fes fubieéts eft hai n’ eft pas feigneur de
fon pais: Pro. Poore is the Prince bats bated by his
fucbieéls; as good loofe all his countrey as their hearts,
‘Vn feigneur de heure ae F4 as
cier: Pro. 4 Lord of flraw fubdues a flecle.

Subiedt: m. eGte: £ Subiedt, vafall, under ; feruant,
‘thrall; obedient ; yable unto; gouerned by; under the |
ter of.
Subieét aux biens. Conetous ; à fa bouche. Jatem-
perate; à fes fantafies. Fantaflicall, de,

Subieétion: f. Subie&lion, thraldome, feruitude ; obe-


a €,


S WE


eS eee


dience; refiraint limitation. . . :
Subier:m. The Corke-tree ; the tree whofe barke is
Corke,


| Subinfeudation: € 4 /ubinfeoffing ; the creating ofan


vader tenure,or Lenancie in fee.


| Subioindre. To fübioyne, adde or put unto, bring or fet


onder,

Subit: m.ite: f. Swift,quicke baftie, (peedie; fuddaine,
vathought of;untooked for,

Subitain. Looke Soudain,

Subitement. Swifity,quick!y, fpeedily, in a trice, out of
band,by and by; fuddainely,at unawares.

Subjugation: f. 4 fubduing,taming, yoking or bringing
vader obedience.


1 Subiugé: m.ée : f. Tamed,fubdued,vanquifhed,brought


under the yoke of obedience.

Subiuguer. To fubdue, vanquifh, tame, bring into fub-

ieclion,or under the yoke,

Subler. To wbiflle; to whixze. .

Sublet: m. 4 whiflling,or whizzing noife.

Sublimn. as Sublime,or Subli

Sublimation: £. 4 fublimating, raifing,or lifting vp ;
alfi,a fublünation, diftillation,or extraction. ‘


| Sublimatoire: m. 4 fablimatorie; an infirument, or


velfell, of fublimation.


{ Sublimé: m. Sublimatum,or Sublimie, Arfenick,Rats-


ane. .


b
Sublime: com, Sublime, high,loftie, baughtie,bonoura- *


ble, flatelie,


| Sublimé: m. ée: £. Reifed,exalted,aduanced unto dig-


. nitie; alfo, [ublimated,or mixed with Arfenicke; alfo,
Sublimed,extratted, or diflilled. : ’
Argent fublimé. Mercurie fabtilixed by the Lim-
ecke. :
Sublimément.Lofiih,bighl haughtily,atliy bonow
6


rably. .
Sublimer. To raifé,oduance,exalt, fet up on high;alfo,to
fublimste,or mingle with Arfenick; al{o, to fublime,di-
fill,extraét,or (ubtilize by diftilling, ;
Sublimité: f. Sublimitie, lofiinefe,haughtine[fe, bigb-
nee, fatelineffe. =
Sublin: m. ine: f High, fublime, loftie, baughtie; al/o,
refined,moft fine ,exquifite,excellent.


| Submergé: m. ée: € Submerged, plunged or funke vn-


der, whirkened or overwhelmed in, boulged or oner-
: flovene by, the water, «
Submerger. To fubmerge ; to plunge or finke under,
whirken ov ouerwheline by, dip, drowne, or boulge in,
* the water, : ‘
Submerfion: f. 4 fubmerfion, plunging, finking, oner-
whelming, drowning, boulging.
Sub:niniftrateur: m. 4 fubminiftyator, an-under-fia-
_ nifher,an inferior officer. : oan}
Subminiftration: fA fubminiftration, (inferior) fer-
uiceyunder-hand supply. : ;
Subminiftré :m. ée : € Subminifired, ferued vader,


Supplyed or fürnifhed vnder-band. =p
SubminiftiersTofubminifer, or (èrue under; al, to
fürnifhor (apply (onder-hand,or under another.)


Submirmilant. @Rab.as Submurmurant, |
Submis. Looke Soubmis.


À Submurmurant. Murmuring, muttering, mumbling to


inf.
Subornation: £ 4 /übornation,or fuborning ; the ma-
hing inflruétingor brineioa or a falfe witnelfe ; alfo,
a corrupting, peruertine,deprauing, =...
Subornement. «s Subornation,


Suborner: To juborne ; tomake,prepare, inftrudl, foil or


S V’B


bring ina fale witneffe; alfo,to deprane,corrupt, per -
uert, perfuade or allure unto éme. : ' 4 4
prieur: m. À füborner of witnelfes ; a corrupter of
otners,
Subrecart: m. 42 affiflant, or affociate ; one whom a
Judge calleth to ft with him one whom Phifitions, for
an important cure,or confisltation,chufe to igyne with


them.
Subredorade: f. A great Guilt-bead.or the ;
Gale | ead,or the greatef of


Subreptice : com, Subrepticions, or fürrepticious; ff


ted,or fal[ely crept in; fuppofed ; indirellly come by.
Subreptif: m, iue: £. Subreptine ; or,as Subreptice,
Subreption: f. 4 fubreption; fuppofition, foifting or
falfe creeping in; af, a filching, purloining or flealing
away, 1


Subreptivement. Subrepticioufly, prinily,under-band.

Eng flealth,by falfè meanes. ee

Subricant. Looke Subrecart.

Subrogation: f. 4 fübrogation, fubflitution, deputati-
on ,apporating another in the roome of.

Subrogé: m. ée: f, Subsogated, /ubflituted,depamed,
appointed in the roome of another,

Subroger. 70 fubrogate, fubfitute, depute.or appoint in
the roome of another,

Subrogué.& Subroguer. as Subrogé, & Subroger.

Subfecutif: m. iue : "€ Subfècutine ; confequent ; im-
meee following or depending on, Succeeding in the
necke of.


Subfecutivement. sub/equently, confzquently,immedi-*


ately hard at the heeles of.
Subfide : m. Helpe,aid,afiftance,reliefi, fücçour ; aff,
a fubfidie,


Subfidiaire: com. Subfidiarie, Succouring ; affifiant 3


Lent,or ginen to the aid of.
Subfidiairement. Subjidiarily belpingly, by way of fuc-
cour.

Subfidier, To Lay fublidies on.
Subfiftence: £ Subfifience, continuance, abode, remai-
ning,a flanding to,or by.ir. | | °
Subfilter. To fubfift, abides remaine, fland bis ground,

freeze or continue bis place.
Subftance: f. Subflance matter, fluffe. À
Subftancier.To fuftaine, feed xourifh, fatten, fluffe with
matter, fill with (ubftance. | it
Subftanté,& Subftanter. Looke Suftenté,&c.
Subftantifique: com, Subfantiall, or fubfiañce-yeet-


ding. :
Gba m. eufe: f. Subfantiall, flufie.:
Subftitu: m. 4 Subftitute ; a Deputie, Ficegerent,Lien-


tenant,


Subftitué: m. ée : €. Subficuted, deputed, ordained or


»putin the place of anothers. -
Subftituer. To /ubpfitute,ordaine depute appoint, place,
or put in the roome of another.
Subftitut: m. A fubflitute. :


Subftitution: £. 4 fichflitution, or deputation; the ap-


pointine,or placing of one in the roome of another,
Subftraétion: f. 4 fiukfirattion ; a withdrawing or ta-
ire away from; a diminution of. on 1
Subterfuge: m. A fubterfige; a fhift ; à priuie fiip,
craftie euafion, cunning efcape; a corner or holete flip
into,or flinke out at. . ka
Subterrain: m, aine: £ Thats under the earths.
Subtil: m. 4 kind of finall gold or filuer thread.
Subtil : m. ile: £ Subsill, craftieswilie pwittie,cunning,
Subtilement. S« biilly,wittilycunningheraftily.
Subtiliant:m. ante: f) Exteamating fubtilixing. a


peo Gouge


Original:from
THE OHI STATE-UMIVERSITY é


Sab.


A


§- VIC


Subtiliation: f, A fubtiliation,or fubtilixing,

‘| Subtilier.’ro /ubtilize extenwate make thine, fine lefe
or mure [lender ; alfo, to plot, inuent, contrine,deuife;
imagine, mufe, :

Subtilifement: m. 4 fubtilizing.

Subtilifer. To fubtilige ; to make thinne, fine, fmall,

Subtilifeur: m, Af#brilixors

Subtilité: £, Subsiltie,wittineffe; craft,canning.

Subtilizer. Looke Subtilier,

Subvenir. To helpe, aid, fuccour, affifi, relieue, main-
lame, *

Subventané: m.ée: f windie, full of wind, that bath
nothing but wind init.

Subvention: £ Subuention,belpe,aid, reliefe, fucconr ;
alfha fubfidie.

Subvention de procez. Am impofition of 100 s
Tourn: vpon eucrie Adtion thats abowe,and 40 s upon
encrie one that sunder,100 pounds:

Subverfion: f. 4 fubuerfion,ruine,oueribrove,

Subverti: m. ie: f. Subuertedouerturned,ruined,oner-
throwne,deftroyed. :

Subvertir, To fubuert, onerturne, defiroy, ruine, oucr-
throw.

Subvertiffeur : m. A fubuerter, ouerturner , oner-
thrower.

Suc: m. Sap,inice,moifluze,

Succarin: m. ine: f, Of fagar; Looke Succrin,

Succeder. To fucceed, follow, enfue bane ifue, come to,
of come to paffe; alfo,to inberite.

» Succelent. Looke Succulent,

Succement: m. 4 fucking.

rue :m. ée: f, Verie finely fearfèd,

uccenturieux: m.eufe: £ Supplying the number, fil-
ling up the place,of one that is abfent,or dead.

Succer. To fucke.

Succeron: m: A certaine little,and long-nofed vefell of
earth, whereby young infants are fuckled.or fed.

Succes:m, Suceoftjiiva,wuents the end,or falling ont of
amatter; bapslucke. :

Succeffeur: m. A fuccefor, fucceeder, followers

Succeffif: m. iuc:f. Succefliue, belonging to fucceffi-


on
Succeffion : £ Suece/fion; inberitance ; a fucceeding,or
following in the place of another.
Par fücceffion de temps. Jn time ; in tral, procefe,
or continuance of time, after fome dayes or yeares.
Succeffivement. Succ finely,one after another.
Succez. Looke Succes, _ .  ! ,
Succif: m, iue: f. Sucking ; or, which may be fucked.
game Succinétly , compendionfly ,
re felfe :
Succion: £ A fucking. .
| Succocitrin. Looke Cicotrin.


oot canada ge
| © bartbems to yeeld,gine way; be.
Succot, Fullof nice til
çoté, Sucked gently, and finackingly ; alfe, kifed


or lye downe, under a


| Sucgoterr te gemtend fete aki
Fr eek fendi;


>


Succombé: m. ée: f. Ouercharged,onercome; foaled,


Suffunigation: f À Pigeon: nn


svc


with fugar, feet as
Alun fuccrin. A
whites of egges, and roche Allum; ufed much by fome
women for the clenfing,or whitening of their faces.
Succulent: m.ente: £ Succulent, Tapie. moift, full of


tice, “
Succuffation:f. A hard baking, a ioulting, a violent
10881n£.
Sucement: m. A fucking.
Sucer. To fucke. ;
Suceron: m. Looke Suéceron.
Sucher. The fame. Picard, ‘
Sucotant. Greedily,or gently,and fmackingly, fucking,
Sucre: m, Sugar.
Sucre penidial.Fine and white fugar whereof Penets
&c,are made; alfo,the Penets themfelues.
Sucré: m.wbence, Faire le fucré. Looke under Faire.
Sucré: m. ée: £ Sugred; fugrie; feet as,or fiveetened
with, fugar. * ;
De : :£, Anice, quaint, faneamifh, or precife wench ;
ce;


Le >
Faire la fiscrée.To mince it;or make it goodlie;to fhew
her felfe verie coy. i .
Sucrier:.m, 4 Comfét-maker,
Suan bel por oy
uction: f A fucking.

Sud: m, The Seek

Sudorifique : com. Procuring,or canfing fivest.

Suée: f, À fiveat,or fiveating.

Sueil: m. The threfbold of a dovre ; al(o, the foyle of a
— Bore ; the mire wherein be commonly wallow-
et . à

Suëment: m. 4 fiveating. .

Suér. To fweat. :

Suérie: f À fiveating,

Le Pais de füuérie, Cornelina bis Tub; a countrey fre-
quented by the Pockie, : ;

Süeft : im, The Southeaft wind.

Suetolt: m. The lumpe, puddle, fea-Owle ; (an ouglie


Suétte: f. The fweating ficknelfe; alfo, a kind of final
‘Dace,or Dare fifh.

Suéur: m. 4 fiveater. \

Suéur: f Sweat,”

Suéux: m.eufe: f. ing ; taking great pai


ee? To efit content, py pend mci be
jent for. 1 +
Siam Sufficiently, filly, enough;with good fa~


ti


ar.


bundance,the belly-full; fatisfatiton,contentment..
Qui a fuffitance il a prou de bien, qui n'a fufh-
fance n'a rien: Prov. He thats content, of riches


compounded of Rofewater, |


Suffifance: £ Sufficiencie, enough, fullneffe, plentie,a- | É


hath great Jiore, but be thats difcontented is moft | > 4


poore, ‘
Suffifant. Sufficient, fall; able,of worth.
Sufflegan. qRab. 4 Suffragan,
Suffocation : Re firangling, whir-
Suffoqué: m. £ : À Suffocated, fifled, choaked,whir-
kened, finoothered whofe breath is flopped,
Siequer To fiffocate, fimoother,choake, fifle, op the


Suragant: md Sefégent, o Sufrages, a Bifteps |
11e. ÿ


im. A fi
word, in an


age, voices confent, fauour ; good


Original trom
CHE-OHIO STATE. UNIVERSITY


0


S VI


ming under ; the finoake which is, from vnder a ftoole, l'acquereur du meublehypothequé n'en peut eftr
receused into the bodie, for the difeafes of the guts, fim- FN : Et, la a eke Hype va
dament or matrix, tae ' lieu aux meubles entre plufieurs creanciers auf
 Suffufion: £ A fuffüfion, or povering upon; a Spreading quels ils font hypothequez. {L'Oifean,
abroad, Suittes. Looke Suites.
Suffufion des yeux, À pinne,or web in the eyes, Suivaimment. Confequently, afterwards, |
Suggerer. To fagcet, prompt,or put in mind of; alfo,to | Suivant: m. A follower. :
minster, cine, yeeld, find, fisritifh or allow ,vnto. Les fuivants. The Maifters of Requefls, tearmed fo
Suggeltion: € A fuggeftion, prompting, telling induce- in old time.
ment, putting a” ns Le plus proche füuivant du degré, The next full inf
- Suggillation,Suggiller, as Sugillation, &c. man,or the next heire, :
- Sugillation: À 4 blacke and blue marke or pot on the | Suivre. Looke Suyvre.
Face,erc,by a blow; alfo, the bloudfhot of an eye; alfo, | Sul: m. An Elder tree, -
| 1eproach,deprausation, flaunder ; detraétation. Sulphuréitez: £ Sulphurie things. |
Sugillé: m. ée: f. Marked with blacke,and blue fpots; | Sulphureux: m. eufe: £ Sulphwrows, full of fulpbure.
_ _ af nipped, taunted, galled, reproucd; blemifbed, re- | Sulphurin: m. ine: £ Sulphurie,of fulpbure.
proached, depraued. RITES Suls: m. Az Elder tree. ES
Sugiller. To make blacke and blue with firokes ; alfa, to Vn Canon de füls.A hex; or,a hollow flickyor branch
nip,taunt, call,reproue malicioufly, reproach, blemifh, of Elder; or,a Pot-gunne made thereof. |
depraue. Sultan: m, 4 Sultan, or Souldan ; a King,Prince,or So-
Suject,ou Sujet. Looke Subject. ueraigne ; allo, aTurkifh coyne of gold worth about
Suiection. Looke Subicétion. P vis vid/ferling, - ART Eu
Suïer: m. The Elder tree, Sultanc : f as Soutane; al/o,a Sultanne(fe;or foueraigne
Suifi-m. Tallow, fuet, (abflantiall fat, Princeffe. :
Vilage de füif. A tallow face; bleake vifage,pale coun- En A Turkifh coyne of gold worth about vij s vj d :
tenance, » erling. ; rt
Suiffe. The Deale tree, a kind of Firre; (alfo, the Dace Spriach Sumacke, Curriers Sumacke, leather Sumack;
* fith ; or as Vandoife. Lionnoïs.) (a fhrub.)
Suil: m, Thethrefhold of a doore. Sumach de cuifine.The berrie,or fruit of that fhrub,
| Suille: com. Hoggifh. ufed beretofore in lead of falt, efpecially in fawces ;
Suin: m, The Elder tree,


$2 whence, as it feemes, we call it, meat Sumacke, and
Suin de laine. The filth, greafineSe, or oplinelfe of fheepes faroce Sumacke.
wooll before it be wafbed. à | Sumelle. Looke Semelle,
Suin de verre. Sandener; the fattie fubftance floating Sumerger. To finke, fubmerge,oucrwhelme,drowne,
on glafe when it is red-hot in the furnace, and whic FA


Sumettre. Looke Soubmettre.
being cold is as bard as flone, yet brittle, and eafily | Sumis:m. ie: & Submitted humbled, fubieéted or jeel-


SP Be


tend to fuperfluitie. ;
be: com. Prowd, high-minded, arrogant ,furlie,
difdainefull ; haughtie Jofise, flatelie, fimptuous; mag-
nificent,maieflicall, AE
Supercedé: m.ée: f. Surceaffed,left off, gimenouer,
Articles fupercedez. Parts of an accompt neither al-
Lowed,nor viterly reieéled,upo the accomptants humble
ait for a frther day to bring in fome principall acquit
tances, or peeces of importance; which day if he flip, he
falls into arrerage,and an Execution is prefently awar-
ded againft him. è Hart
Superceder.To farcealfe leant of gine oner,
Superceflion. Looke Superfeffion. SIMS S
Supercherie: f. Supercherie ; foule play; an ininric,
wrong affront,brauado, affault,on a fuddaine, or vpon


Suitte:£ 4 chafe, purfuit, profecution of, fuit againft ;
alfo,a (equele, ifue, confèquent, or confequence ; alfa,
. @ fucceffion, continuance, or vnintermitted courfe of |
‘things; alfo, the trayne, attendants, or followers of a
- (great) perfon;the companie he drawes along with bim,
-- Suitte en acquifition, di faifie; eft, quand le cre-
}  ancier,ores que l'hyporheque luy manque,ne laiffe
© de fuyvre la chofe faifie fur fon debteur, foit contre
_celuy qui l’achetée par apres, ou contre celuy qui
Pa faific. ~~"
: ‘Suite jar hypotheque; © eft quand yn creancier
it fon hypotheque ou contre l'acquereur,ou con-
tre ec piain oi PEU
Droit de fuitte de beftes; de difme; & de gens,ou
de ir dite under Droit,
Serfs de füitte. Such as (like our villeins regardant to
a Mannor) muf} not depart out of their Lords dominion
or Territories or if they does be may purfe them whe-
therfocuer and compell them to returne.
Bourfe n'a füitte. when a tenant workes in the tythe-
grounds of a ferreine Lord with hired cattell; or when |
e himfelfe is hired to worke in them for mony,his Lord
© can baue no aduantage again{t him by his priniledge of
Suitte de difme; (for which looke under Droiét,) :
Meuble n’a point de füuitte par hypotheque ; viz.


alfoya fupeffluitieouerplus,or ouercharge.
eremiñence: f. Supereminence, prerogatine,excel-.
lencie aboue others.


superfetation, À
D vanqui{h,ouercome, fitrmount, palfe exceed,
excel. ù : )
Supereroguer. To fuperaragate, gine onerplus,doe more
~~ then needs, or is required. ; :


se 7


broken. ded unto, ~ ;
Suineux: m. éufe: f Greafie, oyliesor filthie, asthe un | Sumptüaire. Looke Somptiiaire. |
“a wafhedwooil of fheepe.  - Sumptuofité: f. Sumptuoufneffe , great cofllineffe,waft-
is, Suinter. To gine, yeeld, or fweat, as flones againg moilt file ecxceffine expence. ESS.
RE: weather. Superabondance: £ Superabundance, fiper flnitieex- |»
“a Suite: £ 4 füit,or purfuit,ercs as Suitte, ceffe,ouermuch. \
ae Suites, The cods of a wild Bore. . Superabonder. To füperabound, exceed, be excefine, |


great aduantage ; (vn mauvaistour à l'impourveu;) |


Superengendrez, Children begot at Seuerall times by |


RITE ER. SE |


SVP SEVERE Re
Superfetation. Looke Superfoetation. , (diuine) thing then needs. er 0
Serie : £, The Piper fies, or furface ; the out fide, or Superfticion : £. Superflitions exceffe of feruple or ce-


- ouimoft part of a thing.
Superficiel: m. The fame. i
sp to m, elle: £ Superficial, otward exterior,
ule,
Ventre fuperficiel. as Epigaftre.
Superficiellement. Sw, pas outwardly.
Superflu: m, 4 fuper fluitie,ouer plusyexce[fe.


Superflu: m. ue: £Superfluons, profife,exceffive ouer- |
muc


Superfluité: f. Super fluitie, excelfe, profifenefe, an 0-

. | werplus,more thenneeds. ;

“Superfoetation: f. 4 fuperfétation, or fecond concei.
Wing ; a breeding of young vpon young.

Superfoeter. To conceine a fecond time; to breed young
Upon young. :

Supergurgiter. To ouer flow (an Fakbornifine in Rabe-
lais.)

Superieur: m. eure: £ Superior upper bigher better,
former, elder, fenior.

Superimpofer. To fuperimpoft, fircharge, or charge a-
new; io lay new impofitions on things alreadie taxed,

Superimpofition: f. A fiperiwspofition, or furcharge ;
an impofition vpon an impofition. :

Superintendance: f. Superintendancie , à principal
ouer fight, gouernment,or care ouer. R

Superintendant: m. A Superintendent ; a principall
omer (eer. .
Superintendant des finances. The Superintendent,
or chiefe Intendant of the Exchequer ; is, in all points
of authoritie, equall with the Lord bigh Treafurer of
France (an Officer of long time out of date;) yet is be
but a Commi(fioner whereas the Trealurer was an offi-
cer of ihe Crowne.

Superiorité : f. Superioritie, prebeminence, elderfhip,

S perlanif jue: f. Superlatine exceeding,paffing,of
uperlatif: m. iue: f. Superlatine,exi
+ pnt degree ; alo, loftie, flatelie haughtie, al on
the buffe.

Supériativement. Superlatinely, exceedingly, in the
higheft degree; alfo, loftily, baugbtily,in a buffe.

Supernater. Tofivimme aboue,aloft,or oner,to float on;

- alfo,to onerflow. 1

Supernaturel: m. elle: f. Supernatural mmetaphifieall,

. abone nature,

Supernaturellement. Supernatural.

| Supernel : m. elle: f. Supernall, high, chief, aboue,

oy, ay i Supernally, highly, on bigh, from a-


Supernumeraire: com, Supernumerarie, ouer and be-
_ files the inft or prefixed number, fuperfluous, redun-


~ dantouer plus. wo dag
sapedcspson: f, A faperfeription, inféription, ti-
Supertedé: m. €e: f Surceafed, de ; Looke Super-


remonie in matters of religion, sdle worfbip, vaine
é deuotion.
upinateur: m. A mufcle in the wrifi, féruing to turne
ls palo Adie hood om 7


reuerence ; a fuperfluons , needleffe, or il-gouerned |


pm u
S dité: m, ée: f. Thr d, firnifbed,or |
“ous le, Alp food, conne |


trodden on.


Suppediter, ro /uppy throughly frill faficientlygine |


or minifler unto; alfo, to vanquilb, onercome,
5 Sibdue an “ar under.
uppied : m. A footftoole, or any thing [et under the foot
be Pa Por sean, pl sf “if


uppied d’orgues. The footfloole or pedalls 10 a paire


of Organs.
Supplanté: m. ée: £ Supplanted, rooted;or tri
rm ie foot 3 alfo, pc 3 À
5 guar M. en ré pren ten foi
upplanter. To /ipplant,root or trip up, foyle or put un-
Hs foot; alfo,to reat Poule TE poof x by
prewenting, ;
Suppléer, To fupply, fanifh,clofe, fill,or make;vp.
Supplément : m. A füpplement, fupply, (upphing ; a fir-
mishing, filling, er making vp of defééline numbers,
emptie roomes,uoid


places ,&c.
Suppleffe : £. Supplenefe, plyablene[e;abliitiesnimple


selle. 7
Suppliant: m. 4 fuppliant, petitioner, bumble fuitor.
Suppliant: m, ante: f Suppliant,befeching.
Supplication: f. 4 fupplication, prayer, bumble requeft
or fuit ; alfo,a little packet of grapes wrapped vp in fig-


leanes one by one, and thereby lafling, at the leaft, two |


Jeares.
Supplice: m. Punifhment, chafifement correction tor-
\ ment x


Nul vice fans fon fupplice: Pro. No vjce without
its punifbment ; or, each vice is to it [elfe a punifh-


ment,
Tel vice tel fispplice: Prov. Like paine {hall chaj-
ne thine excelfe to that wherein. thow didft tranf°
grefe. :
Supplier. Humbly to pray, petition, intreat, requef, be-
seech,or be fuitor unto. ‘
Supplenent. taste pr Pt as
u : m, Support ; a prop, or flay; fauour, mainte-
LA i fuccour,affiance. é F
Supp e: com, Supportable, tollerable, beare-


gy «mcm Ho A fupportation ; bearing, abiding; à
oulflering, fuccouring ,a/fifting. Ste _
Ce qui foit dit avec fipportation 3 Viz, by fauor, or


wader correction.


é:m.ée: f, Supported, fuflained, boulfered,


ith,or ups fa ? d; tollera-
pity re Er gg fuccoure lera


on: f. A firceafing, leauing off, gining | S . To fi ty iflaine, flay or bi to
oer, and in Exchequer matters, the fufpenfion of oral Abe weber tds. 4
an Accompt em nan Fr fuit for a no pr À ne
AA! ay to in fome uittance :mée:f. S imagined, meant, under-
" Faptrument for bi fill difbarge 3 hc an | Bled; nelle ted cots end pains,
“to doe, be is forthwith feuerely proceeded a- | fuborned, fuiftedyor put in for another ; whence;
Pr S 4s ve Enfant fuppote. À ch À (


Suppofement: m, À /upponing, opting thing
er


trom


Kg
HMEOHIO STATE-UNIVERSITY.


Tai
+ >


i


Sivirpe


vaderanother;a fuborning;foifting,for ging,tbrufling 9
baa af amang,or in liewof.soat hah ga i A
| Suppofer. To fitppone ; to put, lay, or fet al ee
“ ornés forge, counterfeit, foi ov thruftin falfe things a-


meane under {land more then's expreffed. -
Suppofer vn enfant. To change a child. © *
Supposeur: m. A fieborner, foifter, forger counterféiter.
Suppofitoire: m. 4 Suppofitarie; made of boney,and
salt boyled vato the confiftence of pale, and fafbioned
v fomewhat like a finger: :
Suppoft; m.4 Deputie ane that is put in the roome of a-
nother ; a fuboraed, conterfèit, forged, or foifled-in
peece; alfo,'a difciple, or {choller ; alfo, an inferior, or
under officer in a Courtof fuflice. KH
Vn fiippoftdu diable. A timme of the diuell,
Quelque bon fuppoft vous le dira. Some geod fel-
low or other will tell it you. :
Suppreflion: £ Suppreffion, à fappreffine ‘or holding
dawne ; a concealement; a flopping,or fiaying. "
Supprimé?m.ée: f.Suppre/fed,held downe,kepe-under;
hidden,concealed ; {topped, retaincd,reftrained; fuffo-
cated ; bafe low, (oft; fhort. * RS
Supptiiner. Tofuppreffe, repre[fe,oppreffes bold under,
keepe done ; conceale, hide ; flop, retaine, reftraine
valawfiilly; fuffocate; humble. rds ax
Suppuratif: m.iue: £ Suppavatine mattaring drawing
to 4 head,caufiag to mattars UE
+ Suppuration:£, 4 fuppuration,or mattaving; a gathe-
“riagto a mattarie bead; alfo, a breaking and ctenfing
thereof 5
Suppuré: m.ée: f Su


ve


ured, growne mattaÿié 3 refèl-


tar: fully clenfèd. +
Suppurer. To fäppure; a byle, or impoflume tobecome
soft, refolue iato mattar, or grow to a mattaïie head;
alfo,to breake,and void,or draine it; fully toclenfeit.
Supputation: £ A fupputationaccount,reckoning, fup-
* pofition, coniecture, furmife: As
Sur: m. The South, #
Sur: m.fure:f. Sowres fharpe,eagar,tart. ©
Sur. Onjvpon,oner,aboue ; before; at,by,bard by,tomard,
about; alfo,touching, or concerning.
* Avoir vn ieu fur. To bane a game with,


ow. 1
Surachapt: m. Az ouerbsying ; @ bargaine too deerely
bought,or for which too muck bath beene giuen.
Suracheter. To ouerbuy, pry too decrely, gine too much
- .for. : : ig
Suradjoufter. To gine vantage, adde more, put moreo-
ner. ; NAG
Suragé: m: éc: f. Decrepite, ouer-old, growne farre in


jeares. ’ 4
Suralem. ale: £ 2s Sut 307, fowrifh. AR
_Suraleff A great veine under the bought of the knee ;


Suranner, Topafe,or exceed the compalfe of a yeare; to


| be of more then one yeavesdate or age; alfo,
abn:


mong, or in fiead of, true’; alfo, to fuppoft, imagine, |


Sur-belheur: m. The name of a certaine tart 4 ple.


ucd into mattar; alfo, voided, or drained of fuch mat. |


Surabonder. To fuperabound, redound, exceed, oner-


S Aer The Beankl fecond branch of pri
urandoillier: m. The beankler, or fecond branchof a rigs. : hs
“DecresheidLooke Sutendouiller. “Surdatires come Desf ; fimewbar deafe, bard or
Surannation: £.4 growing old, flale, or aboue a yeares thicke of hearings > rare é
date; anda canfe ed or called on,afentence, | Surdité:f. Deafineffes + RC TRS
comunifon,or command not executed, within the yeare | Surdoré: m. éc : f. Gilt ouer. vraie tt af À
and day NA PR" ane | Surdotér: To gildourr, >: g0une
Suranné: m. éc: FAbdéæyeare paffed orold,of more | Surdoteur:m. 4 gilder ouer. ins,
then one yeares date or ages alfo, flale, aft the befi,o- | § urdoreurc:f 4 gilding oner. + 29908 DT
uermornewithyeares. aOR Sureau: m.Aa Elder tree ; Looke Sufeaus > p..-


toheape |


_yeares upon yeares, grow flale wax verie old.
Suranter. To graffe, fettieor faflen upon,
Suratrendre. To goe faire and fofily before, to flacke his

Pace that another may ouertake im; to attend or flay
for,not altogether but in paffing cafily forward; alfo,to

“altend,or wait too long, * +38

Qui bien attend ne surattend: Prov. He that ex-
pecis good lucke flayes not toa long; or, he that waits to
good purpofé oner waits not.
Suravancer. T0 adéance too farre,or vpon,
Surbaigné: mi 6e: f. Bathed,bedewed ouer.


a


Surbaités wbence,Voute füurbaiffée. 4 flat vaultor

arche, up bax

Surbandé: m. ée: f. Bound,ywelted,or garded ouer.

Surbattir. To build upon. ar

Surbatture: f 4 furbating, è

Surboire: To drinke vpon, or drink more then isnecdfull
after meat. , SS bars |

Surceance. Looke Surfeance. » b 3 a

Surcens: m. 4 Cens'raiféd vpon a Cens ; a fecond
rent,or Cens created vpon the alienation of land Cen-
fuel ; as when a tenant Cenfier paffes away his efiaie
with referuation of a rent or Cens to bim/elfe, befides
that which was formerly due, and is flill to be payed,
vntio the Lord.

Surcen{é: m. as Surcens.

Surcenfier: m.One that charges land with anéw,or (e~
cond Cens,

Surcenfier : m. ere: f whence,Rente fürcenferc. as
Surcens. .

Surcharge: £ 4 furcharge, or new charge; a charee
wee charge, load upon a load, burthen vpon bur-
then. Sg Ne MES

Surcharger. To flarcharges oucrload,ouerburthenso7 Jy
load-vpon load,burthen upon burthen. aH

Surciel: m. The tefler of a cloth of State, dre; the part
thereof which hangs,commonly in a (quare forme, ouer
thePrinces head‘

Surconcevoir. To conceiue young vpon young ; or,as Su


-perfocrer. ‘ cr
Surcot: m. An upper kirtle; or garment worne ouer a |
kirtle. à


Surcottier:m, The tenant vate a Cottier; be to whom
aCortier hath let his land for a Rent ur Cens.
Surcottiere: £ Land, or an eftate in landybeld of a Cot-
tier by Rentsor Cens, ; ;
Surcouvert: m. te: f Conered ouer, : 2:22
Surcouvrir. To cower over, | LR
Surcreft: m. A croft wpon a crefl ; an upper top, or ©


creft. 3 ;
Surcrez: 4 Surcroift. ©: © ;
Surcroift: m. À furplufage, ouer-meafure,vantage,ad-
dition,amendsyal/0,an ouer-growing,a rifing or fpring-
ing upon, = as |
Surcroiftre. To ouer grow; to rife or {pring upon.
Surculeux: m. eufe:f Full of bard fhootes, flips, or


~ Sue:


Sureau aquatic. The water Elder, whitten
tree, Dwar fe-planetret, 5.) 290 em


Ffffÿ.


Original from
THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


SVR


Sureau de marais. The fame ; or marifh Elder,
Sureau de montaigne . The mountaine Elder, the
wild Elder.

Surelle: £ Sorrell.

Suremplir, To fill up, or to ower fill.

Surendouiller,ou Surentouiller: m. The rayall of a
Stag,the Beancler of a Bucke the fecond branch on ei-
ther of their heads.

Surer. Looke Seurer.

Sureté: f Suretic, (afetie,fecuritie,alfurance,

Surface: f. The fur face ; the fuperficies or upper part,the
firlt foew or outward face ,of things.

Surfaire. To auerprife, to bold at an oner-deere rate.

Surfaifeur: m. One that ouerprifeth bis ware.

Surfaix: m. A /wrfengle,or long girth,

Surflorir.To bloffome upon the fruit or to bloome or blof-
fome after the firft bloffomes are vaded, ;
Surflot : m. The rifing of billow upon billow, or the in-

terchanged (welling of feuevall wanes,

Surflotter. To floate or fwimme upon.

Surfoncier: m. ere: & whence, Rente surfonciere ;
à la difference de la premiere rente fonciere,qui eft
la plus ancienne,& premierement cregeyews sie

Surfondu: m, u2; £ Meleed awa) ; al/o, powred upon.

Surfondre. To melt avay ; allo,to powre vpoz.

Surfrifer. To frizle ouer, to curle upon.

Surgallion: com.  flouen,or flus (at Blois.)

Surgeon, Looke Sourgeon,

Surgeonner. To {hoot out, (pring, (purt vp.

Surgermé: m, ée: f Sprung vp, {pred abroad.

Surgetté: m. ée: £ Ouercaft.

Surgi: m. je: f, Arrived, come to fhore, or neere the
bore.

Surgidoir: m, as ene

Surgidoire: £. 4 road, gulfé, or bofome of the féa, for

Jhippes to ride in; ( fometimes alfo the oppofite, a Pro-
montorie, Cape, or Bay of land entring into the fea;
belike becaufe they alwaies affoord a riding for fhips;)
alf, the bole, or hollow of an impoftume, or mattarie
fore.

Surgir. To arrive, take land, goe afhore ; or to vide, or

draw,neere the fhore.

Surgiffant: m. ante: f Arriving, comming to fhore; or
ps us a fhip,nceve the jhore.

Sureiff:ment; m. An arriuing, taking land, going a-
fre ; or aviding ar drawing, neere the fhore,

À Surguinder, To boifé up on high.

Surhafté : m. ée:f, Precipitated, ouerbaftened ; hafte-

À ned unfeafonably,or before it time, az.
Surhatter. To precipitate oucrhaften ; haften unfeafina-

bly, ar before it time,

Se furhafter.To make too much baft,or more baft then


ood i ced.

Suthautter To hoife, raife or Lift vp on bigh,

Se sea ey To fwell,rife,increafe.
Surie&t: m. A cowering, or ouercafting.
= Droi&de furicét. Power 10 adde unto the laf price
__ thats offered at an Outcry,
Suriectement: m. 42 ouercafting,or cafling vpon.
To onercaflor caft vpon,

_com.SHper exc


SVR


Surlier. To tye ouer, to bind upon.
Surluire. To fhine,or caft a great light upon.
Surmaconner. To build vpon,or over,


Surmanger. To eat upon, or immediately after,a meale; |


Lo eat more ; to oner-eat,

Surmarcher, To tread,or goe upon,

Surmeule: f. An upper Mill-flone.

Surmefure : £ Ower-meafure,too great meafure,

Surmontable: com, Surmowatable, furpafable,excee-
dable; fubduable. Y

Surmonté: m. ée: f, Surmounted, fur paBed,ex ceeded;
{ibdued,vanquifbed,ouercome. ,

Surmontement: m. A /urmounting, furpaffing, excee-
ding ; fubduing ouercomming, a
Surmontement des iouës.A chuffie out-flanding,or
Swelling of she cheekes,beyond all due and comelie pro-
portion.

Surmonter. To furmount, Re, get before; goe be-
yond ; to Gh comet ene press

Surinouft: m. New or fiveet wine.

Surmulet: m. 4 fore Mullet ; or, the great fea-Bar-


bell.
Suunaes. To float, fwimme aloft,ouer or upon.
Surnaiffance : £. Am ouergrowth,or growing upon,
Surnaiflant. Growing ouer or upon ; fucceeding.
Surnaiftre. To grow ouer,or upon ; to fucceed of.
Surnom: m, 4 farname,
Surnommeé: m.ée: f Surnamed,
Surnomuner. To gine a firname unto.
Surnoyer. To ouerdrowne, ouerwhelme ; erelop, ouer-


grow.

Suroeft: m. The Southweft wind.

Suroindre. To annoint upon, or over.

Suronder. To float vpon the wanes.

Surop. Looke Syrop.

Suroreiller. To round,or whifper in the eare.

Suros: m, A bonie, and vicious excrefcence growing a-
bout ibe cornet of a bor{es foot (and then called a ring-
7 ) . aa his fhinne-bone (and then called a knot,
or kn0D.

Surot. zs Suros.
Surpaller, To furpafe, goe beyond exceed, furmount,ex-
ce


Surpayer. To pay too deerely for.
S a eu £. Aa PT :
Surpelis: m, 4 Surplis.
Su ant: m.ante: f. Hanging ouer,or upon.
Surpendre, To bang w,ouer pr upon.
‘Super: mLUC: f. Hanged vp,ouer,or upon.
ef furpendué. Look under Clef.
Surpenduë: f. A iettie; an out-intting roome, ec, as
Soupendué ; 2//o,a roome,or falle floore to lay wood in,
gained betweene a cellar, for that purpofe made tbe
deeper and the roome which is next aboue it.
Surpente: £ The fame in the firft fence ; or,2s Soupen-


uë. ,
Surpoids: m. Querweight,or sg 04 aboue inf weight ;,


the ouerplus of weight put into the {cole of a balance,
and making it weigh downe, or onerweigh that which
isin the other [éole. i


lluftre: com ellent,moftilluftriows,excee- Suepepans m. A great Melon, or Pumpion.


urplis: m. À Swrplis.
urplus: m. 4 furplufage, remainder ouerplus,
Be. 3. (Aduerbially) befides, ouer, aboue, o-
mer and befides, ouer and aboue, moreoner, firther-
more.
Surpoil: m.4s Serpaut. my
inét: m. Spech greafes an oylie osier
mm


Original from


DHE OHIO: STATE UNIVERSITY


7


SVR


SVR


from peeces of lickored leather fodden in water for
that purpofe. :

Surpoifer. To ouermcigh,or weigh downe,a thing weigh-

ë ed withit. :

urpoix. Oxerweight ; Looke Surpoids. |

Surpofte: f. A burt upon the Cornet of a borfes foot, by
croffing one foot ouer another. |

Surprendre. To furprife; 10 take napping,tardie,at vn-
awares,in a trip,in the manner,in the deed doing; alfo,
to preuent, interceptor ouertake ; alfa, to beguile, fisp-
plant, circumuent,ouerreach, ;

| Surpreneur: m. 4 färprifor ; oppreffor ; ouerreacher,
cheater ,coufener,craftic dealer,

Surprins: m.infe: f. Surprifed ; tripped taken napping,
or tardiesor in the manner ; found in the deed doing;al-
fo, preuented,intercepted,or overtaken ; alfo,beguiled,
‘ouerraught,fupplanted, circumuented ; alfo,oppre([ed,
or hard layed to on the fuddaine.
La nui& nous a furprins. Night  floine upon vs,or
hath ouertaken vs,ere we were aware.

Surptinfe: f. A fierprifall, or fuddaine 1akingsan affaul-
ting, or comming upon, a mañ ere be is aware; a trip-
ping, taking tardie, finding in the manner; alfo, a
tricke, fallacie, fubtiltie cauill, fhift,euafion; a deceit-
fidl quirke, or quidditie vfed by a cunning Pettifog-
Bere

Surpris: m. Too great a price; a price exceeding the
worth of that for which it is demaunded,or bidden.

Surquanie: £. Looke Souquenic.

Surquerir. To queflion too bufily with.

Surreptice: com, Surrepticious, ec ; Looke Subrep-
tice, ;

Surreption: f. Looke Subreption,

À Surrefter. To refl,or pawfe vpon.

Surrogation. Looke Subrogation,

Surrogué: m. ée:f. Surrogated, fubflituted, appointed
in the roome of another.

Surroguer. To furrogate, fubflitute, place, depute,or ap-
point in the roome of another,

Surfaillant: m, ante: f. Ouerpeering ; leaping on, or 0-
ner ; (bringing or pain ouers

Surfaille: f as Surfaule; alfo, a leaping on,or ouer;allo,
an ouerpeering or ouer growing.

Surfaillir. To leape on, or exer ; alfô, to onerpeere, ouer-
grow, (pring or fpurt vp ouer ; alfo,to flart up fuddain-
1y,as one thats awaked by a great noife cre. :

Surfanole: £. A furfengle, or long girth. aor, à

gas :m, Afüddaine tar ting, or furprife that makes
one ftart.

En furfaule. In a flart,unawares,on a fuddaine,

Surfaulter. To leape, or (pring ouer ; to leape, or iert out
on a fuddaine ; alfo,to fart.

Surfaut, & Surfauter, as Surfaulr,& Surfaulrer.

Surfeance: f. À fürceafing, or gining ouer ; a pawfe, in-
termiffion,delay. | 53

Surfeant : m, ante : f. Swrceafing, or giuing ouer ;

_ pavofing ,intermitting, delaying; alfo,as Reffeant.

Surfelle: £, A broad,and great band, or thong of firong
leather, érc, faflened on either fide of a thill, and bea-
ring upon the pad, or faddle, of the thill-horfe : About
London it is called, the Ridge-rope.

Surfemé: m. ée: f, Sowen,or firewed upon ; alfo,mea-
feld as a Hog,

Surfemer. To (ow, (new, or fprinkle vpon.

Surfemeur: ti fower,or firewer.

Su:femeur de noifes. 4 bate, firebrand of con-

tention, quariell-breeder, diffention-fower. ‘


Surfemure: £ The meafeldne(fe of Hogs.


s.. L
(RSE a EI ESRI Te ETS ESP AS 1 ASE ARRETE RE OR RES: th EME ER EEE TRES ONE tn


PR SR ee TR pe


Surfeoir. Tofurceafè, paw/e, intermit,leane off, cine o-

wer, delay or fiay rhs se - ge
Surfis: m. ife: f. Surceafed, iniermitted, left off, giuen

our, flayed or delayed for a time.

Surfomme : f. Ouer-weight, an ouer-beauie burthen;
whence
La farlobaine abbar l'afne: Pro, Az extreame bur-
then (wayes the fillie Affe. |

Surfoulte : f. Too much boot ginen in an exchange,


Ce

Surfbyer. 4 Surfcoir.
Surfueil: m. The vpper fill,or head-peece of a doore ; the
s peece si a that ep we adoore.

urtaux: f. Az ouer-ceffing, Omer-rating, hoilling, fur-

charging,in the Sublidie baoke tre, pres fe

Surtaxé: m. ée: f. Oxer-ceffed,hoifled, furcharged,
Surtiflu: m, ué: € Wouen,or whipt ouer with,
Surtomber. To fall oner,or upon.
Survaleur: f, Oxer-value,
Surveille: f. The day before the eue of a (great) holy-


day.

Survenance: f. Az accident, hap, chaunce,vrexpetted
occurrence.

Survenant: m. ante: f. Happening, chauncing, occur-
ring ,be falling.

Survendre. To ouerfell.

Survenement : m. Looke Survenué ; or, à happening,
chauncing,befalling; and,a relieuing, helping, juc “alt=

ving.

Survenir. To happen, chaunce, fall out, light, befall, Rep
in unlooked for occurre o7 come on a fuddaine ; alfo,to
relieue, belpe, [uccour.

Survenu: m. ué: f, Happened, chaunced, light, fallen
out, befallen, flept in valooked for, occurred 01 come on
a fuddaine; alfo,relreued pelped, fuccoured,

Survenué: & An accident,or unexpetted occurrence ; a
flepping, or comming, in unlocked for; a fuddaine ligh-
ting on,or falling ito ,companie. ‘

Surverfer. To powre upon.

Surveftement: m. An upper garment.

Surveftir. To put aloft vpom, or coner ouer with, a gar-
ment.

Survivance : f.4 firwinancie, furuining outlining; alfo,
a remainder after a life.

Survivance @ office. A refienation of an Office,
nat abfolute, but implying a condition, that the Kefig-
nor may, if he will, enioy it wholly during his life, and
ton difpofe of it if be happen to furnine the Re-
ener. a, :

Survivant : m, À füruivor,outliner ouerbuer.

Gurvivant: m. ante: & Sxruiuing, outlining, :

Survivre. Tofuruiue, outline, onerliue, remaine after
others. ; :

Survoler. To flye ouer.

Survoleter. To flicker,or houer ouer, .

acne É: m. €e: f.Emptied out of one veffell into ano-
ther.

Survuider: To emptie out of one velfell into another.

Sus. On,up,upon,ouer aboue,

Sus avant. On before, forward there hoe,

Sufan: m. À yeare and day paf; or the paffing of ayeare
and day, without performing that which fhould bane
beene done within it.

Sufanné: m.ée : £ Looke Suranné.

Sufanner. as Suranner.

-Sufat. Of Elder or Elder flowers ; whence,Vinaigre fix
fat. Elder Vineger. à y DR ETES
Susbarbe d'une bride, The no/e-band of abridte,

FFF iy Sus-


Original fron


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSIFY


+


yo Se (Hé ean


%


rae


| | Ss v's


hake Se LY ek ee ae te


Susbout. (Adverb:)Vp, an end, :

Sufcept: m.A4 Jubielt,or one that lines under the protec-
tion of another,

Sufceptible: com, sufteprible, capable,

Sufcet, as Sufcepr. 4

Sufcitateur: m.A raÿfèr,awaker,inciter, prouoker, flir-


rer vp. dei ia
Sufcitation: f. Afiftitation,awaking raifinginciting,
or flivring up.


Sufciter. To fufcitate, awake, raife, quicken, kindle, in;
cite, flirre vp. ein

Suftiteur: m. A raifer awaker, kindler,quickener,inci-
ter, flirrer up.

Sufclavier: m. ete: f.7pan the kannell bone; whence;
Veine fufclaviere. The fècond maine afcendant
branch of the hollow veine.

Sufcouche:f The Night-mare.

Sufeau: m, An Elder tree ;'Looke Surean.

Sufeau bas. 2s Sufesu femélle!

Sufea femelle. wallwort, Danewort, Bloudwort, ,
drvarfe Elderne.

Petit fufeau. The fame. ;

Sufefpinenx: m. cufe: f. Refling vpon the backe-bone;
whence ;

Mufcle fafePineux. A muftle whereby the arme is
raifed,or drawae upwards, -

Suslambris: m. The upper feeling of a boufe,erc.

Sufpect sm, 2cte: f, Sufpeéled,donbted ymiftrufted,bad
iniealoufie, 7

Sulpedtion : & Supition,jealoufie.

Suspend. as Sufpens. en |

Sufpendre. To fufpend; remoue, depofe, deprine , dif-
charge for a time; alfo,to deférre,delay, keëpe in doubt,
bold off with uncertaine tearmes. ;

Sufpendu: m. uë: £ Sufpended; depofed, remoued, or
difcharged for a time; alfo, deferred, put off delayed,
held in fufpence.

Sufpens. Doubt fill,uncertaine,in fufpence.

Suspenfif: m. iue: £ Sujperfine, fiufpending,onely for a


time.
Sufpenfion: f. A fufpenfion, or fuspending ; a depofall,
remone,or difcharge onely for a time. a
Sufpenfoire: com. Hanging, dangling, fivinging ; ful
penforie,in falpence. . “
Sufpentoires. Certaine cords, or firings (banging from
the bedftead) for a ficke man totake bold of; and beare
up bimfelfe with , when he would remoue , or alter his
lying. =, | Se
Sulpied. (Adverb.) up,or afoot, "+ 2
Santé m. ce: £. Saflained, fed, nowrifbed; maintaig
ned ; comfoited, : sie
Suftenter. To fiflaine, feed, nourifh, find; maintaine ;


sullcadique com, Suflaring, feeding, nowrifuing,


waintaining. fine
4 ar Fes Pericranion, or skinme that couers the


ed pg sti bead-peece of a bridle, E
= 3 ft “~ in d. 1 oe


: Diaitiassihye( £ O- gle =
a eee et :


« =


sivvye


when it meets with the Sagitale, + 9 + 1. |
Suture Mendeufe. The future, whereby the bone of |
the temples is dinided from the few
Suture fagitale. The féame which rumning firaight on
in the top 3 the (cull, diuides the righe fe from the
left, and (fometimes) defcends cuemto the nofe, "©
Suture fcameufe. as Mendeufes’ 241200
Suture feiche, A clofing vp of wounds{efpeciallyin the |
face)by gluing on either fide thereofapeece of indented
cloth, whofe points anfwering one another, are gently
drawne together with needle andibred "1
- Suture fphenoide. 4 falfe fütirre.in the end,or bot=
tome of the noddle whence it pafes under the Os con-
iugal,and ends neere the ends of the Coronal {ature
Suyereau:m, The great baflard Mackarell, Mar-
pce Pine és DE SEUL Uy GY
: £, Soot of a chimney; any bleach, + "7
"Suge d'Encens. Soot af ‘sacenfe,barot (ofpurpofe for -
the foot}in a clofe pat; of an abfter fixe, and cooling pro-
pertie; clenes,and fills up the ulcers amd appeafes the
heats and inflamations, of the eyes." "0er ©
Suye des Peintres. Painters foot; a torvofine, and a-
firingent fluffe gotten in Glaffe-bonfès. | ma
Suyer: m. An Elder tree, #12 008 SY
Suyn de laine, Looke Suimi © © HN,
Suyne: f. A precious ftone found in fome Serpents.
Suyte:f. 4 chafe, purfuit, profectition of fuit againf?
alfo,the traine,attendants,or followers of a(ercat)per-
Sin; the companie he drawes along with him ; alfo,a
Sequele,iffue ,confequent,or confequence ; alfo,a fuccef-
~ fiom, continiuances or unintermitied cowrfe of things;
Looke Suitte.
Suyvatnment, Sweceffiuely,confequently afterwards
Suyvant: m. À follower one of thetraime of. 110"
Suyvant: m. ante? f Following, fucceeding,enfiang. ©
i To follow ,goe after,attend or wait on; imitatesor
counter feit ; chafe,or purfue ; fucceed,or enfue: (En la
vendition on dir qu'on {uit la ctiofe, quand on la
demande à vn tiers detenteur non obligé perlon-
nellement à la rendre. l'Oifeau.}
Suyvre le brouft. Locke Brouft. 9: à
Suyvre fes coups. To profecute,or fecond a beginning.
Suyvre la fortune. To take, or adhere vmto,the firon-
ger fide, 3 |
Suyvre les lopins. To bunt after good cheere ; to
proflitute bimfelfe,on all bafe conditions unto his owne


appetite. A
Qui füit les poules apprend à grater la terre: Pro.
See Grater. ; pe
Qui bons Jopins mange bons lopins le firyyent:
Prov. Prouifion follomes them that vfe to fare well ;
where beft meat’s eaten markets are bef ferued.
Suse Looke Sufeau. Ac ie FM a
uzerain: m. Sogeraigne (yet Jitbalterne) fuperior (but
ms force bigh inant (though inferier te
the bighef.) ERIE A957 -
Suzeraineté: f. Soueraigne (but fubalterne) iurifalidii-
© om, fuperior (but not fupreame) power; high or chiefe }
authoritie , fubicét or inferior , to the maieflie of |
f Se + > 4 «
Suzerains: m. High and mightie Lords bauing under
=. See ee) ee bed Serpe ou 7 Sete
» this day the Kings principall Judges baue fometimes
À A POSE Sue
ilot: m. Looke Sibilor.
con map à . =
Sycomore:m, The Sycomor +, Figge-Sycomore tree,


Sy-


Original from


SF HE OHIO STATE-YNIVERSITY


| Sÿderal: male’


syeoniere baftard as Re drale ae


Sycomore de Chypre. The Cyprian Sycomore; a ||


great tree almoft like the Poplar, vbalenid ons ibe
Elme; it beares foure times a. pent esb bi! da tb |
not-vntill it bane beene flit, and bane: bldè

i a milkie iuyce, -


| y comore d'Egypte. as S Me ak
Pe HE The oad tree tP italian Loté or ||


Nettle tree ; yeelds a frxit,of whofe. A for want. of )


coinore:


beltèr tbingsjbeades are made.


 Sycophage” com: A Figiree : @ Sib
Sycophantin: m..4 chant buf ign dim


backe, tale-bearer,
Me , of oF belonging to; 3 ch
Harres.,


aeration: Free. lage, a blapting in trees 5 ere at
es and drought ; fe ratte 07 benurming.


“ofa imme, followed by a total  putrifi ion, ‘and Utter }


“dfhiuétion thereof:
Syderé: m.ée:£ Tempered, and fied bythe eer

and conficlation' of the LPO, os

Syct. Looke Sier. > re

lable: f. 4 fillable. yong

Syllogifine : m, 4 (Logical) silane. aa
Syloatique. qRab. Huge, migbtie.
Symbole : mA tokea balles. Signe to know one by; a


fecret, priuate,and myflicall note; a {hort and intricate:


rvidle oy fentence ; a pafbort ; a fot; a collation; alfo,an

‘uniforme confent or Concurrence of fundrie opinions;

alfa,the fumme of our Belecfé ; the Creed.
Symbolizant: m. ante : f _ Spmbolizing, Lmpatti-


xing.
Symbolization : f 4h jmbolization,or Hmbolixing ; a.
mutyall pres in opinion uen: and manners; a
Sympathizen,
symbolizer. To [jmbolize, or fjmpathixe; to concurre
© in opinion, iumpe in conceit, agree in bumors or Mann
ners,with,


_Syminetrie :f. Ha) a iuft, and mituall propor.


tion of cach part in refpeéi o the whole,
Symmetrié: m. ée : f. We proportioned , in inf jm
met vie,
Symuniftre :m, 4 Secretarie,or prinie CounfeUor.
Symniltc: m. 4 fellow, or colleague in a (facred) pro-


bic: £, Sympathie ; a fimbolixing: natwrall con-

Msé combination ; ene paffion, affection, al
low-feelin,

Sympirt ifer.To impathie,or haue a fellow-feeling of,

to iumpe with in ad, confent with in affection, a=
gree with ia difpofitio


Symphie: f. Await, and vdmoning vrion of two


bones.
ire f, Harmonie, tunable finging, oc, a con-
nt in tune.
Men: £ An imbracing or clip ing; and thence
ia oes! {wallowing ouf.
fiarque : m.Tbe Sailor Oucrfeer of a fraft;


Symptome : tn. À fjmptome ; an aff, paffion,or acci-
dent accompanying a areas: afenjible griefé ioyned
+ therewith; cg G Ague the headache, orc; gene-
gaily, whatfoeuer ba; as alining creature againft
or befides nature ,as fi ee e, dr b'inward caufes,and
‘accidents thereof.


sn he PE Sinagogue, aFémblié, congregatit
ti 0, € on,
ma res esque 4 ape à a


d at that || * nce
a: cor aptb infty, vprighilÿ, plainely, without fra


| Syncopization: à : A cutiing aa) af, an often
SGH To cut away; alfo, to fowne,or fwound,


| Synople. sinople; Greene,in Blazon, ~


RH nt terete tienen mm ee - + em


+ a à N


‘Sypandroe if Aclofe coniimEtion of bones without a.

ny vifible motion

| Synicere: : com. Sincere, pure, perfett,intive, found, ‘un.
jyereahted Jaf epriabt, bonefi, open-bearted, ale


ating,
iS ement. Sincerely, purely, intively, Pound


€.
Sync A Sincerite, integritie, founiinefe, ike
espuritic, cleanene ferprighine fe, | lain-
Sr pg ~beartednelfe i
aco 5 eS Morges fonning, or frown
Da


‘founding.


Syncretifme :m. sy a agrecment,of two ene-
mies againft a third pel.
Syncrisme :m. A thinne, and fprédding cintment, or
medecine,
Synderefe e: The remorfe, or pricke of confiiences that ,
part of the foule which oppofeth it [elfe unto finne. |
$ nderique. Nerfs Syndcriques. Binding fiéves.
dic: m. À Sindické, Cenfor, Controller of manners;
: Tin: an Atturney, or Agent for a Commonwealth, or
Comminaltie.
ndicable: com, Subieét unto examination cenfure,
or controllment.
Syndicat m, Th Office of a Syndicke,erc.
Syndiquer. To examine, cenfure, or controll mens con
. er {ations or courfès.
Synochite..4 flone whereby(as Magitians afficenc tbe
dead be raiféd,
gifs she male: :f. Symodall,of a Synode, enabted i ina


Sy m. A Synode, or affembli lie of Ecclefisficall
perfons.

Synonime-A Synonima; a word bauing the fame A
Vication which another bath.

Synonimer. Tomake nve words beare bei os © s


yntre, Leoke Cintre.
yparathe. The dung of a Goat,or Shcepe : be

Syphon. Lobke Siphon, =
re. Sir; Looke Sire.” peed 5. a

Syringuant. Squirting, imieCting into, =

Syringue: f A Siringe,a (quit,

Syrin ué:m.éc:f Squirted, er niet, Pike |
il a Siringe.

x. To (quivt,ov inieël with a ba oe
. Looke Siroch.

S rots eth oases :

Syrop. Sirrop,or a fjrrup ; af, «finie, ad Been
humor in the flomacke of a new-borne infuutt, the m
whereof it corrupts, if it be not enathated LA ie
youngling fucke. 4 11. 0
Syropvignolar. Syrrup of the cine, wine, |

Syrie A quicksand,or JbeLf of fand in the ea in a


S Role: : £ The motion,or lifting vp of the Beart did Ar.


: teen aljoytbef je of a 4 long vowel, sn,
Sytorpé. Cut 0 tie


syne oe Synderefe,


Tbe
Th The Feminine tof Ton; Th,


abatre: m. 4a Pr ert,


Original from


HE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


TAB


Tabellion: m. 4 Notarie publicke,or Scriuener,allow-
ed by authoritie to ingroffe, and regifler primate con-
traits, and obligations : Therein differing from No-
taire (asin the word Notaire) mere generally, then
that(as in the opinion of Nicot) the Notaire does the
fre of both in Cities,and Townes of re(pect, and the

ion onely in Boroughes,and Villages : And yet
they are very ofien confounded, and taken fir one, and
the fame (fayes Ragueau;) Ard their Offices are
(fayes another) at this day made, or growne one.

Tabellio e, Th’ Office of a Tabellion; the place
wherein bee ingrofjcs, and regiflers priuate contraëls.
Droi& de Tabellionnaye. as under Droid; alfo,
a halfepenie inthe pound for contraéts of the fale of
land,c>c,exceeding the value of 15 1. Tour, due to the
King within the Libertic of Sens. :

Tabciionné :m. The Office, Funttion,or Art, ofa Ta-

eon,

Tabellionné: m.ce : f Drawne at large,ingrofed, re.
gillred by a Tabellion.

Tabcllioaner. 4 Tabeilion to draw,ingroffeor record
a deed,

Tabernacle :m. 4 Tabernacle, panillion, tent or ball;
alfo,a fhed, fhelter,or little fhop of boords ; alo, a gau-
die Cabinet,Box,or Chariot to fet, keepe,or carrie lma-


oes im,
Tabian. lai Tab. The milke of Tabia, a place in 1.
talie, verie bealthfull for fuch as are in a confumptiou:


Rab.

Tabide:com. Confuming, wafting, languifbing, pining
away; alfo, welneere all melted,or wajied,

Tabifié : m.ée : f. wafled,confumed, rotted, putrified ;
alfo.infecied,poifoned,corrupted.

Tabificr. To waft,confume, putrifie, rot ; infect, poifon,
marre,corrupt.


reat boord,

Tihlaciare d'un Luc, The bellie of a Lute,
À Table : f. À table ; a long and fquare boord ; a table,or
boord 10 eat on; the table, or counter of Bankers,and
Marchants ; the Table,or Index of a booke; alfo, a
Cheffe-boord, ov that whereon we play at Tables; alfo,
a ({quare) plate of mettall; alfo, feed, fare, diet, vic-
tualls, meat and drinke; In Law, the Ficf, demaine,
whole Seignioric, or intire bodie of eftate in land, be-
longing to a Lord,e>c ; whence, Mettre, & vnir, en fa


le &c.
La table d'un Luc. The bellieof a Lute, fé
Tables rabbatués. The Queenes Game, Doubles
Table me Res alfo,a are ,
ti ing together of friends, and allies; alfo, a
lite ete Shi wheron the Paflifsiers carvie thar
Pies,and Tarts from place to place.
Diamant en . A (quare table Diamond,
Heft à table & n'ose manger. Either be is a coward
_ and dare not,or a pinch-cruft and will not, fall to the
meat thats before bim. .
Revenir à la table del'aifné. The part of a younger
brother,or of bis iffue(deceafed without natural! bers)
torenert,or efcheat unto the eldefl.
Tenis table, To banquet, or feafl it eerie day in bis


| Tenirbonne table. To heepe « good table, 10 fire


well, ;

Tenir longue table, Yo fit long at meat.
Table d'A eee AFP, Aplentifill, or
we ‘ ls, à


Se =


+ Due ¥ gle


Py
ar.


Tablage : m. 4 tabling or boording; alfo,a table, or |


TAB.


ned difcourfe is(commonty) as vaine, as meate without

falt’s vnfauorie, . ce
Table vaut efcole notable: Prov, Table-difcourfe
4 an excellent Schoolemaifler,

De groffe table à l'eftable : Prov. Exceffine bonfe-
keeping makes Gentlemen turne Groomes. _-
Rondc table ofte le debat : Proy.Round tables take
away contention ; one being as neere bis meat as ano-


ther,

Tableau: m. 4 pifture; a table whereon things be pain- À
ted, or written; a writing table ; memorial, regifier.
Tablée :£ Atable-filof tés

Tables. Playing Tables; Looke Table.

Tablette :£ A little table, or boord; alfo, a childes
borne-booke. at
Tablettes, writing tables ; alfo,the feales ofa Hawks

Legs ; alfo,Lefenges, minifired in Phyfick.

Tablier : m, A Cheffe-beord,or Table to play on; alfoan
Piet alfo,a long and large table-cloath; allo, a ta.
bler or boorder.

Tablier de Notaire, A Scrineners fhop,or booth,

Tabouler. To make a great noife or tronblefome dinne;
orto ce lowd and fall like a Cooper in the booping
of caske.

Taborlan : m. Amigbtie Prince, or Potentate ; or, a
ur Jlate, and dignitie (perhaps from Tamber-

ine, :

Tabour : m, 4 Drumme; alf6,a Tabor.

Batre letabour à coups d’offelets, Te play at Dice
on a ‘Drummes bead.

Tabourafle: £.4 Drummer Tabor.

Tabourder. To play on a Drumme,or Tabor;(ér thence)
aljo,to vapor knocke.

Tabourdeur:m, 4 Taborer,or Drummer.

Tabourement: m, 4 Drumming; alfo,a vapping,knock-
ing,or thumping(as on a Drumme)at a doore,window,
or other thing of wood; alfo, the noife, or dinne thats
made thereby. :

Tabouter. To drumme ; alfo, to rap, knocke, or thuampe
(as on a Drumme) at a wooddcen window, doore, &c ;
alfo,to firike, or bumpe on the Pofleriorums.

Tabouret: m, 4 pinne-pillow , cr pinnt-cefe; alfo,a
cufhion floole, or little low floole for a woman or child.
to fit on; alfo,the flat bafe,or fiot of a piller réfembling
Such a floole; alfo,the bear be Toywort,Caftweed,P ick.
purfe, Shepheards-purfe.

Taboureur:m. 4 Dy ummer,or Taborer ; alfo, a thum-
per bumper knocker; whorcmunger.

Tabourin :m. 4 Taber; alfoa Di umre; and alittle

 Drumme ; alfothe Drumme,or Diummer belonging to
à Comprnie of footmen; alfo,a Timpanie in the bellie,
Tabourin de Bafque. Akind of jmall, and {bellow
Drumvstjor Tabor open atthe one end,ard baning the
barrell fiucke (ull of fmall bells, and other gingling
hnacks vf laitin,e>cwhich, together with the Laborers
fincers on the other end thats conered. rake (in tLe ears
ef children and filite people)a prettic raft.

Tabourin de guerre. Is propery the Drumme,
abourin cs oreilles. 4 certame skinne, er filme
whitin the eaves; thin,ibe more eafily ta reccine founds
and aire from without; yet flrong,thcreby to refifl out-
ward annoyor ces sand drie,the better to refound,
Chaufles à 1:bourin, Ce font chaufles enflées de
bourre,& grofles comme vn tambour. À
Prendre le lievre au tabourin. To perfirme impoffi-
ble matters; See Lievre. à
Ce qui eft venu par la fleute s’en retourne avec le
tabourin: Pro. Looke under Fleute, T
: : à


a


Taconnet :m,as Taconne,


Tia


Se enn Ce ene eS | RENE ie er ARC RER EE SR RP oe
Tabouriner. To play on a Tabor} alfo, to drumme or | Tactoux: m. oufe: € Sunne-burnt ; grawne verie


firike up a Drumme.
Tabourinefe : f. A woman that playes on a Tabor, or
trikes vp à Drumme.


Tabourinet : m.4 Drumme,or Tabor for a childs alit- -


tle Drumme,or Tabor ; alfo,a little roome contriued in
‘the corner of a fquare ball with Tapiftrie, or boords,
Mener autabourinet.To inucagie,allure,lead by the
nofe,drave whither ,or to what,be lift,
Tabourineuf:m. 4 Taborer; one that playes on a Ta-


7,

Tabourineufe. as Tabourineffe,,

Tabouriniere. The fame,

Tabourne. as Tadorne.

F'abouter. as Tabuter,

Tabureau:m. 4mockerorfoffer. :

Tabut: m, Trouble,turmoile,difquiet,moleflation,
Fagoteur de tabus, A feditious,turbulent or trouble-
fore fellow.

Ce vilain ne vaut pas le tabut.1s ot worth the bea-
ting,or not worth the paines one muft take in the beat-
ing of him, à

Taburer. To ioult,butr,or pufh; to trouble difquiet, mo-
left, infeft ; not to let alone one that would faine be in
quict.

Tac : m.A kind of rot among fheepe; alfo,a Plague-fpot,
or Gods-token on one that bath the Plague; alfo, as
Tal; 4/6, the name of a firange difeafé (raging in the
yeare 1411) wherein the patient lof both reft, and ap-
petite; feeling,whenfoener he did eat, a fit of an Ague;
often coughing ; euer trembling ; and “LEE his
amendment, great flore of bloud at bis mouth nofe,and
fiadament. |
Herbe du tac. Lungwort,wood Linerwert,

Tacconnet. as Taconne.

Tache: f. A fpot, laine, blemifh ; mole,naturall marke;
alfo,a reproach, difèrace, difieputation , blot-unto a
mans good name, :

Taches de fumier. Buds,or bard and bluifh pimples,
breaking out on the face,

Taché: m. éeif. Spotted,blotted, flaincd, blemifbed;
diféraced.

Lucas To fpot, blot, flaine,blemifh; difgrace ; alfo, as
Tafcher,

Tacheté: m.ée sf. Spotted, peckled, marked.

Tacheter, To (pot, peckle, marke,

Tachette : f 4 little (pot, blot, flaine, blemifh.

Tacheture :£ 4 (pot, fpecke,or fpeckle ; alfo,a (petting,


: fpeckling,marking.

Tacite : com. Silent, lil buflt, quiets fecret conert in.
ward;bolding bis tongue, faying notbing;/et paffe with-
out mention,paffing on without any noyfe.

Tacitement. Silently, lilly, quietly, fecretly, cowertly
priuily,inwardly without noi(e,without any words,

aciturne : com. Silent, fecret, holding bis peace, vt-
tering little, ufing few or no words of. ;

Taciturnité :£ Taciturnitie, fècretneffe, or fecrecie, fi-


lence, counfell.keeping,
Tacle : m. Any (beadedioafior boult,whofe feathers be
not waxed,but glued on,
Tacon: m, A little Salmons ov more properly, a kind of
fnall,and delicate Trout, canght in a riuer that paffes
by Clermont en Auvergne, 3
Taconnc:f. The bearba Fole-foot, Horfe-fiot, Coults-
foot, Hall-foot. ; |
Taconner yn foulier. To cobble, clowt, or feta patch


on it.


ve Gu gle


lump
‘Tailladé: mée:£ Cus, flafbed,gafhed, flit,tauiiced,in.


TAAT


bleake,or fwart,by being all day in the Sunne; alfo,ex-
treamely couetous,or muferable,
Tadorne. : oe and wbitifhbodied water.
fovle make fomewhat like but bigger tben,a Ducke.
Taffetas: m. Taffata, otre CREER
Taffetaschenillé, Stripe Taffata,
Taffetas à gros grain. Silke Grogeram.
Taftetas moufcheré. Tuffe-taffuta.
Taftetas velouté, The fame,
Tatorée: f, A borfe-boat; a great flat-bottomed bodt.or
Ship to carrie borfes in.
10N: Mm, À Brixxe, Brimfee , Gadbee, Dunflie, Oxe-
ie. |


ahon marin. The fea Brixxes a kind of worme found
about forme fifhes. : ;
Tahou. Poire de Tahou. Afmall peare whereof excel.
lent perrie is made, ;
Tale: f A great grandmother : Pic. alfo,as Taye.
Taige. A kind of vine : Rab.
Tail. as Taillade: €Langued. re
Taillable: com, Taxable, fubied? or liable unto taxes,
which may be taxed; alfo,payiang taxes.
Heritages taillables. Held by villeines,or by Ville
nage; by feruile tenants, or by a feruile tenure,
Taillablier. Seigneur tail. 4 Lord that taxes, or may
taxe bis tenants ; or 10 whom taxe is duc from them,
Taillade: £. 4 cut, flafh,galh; a lit; a launcingor flit-
ting,
Taillade com. @Langued. a Tailladé ; whence;
Ribe taillade. 4 full-deepe fhore; a fhore,pr fide of a
water of aplumpe,and dovene-right depth,


cifioned.
Taillanderie:f. The fmitbie,or flop of a Taillandier.
Taillandier:m. maker of Hatcbets , hedging Kills,
Axes, Chopping Knines, and fuch other great cutting
Infiruments,or tooles of yron.
Taillandier :m, ere: f Cutting,or {nipping off:
Taillant d'un ferrement, Th'edge ofa toole, À
Taillant: m.ante: f. Cutting, (lusting backingeafbing, À
nicking,notching indenting ingraning; alfo,fafbioning,
or proportioning. ]
Taille :f, Acut, flit, gafhynotch,nicke ; any incifion ; al-
fo, a cutting, fliting,gafbing notching, indeating,nick-
ing ; ingrauerie, caruiny ; alfo, a iag,or {bred alfo; a |
tallie or feore kept on a perce of wood ; al/d, the fharpe-
neffe, keenenefe,or edge of a weaponyor toute; alfothe
proportion, fixe,ov [tature of manor beaft; aljo,the Te.
nor part infinging crs alfosas Bois taillis; alfo,a tax,
ee; (Looke the nextmarginall word.) :
Taille douce, Looke Doux.
Pierre de taille. Free flone,
Vin de la feconde taille: wine that comes of the laft
preffing,afier the beft of the grape bath beene (queexed
out ; (car taille fe prend pour la coupeure du marc
du vin,eftant {ur le preffoir,quand on le veutferrer
derechef : &Nicot.)
Avoir bonne taille.4 Tailor to cut a garment band-
Somely, or fitly for fuch as ave toweareit, Ë
Cocher fur la grofle taille, (As ce fay)to lay it om,
(take it off wba as will ;) to (pend, or borrow, excees
dingynuch, F +
I n’eft de taille pour eftre fi maltraitté, He à not a
man to be fo abufed ; he is not fit to beare,or not like-
lie to brooke, fuch immries. : G
De toute taille bon fevrier: Prov. ‘There are good
and bad valiant and cowardle,firong and weake, A
«a


JT rom 1 a
THE OHIQ. STATE UNIVERSITÉS ea


all fhapes and fixes.
Taille: H A fe taxa sallage jrikates aise:
-_ (Les Tailles ne font point deués de dévoir ordi-
naire, ains ont efté accordées durant la necefsité
des attaires feulement, fayes Ragueau.) In old time
they were permitted (onely) in fu Cafés ; viz, Nou-
velle chevalerie; mariage de filles; voyage d' outre
mer ; & captivité: Since they baue been commonly le-
uied in time of war;and at length Charles the feuenth

made them ordinarie.) Diners French Lords baue a

Taille from fome of their vaffalls, or tenants, as well

as the King bath bis from onely fome of his fubietts 5 1

Say onely fomes becaufe all Gentlemen(ofa Gentleman-

lie profèfion)all Clergie men; the Prefidents and Con-

{eillers of Soueraigne Courts; the Maiflers of Requefis,

. and Secretaries of the Kings  houfolds stbe Secretaries,
or Clerkes of the Chauncerie the Gouernours, gradu-
ate Schollers,and diners offic icers, of Vainerfities; the

Burguers, and imbabitants of many great Townes; ‘and

fome Officers,and others by fpeciall priuiledge, are ex-

empied from it.

Taille abonnée,ou abournée, For which the émet

15 at a certaine perelie rate with bis Lord,

Taille franche. Due, in th'aforefaid foure cafes, by

freebolders,ou ceux quitiennent heritages en fran-

chile à devoir d'argent,

Taille iurée. Looke Juré.

Taille mixte. Is impofed on.a mans houfe, and makes

liable unto it all bis goods in what place, or part foewer

they he,

Taille mortaille. which is leuied of villeines, or fer-

nile tenants, yearely, and at the veafonable pleasure of

the Lord,or as be and they can agree.

Tailles perfonnelles. Perfonall taxes; are impofed

upon the per(ons of men,according to their meanes,

Tailles reelles. Keall taxes; ave impofed, noton the

persons, but on their poljeffions, tbe which they fallow ;

and proportioned unto the rates (et desone ina Cenfue

‘el defcription,or furney of them : noï ave they tied one-

ly to immouables ; for the mouables (as Marchandife,

and commodities) whereof, gaine is made, are fubicé
vato them.

. Droi& de taille. Locke under Droi&.

Ne 8 taille. C’eft lafeptaine, & le territoire de

a ville
Taillé: m. ée:£ Cut, fliced, flit,gafhed, flafbed,backed;
lé: ecu eed ft eee ache

ent alfo,guelt,or fpeyed; alfo,taxed af-
fofed.

Taillé d'avoir du mal. Deflined, or bre tobe mife-

rable, Taillé d'avoir du pire. Likelie to get the worse,

Taillé de l'avoir, Like ynough,or in good forwardnefe

to baueit.

Befongne taillée. The hands full, ynough to doe, as
 anneh ag can ne him nhs sean ne
|. jatai Leaning their war cutout, their

aoe labour balfédene,

Et con : 10. 4 clunch,clowne,boores one that v.
2 on nought but Beanes and bacon. 4.2
ere cut.


ss far ger, age


Jlafbing; nicking , notching, indenting ; car
uing; alfo, a guelding,or fpeyiag, om

Tailler. To cut, flit, fice, bew, backe, foloaesh; nice,
faip, notch indent; carue,graues aljo,to gueld,or Po; |
alfôste tax impot taxes on, leuie tributecafs
Tailler de la bofongne a, Looke Taille, »
Tailler vn marc, To cut off the edges, van) a the |
mother of Grapes cane bard preffed, and which
will ruane no more) and throw thofe cuttings into tbe
middle of the preffe,there t0 receiue, with the ref, ano-
ther fqueexe.
Weft bien veau qui veau taille: Prov, He isacalfe
that calues-flefh cutteth; (A fit anfwer loa sera
that calls a man Calf)

Taillerin : m. 4 flice of,
Taille-{ebe. as Courtilliere,

— m, A wind-cutter ; an idle, or find oa


Tailleur: m. A cutter, [litter, bewer, Be vÉ 3
Carner,Grauer,
Tailleur d'habits. À Taylor.
Desieuné,ou morceau, de tailleur. 4 plane,
Tailleure. as Taillure,
Taillis : m. À Hachee ; or made difh of Crenifes, the flefh
ofCapons, Chickens, or Veale, bread, wine, fait, uer-
ce,and {pices pale kind of gellie. sun
Taillis, Bois taillis, 4 copfé,groue, onderwood 5 fuch
wood as is ‘lled,or lopped encrie feuen or. eight yeres.
Tailloir: m, L4 trencher, or trencher plate; alfo,the up-
permofl fquare of the Chapter of a piller.
a Je col fur le tailloir, To lay bis bead vpon the |
locker i
Taillon: m, A little lice; cut, or eh 5 alfo, a’ great |
chipping knife; alfo,a tax vaifed by Henrie the fecond, |! -
Anno 1549, towards the increafè ofthe pay of 1be |
Genfdarmes(who vfially lay billeted in villages)and |
to enable them:to pay their bofts fer whatfoener they +
bad of them: Whereby poore countrey men got a:
the firfla little cafes but not long after they became as
much oppreffed by their vnrulie guefs.aseuer;andyet |,
they fil payedand fill doe pay, both Taïlle,T aillon. |:


- Taillonné : m. ée : f. Cut by flices,bits,or parcels.


Tienvenss meule :f. Fall of. iepspareuts tab iz


Tallover as Talloir.
TFaillure :f 4 cutting, flicing, fisting, flefbing ip: :


ping nicking notching yndenting ; caruing,or grauings ;
alfovaflice,cut, flit, flafbscrcar

Tainturier: m. 4 Dier. |
Taion: m.A great exandfather : Pic, alfo,an Oake of


tbree loppings,or of 6oyeares owth,
Taire. To be filent gnumame son quiet, fill; ta hold bis |

> peace, ufeno words of make no noyfes conceale, kecpe |-

Secret or vntobänfelfe, ‘

Taire, & faire font requis par met, & par terre: |

Prov. Be dome full, and ceafe 10 talke,wbether by fea,

or land thou walke, - .~

Bien dire fait rire, bien faire fait taire: Prov. wee

laugh at goood words,but admire good deeds.

ls font fages quand ils fe taifent:Prov. F Fooles
paffe for wife men while they filent are.
de pis fagefe taift : Prov. The wifeft man fpeakes


: Mieux vaut fe taire que mal arler : Proy.Betler 20
By a sos tia rds placed.
veus yecen paix: Prov. |


ride under
Gand da prce si vont, regardenny,&


4 inal from
THE OHIO ae TE


en


TAL
“te tairas: Prov. When on another thow wouldft raile,
behold thy felfe,thy tongue will quaile,


Qui de tout fe taift de tout a paix: Prov, Hethat |


holds bis peace of at peace witb,all men.
Tairir. as Tarir; To drie up, * j


Tais: m. A potfhard; alfo,a feull,or fealpe; alfo, afbell, |


or great fcale.

Taiser. Looke Taire.

Taifible: com. still, filent, quiet, bufht,

Taifiblement. Silently,quiesly, ftilly.

brea :m. A Gray, Brocke, Badger, Baufon; of two

inds.

Taiffon chemin. The dog Badger, footed,and fnow-
ted fomewhat like a dog; blacker and longer-legd then
the Porchin; feeds on flefh,and carrion;and voyds bis
ordure farre from his earth; whicbbe makes(either in a
tough foyle,or in fome rocke) both deeper,and narrow-
e then the other doth bis,

Taiffon porchin. The bog Badger ; is footed co fnow-
ted like a fwine; feeds on roots, and fruits ; and dungs
in the mouth of bis earth, which hee,commonly, makes
ina fandie,or light foyle : be fleepes verie wuch,and is
thereby much fatter (for fuch as can eat of bim)bet-
ter meat then th'other.

Tal: m. Oyle extracted from the berries of the Crimzon,
or pricklie Cedar,

Talaires: m. Mercuries winged fhooes.

alare : com, Reaching, or banging downe to the beeles,
or ankles.

Talc: m. A tender and tranfparent flone, which indures
extreame beat, and cold, without breaking, and bath
beene heretofore vièd in flead of glaffe.

Taleinoufe. as Talmoufe; al/o, a cuffe, or dafh on the


lips.

Talemouke. To cuffe,or dafh on thelips ; alfo, tovex,
barvie,trouble, toile moleft.

Talent: m.4 talent in money; of diuers forts; one worth
about 175 L fterl. another 291 1. and a noble; and a-
nother 400 Lalfo, will, defire, luft, appetite,an earneft
bumor unto.

Talenté: mée : £. Verie defirows of, eager vpon,earne/t


after. . :
Taleoles: m. Shivers,or flices of a flicke, or of a root.
Tales. Dice; aljo,the game tearmed (0c
alion:m. A paine equall to barme done,a punifhment
* counteruailing the offence committed ; one bad turne


‘ for another. . i
Talle :f, as Thale; al/6,a fhoot, fprig, bud.


allemellier :m, 4 bedge-baker.(v.m.)
Taller: m. The coynetearmed a Dollar. —


| Taller. Looke Thaller.


Tallevas:m. A large, mafiue, and old-fafhirned Tar-
guet, baning in the bottome of it a pike, whereby, when
need was, it was lucke into the ground. 3
allut. 5 Talus.


- Talmoufe:f. 4 Cheefe-cake; a Tert, ot cakemade of


beefe. : ‘
Talker babora rap ouer the fingers ends clofédto-


ether. -.
Taloché :mée:f. Rapped,or bobbed ouer the fingers
Talon: m. The beele,a beele.
Lun du gouvernail. The bottome of the backe of a
rudder , DA


Letalon d'un foulier. The beele-part of the fole.
Chaufier les talons à, Tocourfè, purfue neere, gine
hard chafé vate, a!

Iouér destalons. To fhew a faire paire of beeles, be-


- Talufant: m. ante: f Sloping, made or defcending a-


‘Tamaris :m. Tamariske; a fmub,or fall tree,red- bar-


TT TARE


take bim to bis legs,runne away.


alonné: m. ée:f. Kicked, fpurred, or Arucken with
_ the oi 3 alfo, bard chafed, botly followed, neerely
fie


pre fied. A Ee SEs

Talonnement: m. A kicking, (purring, firiking,or bea-
ting with the heeles; alfo,a bard chafing, neere purju-
ing, clofe following ; alfo, a digging with the beeles in
the fides of a borfe. *

Talonner. To kicke, fpurre, firike, or beat, with the
beeles; alfo, tochafe bard, follow botly, purfue clofely,
tread on the heeles of; alfo,to(purgall , or to ride dig-
gig with the becles into a borfes fides,

Talonneux: m.eufe : F. Vfing,or baning becles.

Talonniere: f A treading on or downe, a {purring or |.
firtking with,the heele, :

i as eps

iu: m. ue: f. Slope, floping, flopewife, aflope.
Maifontalué, 4 boule be botrome 1 fenced. from
the raine that falls off the eaues, by water-tables, or
boords, fet off fromtbewall,

Talvafsier:m. À long loger Inbbet , find luske or
Slime, foolifh or unfafbioned loggerbead.

Taluér. To flope, to fet, cut or make aflope. :

Talure: £ The blue marke of a blow, bruife,orburt.

Talus : m. 4 flope, loping, flopeneffe, or flopinelfe ; alfo,
the floping fide, or defcent of a bill, banke, or caufiy;
(and fometimes) alfo,the banke,or caufey it felfe ; aifo,
the head-boope of a peece of caske; allo a great firvow
in plougbine.

Foflé entalus. 4 warrow-bottomed, and wide-mou-
thed ditch,


flope.

Talut,& Taluz. as Talus.

Taluzer. To build,or make aflope,  :

Tam: m,Blacke Brionie,our Ladies Seale,the wild Vine,

Tamaridin. 4s Tamarind.

Tamarin. 4 Tamaris.

Tamarind: m. 4 fmall, foft, and darke.red Indian
Date, of a laxatine propertie,and a good purger of the
heat of choller: | :

Tamarinde : £ The Indian Datetree.


ked,and leaned like Heath. :

Tamaris fauvage. Wild Tamariske ; is leffe then the
other, and beares no fruit at all; fome alfo call thus,
Heath, Ling,or Hather, becaufe it refembles the wild
Tamariske. ; Ht

Tambour: m. 4 Drumme; alfo,a Tabor. |

Batre le tambour avec les dents, To didder,or chat-
ter with theteeth for cold, :
Prendre les lievres au fon du tambour. Seeke Lie-


vre. Sh
Vn foldeflus vn pont c’eft vn tambour en la Rivi-
ere: Prov, À foole on a bridge is « Drumme in the ri.
wer; viz, makes it refound by his madde tbumping,lea=.
ping,or dauncing ouer it.
Tambrays. as Eftambres, ; i
Tambu: m. The baftard Pepper plant called Bettle, or
ma à fometimes (but improperly) taken for the Indian |.
Leafe. ER
Tamis:m. 4fearce, er boulter; (alfoya flrayner) made


of baire. ; ARE HP
Tamifé: mée:f. Searced, or boulted; alfo, rained

through a fearce, : =
Tamifer. To fearce ; to boult ; alfo; to paffe or firaine

through a fearce, NEA E
Tamoulenant. Pondering, mufiñg, ludying. |


Tam- |”


‘put


| Papen Tote, ite) Wilt il


with a bung.


ee | Taquet:m. 4 brace, or peece of wood nailed againf} a


“à the clapper of a mills
| Taquet. as Taquain(Adverb.


bard,or eagerly 10 fit at t+ (&Orleaninôïst) ’


» pineb-crafl, \nold-fafh à ‘alfa Porter; oranyfucb bafe

companion; °
Faginerie fj Surdidemiferie, wretched miching bf

pinching, 2

Tarim. 4 kind of weefell, > » À

Tarabin tarabas, 4m Interiedtion of tm like

“oh pifhs pifhitut tar dc) ados: :
Tarabufter: See Tabuer. : : ms
Taraite.as Tariéres!: Lo : Ub ttt : 1
Tarande:£. The beep called à Buffe: a She
Tarantole +f The mofl venomous Spider Tarantôla ; ;

“talled fo of the Neapolitan Citie Taranta, aeere unto

which vero € more of them then in any otber paibof
 Ttaer .

Tarafcon. 4 towne in Provence fated upon the
| Khoine, infl oner againft anotber towne called Beau
Veaire; whence ;

Entre Beaucaire,& Tarafconne paift ny brebis,

ny mouton : Prov. For that great riuer diownes vp
al the round thats beiweenethem.
Tavavelie? if. A Gardeners fettin» ren, uA]
Tarault. as Tariere} al/a,as Tarots. :
| Tare. A kind of Tarre, wherewith Dh ar are enki, |
“and. Gares (cabbie difeafes) annointed,


tong in comming)»

Tard. (Adverb, \Late,latel),tardily, fuck linge.
~ Qui-tard veutne veut : Pro. He tbat mall no! quick.
ly will not at all,
Qui bien fait tard eft reprenable: Pro. good turn
: thiat xs done too late, 1s fisbieEt unto blame, and hate. |

| Tardance:£. er AT
flayingin a plate, |:

Taides: m.ée : f. Tarried, flayed,  defervedydelayed.. ©

soars: mette : £Latifhs or; fomesmbat tardie flow,
tedious. »

Tardement. Tardily lately Engeringb;tedionfy..

Tarder. To tarrie, tay,.demurr ec, abidelone ; dene
linger, frs, delay; pare fap set, Linder faces
“Soff hold biche, withbold, LIN ALamIoYET
Il wm» €. Libinkellong Mc sind


¢ fol tarde iour ne tarde: Prov, 7 ; i
Ne A ae day- -light tarries not. +
Tard: deu: m, À verie sweet apple of the bignelfe of |


Fadiiininestadi, flow, flacke liagering.pemiffe
Hb ie ae ua long i in comming; os
tant, à
Tarde? \Farditiey or'as‘Tatdiveré. |
| Tardivetnent: ‘Tardily remify, Job, duly,
unweldily,lazily,litherly,


Fi de
a ne
Fardiveté:  Tardine[fe, loi es lingering;
€ , » nemif-


delay,tedionfnefe ; 3


 Taquette:whence; eae inguin


Taquin: m. , A niagara; ‘mifer, micher, penié-father '


| Taquain, (adverb, ) Suditenly or at the ae infant, |
Pali ere sia teepesanouber from faking, o7 flipping sal.


| Tard: zm. tarde: € Tardh late, lechtediousingering, ‘Tari: mie: f, Dried vps drsinedof natural


|


Tarquet :m, A kind of little


| Fxdounex ———— rqRab,


Sthereof; alfo,the allay,or imbafement of £
coynes.


\ who


Tarelet: m. iittle Angars — |
Tarelle: f. An Augar.


Tareronde:f: The Forkesffes a achind Hind of Scate which:
hath in ber taile an pat ro pricke.

| Targe:£. 4 kind of Targuet,or Shield almof fquare, er
machin ufé along the: Spanifh coaftilying ouer againft ,
Affrick, from whence it feemes the fafbion of it cames : |


- Ina efcu ny targe. Looke under Efcu. :


Targé: m. 603 fi as Tardé; allo, — Biel, |


flr owed under, ©: bro eu


Ta ement:.m, A # ling a
in ae, Sasi Far |


Targer: as Tarder revere old Autos ) alfo;to field,


der.


-cobrr, fBrowd


se Targer d’ ro mre To arme, fortife, defend or


extufe, bimfelfa by à réafon:


Targette: fA kind of racheter bafpesmrbermith cafe-


mates, care clofed,
| Latgon ‘ni, Thebearbe Tarragon. «
ins as Targe,


Targué: m. Coif: Shielded armed ar conered it
albert,


.Targnets.


withered, without any manner of fap.


Tare: : £, Loffe diminution, decay, i impairement, want, or
waft in Marchandife, ec, by the exchan ets


‘Jef eu qui n'ai fa tare : Prov. Heis lela
Taré: :m,ée: is Defeeline weflingides Ge, corrupt; out.
: afthurt full, damageous,wbich none wi crap
. binder ance,or loge; whofe vfe counternailes not the
shane one is at about i it i alfo, We erates or fib of


Tarcfrabe:  Tarcranche £a Glorieufe, :


Tarier: m, The bird called a Bunting; rs “3 ¢


| Tariere: f. An Augar:
Tariere boifte. Awimble.


 Tariffe :f, Waft paper to bindwp fall pers: ins ae


|g rithmetickor the caffing of accounts, -


Tarin:m.A little fingnz bird baninga velo bodie,


andan afh-colonred bead.


| Tarire Todrie, foake, wither vp ; to draine of. natural


moillure.
Tarle : m4 w00d-werme,or wood- moath,
arlé: m.ée sf, Worme-eaten, |


ict
atmées:f, Thick magots; or (hort and PRÈS
oftentimes, breeding rk  Pindaments af bafet; “fo,


Prd


‘oOo awarmes, :
| Tao: m. Akind of | peat ad éeren. many fueral
crutings make them much more initri- !


dogs host, vay tp |


470,
cate then ordinarie ones,


_ by Ladies and Geatlewomen,
Tartacier :m. a Ferrafsier,.


Tarré :m.éc : fHauingana cle MG, |
Tag de Poeil, The gr lle mbereon she eire of tbe tye: a |


omis


D Ag du pied. The fil pars of the foot pate |
»\deg,and anfwerableiothe wrift of the bas containess


or confifis of, feuen bones, BL oqo


Tartaire:m,\ATartarie Faulcon. «|. aly af


Tartarafle :f, 4 Tortoife,
Tartare. Tartar; Looke Tartre,


Tartarin : m, The mans
: Li


© sss


or ue. |
fer


IE À


AB


Gf


eT
rt


1 ind 4 ee! See


T; AS:


| Tare: m, A Barbarie Fawleon; or rather as Tar-


Farce: fA Tarts

+ Tarte Bourbonnoife. A mire, bog; flough, deepe and
durtle place.
Tarte lacobine. À Tartmade of faticheefe,the _
of egces, feet butter, Suger and, falt,all mingled and
layed in paft together.
Tarte rouge, Another made of apples fleepedin red
wine, Sugar, Pomder-Cynnamon, and {weet butter ;
then firained and laid in paft.
Payer latarte de fa nativité. To make a feaftor ban-
ques on his birth-day.
On fe faoule bien de manger tartes: Prov, Smeets

quickly breed facietie.

Tattelages: m, Tarts; meats like unto ee or things
that belong tosor be fit for, Tarts.

Tartelette :f. 4 little Tart.

Tartelle; ou, Tartenelle:£ A whirligig,

‘ Tartinages. as Tarcelages.

Tarton-raire. — j ores nae extreamely-
purging FrencojorKa,or 3 arbe.

Tartre ia Tartar, or Argall; the lees or dregs that
flicke to the fides of wine-ve fells; hard and drie like
acruft; found, and fo clofe compaéted , that you may
beat it unto powder.

Tartriere: € À Jags the Spurve-rowell- like infirument
ole P aftiffiers make indented iagssalfoya Tart-


Tamgue! €, An Indian beaft which bath banging cares;
liueib alone, and without any trohpings among reckes ;
and breeds a kind of Beazer ftone.

Tas: m. A beape,a pile, a bundle ; adeale, fort, vabble,
companie,troupe.

Tas de charge. The root of avawlt; the fiones where-
by it is begun, ov which doe ferne as foundations to al
the feuerall branches thereof,

Tafche: €. A taske. *


with anatber.


(Tage: m. ée:f. Indeed tabmredatsempdf
ne abouts alfe,tasked,


oe ffaying ; alfè,a taskine.
| Tascher. To indeuor labour, attempt effay, offer, or goe
"about; to dee atbing ; alfo, to taske, or appoint a taske
| unto,


le n’y tafchois point. Adidisnotof purpofe.
ee or
Fm


Tale To beape or pile vp ; 10 make to trs ban


eof an Armor(: (im wabich fence ibis moft common.


IRL
ah dat


afford
pe one for. ati
| Talte-vin:m, Pme Wine.


tery


(rer tees


22%


En bloc, & en tafche: Tagand rags all togetber, one


Tae ements man indenoring abouring attempting


Tafle: "abt ap ink ny al ae eel


de foi of bay,
“Tales sees f. Heaped piled fasmade pine ales =!


pafleire? £, Alittle cup; alfo,the shirt of a\parment;&>


Les manches 3 galtons. Te fleues dravne om ih |


puffes.
Parler à tafton.7 mictlregnes |
Pa dalton Teale her ; ;


Tafñonmaat Feng gps handigscbing t+ 7


er Alle


Taftonnement :m. A groping, feeling ; bai tou


ching, Rroking.


Taftonner. To feele “rene touch,bandle, rakes
Tate-vin, Looke T
Tatin : m. A little, finall quantit


ped '

spore dealt...

Tatou: m. A kind of pe ein which in
fiead of a pricklie, hath (, fomevwbat like the Tertaife) a
skalie coat,whereinto,in timesef danger be drawes vp


bim{elfe.
Tavaillole: f. A Cufhien-cloth; or a goed big perce of
linnen (commonly wrought) py 45 a Couey
night-clothes,e>c, or to the bag wberein they be hep
Tavaiolle. as Tavaillole; (and the better word.) |
Tavan: m. A Brixxe,érc ; as Tahon:
Tavan de mer. The fea Brixxe; refembles à | bis
and bath fixteene feet, each wbereof is pod
witha sn or crooked nayle : This vermine lodgi
bimfelfe vader the finnes of the Dolphin , and Te
2 os them as much as the land ve doth


oe 3 f Looke Tavaiolle,..
dir. To couer geal with canuas,or
ood, felter bide himplfe, 10


Taudis: m. a. 100; or veut wis a raid am) fhrowd,
or {better made reo and thence, a Targaet-
fince, or a defenfine engine, under which approaches

are made, or breaches entred,by erga A ai Tay- |
lors boord,or fall ; alfo,the couer of a boo or flalls
alfo, a foule, flutsi(h, umbandfome,or re roome.

Vn taudis tout chargé de vaiffelle d'or. A Cupboord


eps duckes


of golden plate; or a Goldfmithes booth, “ae fu |.


thicke therewith,
Tavelé: m.éezf. Spotted, fpeckled,meny |
Taveler. Trés or befpeckle ; to marke sr foo of


fandrie
Tavelle: £ Anal ig ce a Crowne-laces. É
Tavellement: m. 4 fpotting, or fpecklings « marking
with fpots of faudrie colours.
Tales Ê The little worme called a Woo ft


Tavelure: £ as Tavellement.


* Taverdette : f. A kind of plague.


Taverne: f, A Tauerne; is J all (in fome fo places no


«_ better then)a viéiu


Taverneage: m. The penaltie infliéled ona 7intner,or
Wine-drawer, that _ Sold bis wineata À asie

: thenwoas fet bim by the aie. :

Taverneur : meure :f. Frequenting Tavemes.

Taverheux : meu :f a Taverneur ; af, i of
Tauernes.


Tavernier: m.A Vintner sranerne-heeper,winecdraw-
ers alfo(in fome places)a vitinaller, of whom (as ià §
‘our Tauernes ef Londoa)one may banc meat ,


Ee Taree sen à de fa taverne: Prov.Looke
Tavepierese Arweman thet keepes, or sr


_werne ; a woman that fells,or
Taves :£ Red pimples or, à ae As ae,


TAY


‘Taulache: £ A little Targuet,or Buckler.

| Taulpe:£ The little beaft called a Mole,or, Moldewarp.
’ Fourmage de taulpe. Heauie,or fad cheefe.
Royaume des taulpes. The earth, -
Fouilleur des taulpes. 4 Mole-catcher,
Fouir aux taulpes, To deceafe,to die,

Taulpetier: m. 4 Mole-catcher. :

Taulpin. franctaulpin, L4 trained man, or fouldier
ae of a busbandman ; alfo, a chuffe, boore, fwaine,
bi '


niere. ; ;

,Tauné; Looke Tanné.

Taupe:f. A Mole ; Seete Taulpe. |
Taupiere: f. Aa impoflume, or foft fwelling in the bead,

| wherein it makes a bole fomewhat like that which a
Mole roots in the ground,

Taupiniere :. 4 Molehill or bole.
Taupiniere d’aflafsinateurs. denne of murtherers,

Taure :f. Small Lunarie, finall Mobnewort.

Taureau : m. 4 Ball; alfo,the figne Taurus,
Mener la genifle au taureau, To bring the Hepfer to

_ the Bull; 10 fell a virginitie, proflitute a maid; or
(any way)to bring a wench toa mans bed.


Prov. Driake little wine, and much water ; or,drinke
wine moderately,water abundantly. ’

Taureliere: £. À Cow that affects, or longs for,the Bull.
urillon : m, 4 young,or little Bull,

Taute: f. A Calamarie,or Sleeue-fifh; refembles the fea
Cut,or Cuttle-fifh, and being skared, powres out a red
liquor ; alfo,a roller or a roand truncheon,laid under a

_ great flone,c>c,the more eafily tovemoue it.

Tauter. To lay a roller, crc, under a beanie thing, the
better toremoueit, == °

Tautte, as Taute. <

Taux: m. 4 taxation,or eflimation ; a taxing, affefing,
rating or prixing of things,
Ilen aura le taux du luge. He will fure,and foone y-
nough heare of it to bis colt ; be will farely be paid, or
foundly be beaten, for it. ats:

Tauxation: f. 4 taxation,taxing wating, affefing, fet-
ting downe a certaintie in,

Tauxe: f Taux, ' we

Tauxer. Totax;rate,a[fe[fe,make a certaine eftimate of

feta certaine price o? {cantling on; to allow cofis and

“charges unto, |

Tauxeur: m. A rater, taxer ,afeffor, prifor praifor.

Taxaté d'un defpens; 4 taxation of tb'expences in, or:
charges ofa fuit,

Taxation. as Tauxation,

Taxe:fiasTaux, es

- Taxé : m.ée:f Taxed rebuked, checked,reprebended,

reproued; difparaged, difabled ; alfo,afeffed,

Taxer. To Ltée staunt, rebuke,reprehend,reprouc;
diférace,difable,difparage ; alfo,as Tauxer.

Taye :£ Aay filme,or thinne skinne ; as that which is left

i By Butchers on th'infide of a breaft of Veale,quarter of

 Lambe;@rc sand benee, a pin or web in th'eye, a white
filme ouergrowing the eye; alfo,the wooddie skin wher-
the RES almoft quartered;al{ô,the
* fappie heart pith,or middle of a Pine tree,dinided into
ficcrand ufed by fome of the poorer French, in flead of
candles. ES itty + LPT LS u
~Wnetaye d'oreiller. A Pilowbeere.
Dure taye. Th'oatward skinne of the braines the dow.
ble skinne whereby it is couered , and kept from being
burt or touched by the skull, "0 908k


SBMS !


ind,
Taulpinicre: £ 4 Molebill , or bole ; Seeke Taupi-


Boy Levin comme roy, boy l'eau comme taureau: -


_* Due: alfo,Shoomakers blacke ; Looke Teint.


TEE


Tayeux :m.eufe : f. Skinnie, filmie ; full of shinhe:
filmes; alfo,troubled sg et heheh :

Tayon :m, 4 grandfather; alfa; a)
grew, ka SRE

Le. (The Pronowne) thes! 2 mm,

Té. © cl which isvfed by the French when they call


“,


a Og.

Teck: m, The ro0fé, or couer of a boufe; alfo, a ye, or

boufe to kéepe bogs, or geefe in.

ef. The fat pith, or beart of the Pine tree, called by
Some the Torch tree; tis alfd (and moft properly) the
whole flocke thereof turned heart,or of fo fat and rof-
nie afubflance, that lights may be (and by the clownes
of Auvergne are)made of it.
ei, as Té; a voyce whereby dogs be called.

Teigne :£ Scurfé,or a bot [cabbinelfe, on the bead the
Scurfé of a Scauld pate; alfo,the weed Strangle-tare,Te-
nentare,Tine, Stranglerweed Choakweed,Choak fitch ;
alfo,a Meath, aly
‘Teigne delin. Dodder, ;

Teigne de thym, Laced Time,Dodder Time. :

Teigneux:m.eufe: £ Scurnie, feanld-pated.

Herbe aux teigneux.Butter-burre, $

Troix teigneux,& vn pelé. A me(fe, or fnall troupe
of (curuie,or paultvie fellowes’: @Rab.

Femme trop piteufe fait fa famille teigneufe : Pro.
A tender boufewife makes a tainted hou{hold,

Jamais teiyneux n’aimale peigne : Pro.No fcauld-
pate will the combeindnre. -- :

Teille: € The rind,or pilling of bempe, crc.

Teiller, To pil,frip, fcale,or {hale bempe crc.

Teillet, as Tiller.

Teinct: m. 4 tindture, die, flaine; complexion, colour,


Tein&t: méte:f. Died, flained coloured imbued.
Teinéture : €. A tinfture,dying, flaining, colonring ; al.
fe the fiuffe wherewith , or colour whereof, a thing
us dyéd, = 3 i
Teinéturefourde, Looke onder Sourd,
Teinétureric :f. 4 die-boufe,
TFeinéturier: m. 4 Dier. |
Herbe aux teinCturiers. Madder.
Teincturiere :£. A Diers wife; or a woman Dier,
Teindre. Todie, faine,colonr imbue dip in colour,
Teint: m. as Tein&; a die, rc; whence;
Joye au coeur fait beau teint : Pro. Hearts-iey gines
to the face a beauteous tinétüres a cheere full confcience
cleerés the countenance, °° « ° i,
Teinter. To rang, like the flring of a bard-bent bow.
Teintures&c, as TeinAure,&c: » va arg
Tel: m. telle :f. Suchylikelrefembling, fueb Tike, 1
In’y a quelque chofe de tél: Theve if rio Juch matter,
Entre tels tel deviendras? Prov. Among fitch thou
wilt be fuch;tbeir copante will make thee like themsor,
© among fueh be (gch ; fit thy fife to thy companie.
Telamons : m,Great fhips;aljo, [upporters or fupporting
Leia BES in builehings. DAWG lin 51 e: | HSE
Telant.vin velant, Thicke ;érclammie wine; wine that
ropeth. DU mat EU À


Tele: ÉWsITÔI = SSui 0,40 oh a IY ot

Teer tr PA qu a a ,
elephioh, Opin :Libiong Einestong ; or moft properly
ibe Rind thereof À nc
Orpin,and Hungarian Orpim, =

Feliersmi4 BinnenWeaner, 69 ir 1


Teline : £ 2s Flion +’ @Langued.

Tellement.'So,32 fort; fich wifé,in that fafoion.

© Tellementauellement, indifferently reafonably, [6
So,not too well. Ggggy  ~ Tel-


RES : +
Hime !
PR.


‘T EM


Telline: f. # Flion : qLangued,

Telon. as Tiretaine.

Tember; &, Tembut. The bafard Pepper, called Be-
3 tle,or Beter,

. Temeraire : com. Rafh, baflie, bare-braind beadlong,

foole-hardie,ouer baxardous,incofiderate, undifcreet,

bee D then needs, more aduenturous then bee
uld be,

= Temerairement. Rafbly, baflily, too bazardoufly, in a

; headlong courfe, at randome, at rouers, at all aduen-

tures.
Temeréement. as Temerairement. :
Temerité :£, Temeritie, rafbne(fe, haftine fe, foole-bar-
dineffe, unadnifedne(fe,indiferetion, want of due con-
fideration.
Temperance:f. Temperance, moderation, fobrietie ;
i : the meane betweene the extremities of appetite, and
affection,

Temperature : f A temper,temperature,tempering; a
mean,moderation, qualification, orderlinefe.

Temperé: m.ée : f. Temperate moderate, fober,order-
lie, forbearing, refraining, meane-ob[eruing, of good

È temper, without any éxcefe ; alfostempered.

Temperemént: m. A tempering ynoderating ordering,
gouerningve/training,

Temp:
{urably orderly, :

Temperer. To temper,moderate, qualifie ; gowerne, or-
der ; allay, affuage ; forbeare, (pare,abflaine, refraine
from; to mingle difcreetly, meafure equally, keepe a
meane,

Tenperie : f. Temperatenelfe of weather,

; Tempes. Looke Temples,

Tempeftatif: m.iue :£ Turbulent , contentious,trou-
blesome, vaquiet, feditions ; euer iarring, wrangling,
Scoulding ,brabling,

Tempeftativement. Turbulently, tumultuoufly, trou.
blesomely,contentioufly, [edition|ly, wranglingly,

Tempette: f. A tempeft, Rorme,blufter boifterous wea-
ther, |
Deux pots au feu fignifient fefte, & deux femmes
os la tempefte : Prov. Loske under Femme; or


efte.
Teinpefté: m. ée:f. Stormed,bluftered ; toffed,vexed,
pes se taken, or ouertaken pes or
ouerthrovone by,a tempeft.
Tampefter. To forme, blufier, keepe a horrible cople or
Slirre, raife à tumult, be in an vprore ; to tofe, hurrie,
barrie, torment, vex,turmeyle; alfo,to chafe extream-


fy at.
Tempefteux. as Tempeftuei
Tem
flor mic ,troublefome,unquiet,
Temple: m, 4 Temple,a Church. oe
Temples a be temples; the fides of the bead betweene
ibe ¢ eares. SE Bes ;
Templettes: £ Fillets, or bead-bands for women; al-
fe, Jewels banging upon their forbeads by bodkins
thruft into their baire. 3
be oe :m.ale: defo in,the ead sp whence;


PUAGEY NV CIN Ee |


‘Tempre-meure. Elle eft rem. (Said off maid) fhe is


erément. Temperately,moderately, foberlymea- |


ux, pt
peftuêux :.m. éufé : £ Tempefiuous, bluflering, |


=, corne ts ripe,our haruef gotten.


& : £.4¢ Temporal; alfo,temporall.
+ Re ia 32008 4 pa ide ie areca bon
2. ng obferning, or 1 : com. Hot , fittobeheldorkept, :
ay timely lng pretation of Tenacemen FD deb
8
THE D J'NI = |


TEM


Te ifer. To temporize it; to obferue, agre
copie bim(ttje, ta tbe tine, t0 ph pps i
according to the time; alfo,to linger delay, prorraëi the
time,

= im. A hemporizer,time-feruer,protratler
of time,

Temporifeux : m. eufe :f. Temporizing, time.ferning, |"
lingering protracting of time. ;

Tempre. Quickly, shortly, foone, fuddenly, —

Temprement. Apace ; or as Tempre,


ripe,or maviageable,

Temps :m. ‘Time, feafon; while, opportunitie, leafare ;
weather,
Lete eet Hereafter, fi
Letem ongnes. Harwef}, or reaping time ;
f termed gins ee dire 1h

S de forgas, Looke un or
Temps de pouldrette. The féafon nr the buf:
bandman is to breake the clods of bis plowed lands.
Les quatre temps, The foure Imber weckes.
Bon temps. Propperitie ; alfo,merriment,or time pa/-
Jed in merriment,
Bon temps mau temps. Hew/oeuer the world goes,
whatfoener come of it ; alfo,one with another,
Avec le temps, In time,in th’ end, at length,
ho temps & lieu. Fitly, in good feafon, as it fhould
ee...


En peu determps, Shortly quickly, ere long, within
a wbile, 5


Par temps, Seafemably,in good time.
Avoir font A oe to bane ber flowers,


Faire fon temps, Ila fai fon temps. He à growne

old,or eut of date.

Faire le guet au temps. To obférne, and make vufe of

worldlie occurrences.

Cela fe faifoit au temps jadis. Thats fiale, or obfo-

lete; thats quite out of ufe, cleane out of date, altoze-

ther out of fafbion.

Gaigner le temps. To prolong ,or draw out the day;to

wintime,

Galler le bon temps. To line merrily blithly, iocond-

ly; licentioufly, fensually,luxurionfly,

Haufler le temps. To tipple bard,or tipple unto drun-

henneffe; to fit long tipling,and yet not thinke it long.

Paffer le temps. Il paffe le S, Hee lines at bis |

cafe, or takes pleafureynough in this world; be gives |

malt all fulnefe of fenfuall contentment,

_ Poufler le temps à l'efpaule. To v/* delayes, cre; as
‘under Efpaule. |
Le temps n’eft pas toufiours en bonne difpofition:
Prov. Time is not alwayes fanourable;or,all times bee
not good for all iy 2 } ;
Le temps ouvre. Looke O:

Le temps vient, va,& pall qui ne le compaffe:
Pro.Time commeth,goetb,and away doth paffe,be tbat

_ obferues.et weighes it not’s an affes ;
Avecle temps, & la paille Pon meure les mefles:
Pro, Time and firaw doe make greene Medlers, which
are ashard as flones,as [oft as roafted apples : we muft
attend with bope times operation ; The like is;

. Avecletempslon moiflonne : Prov. In time our


~ Ingratitude afleiche les fonts, & le temps renverfe
Jes ponts : Prov. Vathankfulneffe dries bounties


TEN


| Tenacité: £ Tenacitie ; faft keeping, fure bolding; firait
retaining ; hardne[[e,nigzardline([e, miferie, [paring ;
alfo,conflancie, ftead fajtneffe ; alfo,clammineffe. +

Tenaillade :£. A piucke twitch, or lroake with à paire
of pinfèrs.

Tenaïlle : £ Apaire ofvinfers.

Tenaillé: m. ée:£: Plucked out, or taken hold of with
pinfers ; alfo, whofe flefh us pinched, or torne off with
bot pinfeérs.

Tenaillement:m. 4 placking out, or taking hold of
with pinfers ; alfo,a pinching,or tearing off of the flefb.
with hot pinfers. Obs

Tenailler. To pull out,plucke off take bold of, with pin-
i alfo,to pinch, or teare the flefh off with hot pin-

ers.

Tenais: m. The flip of a plant. /

Tenaifie: f The bearbe Tanfie.

Tenamment.Faftly,cleaningly boldingly,clofe together.

Tenant: m. A mifer, faudge, niggard,pinchpente,peni-
father; a (baring bard, or neere (nudge; a clofe-ban-
ded or couctous bold-faft; alfo,the fide, or limit on the
fide,of a boufe,or peece of ground ; alfo,a defendant in
a Fuftor Turaament; any one that withftands another,
or holds,e> makes good a place again[t bimalfo,a coti-
nuall courfe, or vnintermntted continuance, of things;
whence;

Tout d’un tenant. All together ; &; Tout en vn
tenant; Together, in one,all as one.

Tenant :m, ante :£ Holding, keeping, detaining; alfo,
bounding or abutting on neect or neere adioyning vate.
LeRoy tenant fon lid de Iuftice. Sitting in the
throne of Fuftice. :

Tenar de la main. A certaine muskle whereof the grea-

{ef} part of the palme of the band confifleth.

Tencer. Looke Tanfer, à

Tenche: & ATench,

Tenche de mer. The fea Tench, à rock-fifh made like

the riuer Tench,but of fandrie colours,and verie tender

when fhe is dreffed.

Tendant. Bending, firetching reaching,gining forward,

_ making towards ; tending, inclining, drawiag neere

unto, 4 ’

Tendelet : m: The tilt,or couer, of the poope of a galley ;
the cloth wherewith it is couered.

Tendineux: m.eufe : f. Ofor füll'of,a Tendon,

Tendon: m, .4 Tendon,or taile of a muskle; a bloud-

… lefe infirument of motio,confifing partly of the finew,

* and partly of the ligament, and fibers,whichiffue con-

fafedly from the bellie of amuskle. |

Tendre. Totend;bend ; reach,extend, firetch out fpread
ot difplay; to pitch; res gins forwards; approach,

or make towards ; goe on,or draw neere unto; alfo,to

indeuor, goe about, labour to get or come by; alfo, to
tender or offer unio, ; eas

. Tendre à fin de non recevoir, To oppofè th’ entrie,er

admittance of his aduerfaries plea,or proceffe.
Tendrele giron en la Iuftice.(A deféndant)compa-
roir à Pafsignation qui luy a efté baillée, & accor-
der au demandeur fs fins,& conclufions, © >:
Tendreles mains, Tobeg,or aske for mercie.
Tendre aux oifeaux.'Te Lay,ov fet nets ec, for birds,
Iln’aveine qu? tend, He bath no fancie nor bumor
‘unto it; he minds or meanes nothing lee.

Qui daifetend aife luy faut: Pro. He that prouides

© for bis cafe dothoften loofe its or, be that cares for bis

cafe is often croftimt. ;
Qui à afne tend à afné vient : Pro. He quickly may,
that needs will,be an affe ; or, at any time bee. [peedes


TIE ’N-


that would be anaffe. Peel,
Tendre: com. Tender; young; (oft, apple, gentle, ply-
ant ; mercifull,tractable, foone induced, eafily drawne
unto; alfo,nice nefh,puling delicate,effemimate.
Tendrelet : m.ette:£ Somewhat tender,crc.
Tendrement.Tenderly; fofily, fupplely plianthy;gentle-
ly,tragtably ; ne{bly delicately; pingerly. f
Tendtet :mette:f. Alistle tender, faft;fupple ; gen-
tle,traëtable; nefb,delicate,
Tendreté:f. Tenderneffe, fofineffe, fapplene[fe; gen-
tleneBe,tractablene fe; nefhnefic;effeminacie delicate-


nefie, ,

Tendreur :f as Tendreté.

Tendrietes : f chaps,rifis, or chavones onthe nipple of
a womans breafl.

Tendrillons : m. Tendrells little grilles.

D :meufe :f.F xl of tendrells,or of flender
grilles, ; \

Tendron: m. 4 tender,nefh,delicate,or effeminate fil-
low; alfo,a cartilage,or griftle; alfo, atendrell, or the

… tender branch,or fprig of a plant, <

Tendronneux : meule: £,Griftlie, full of grifilés,or of

stendrells. oy

Tendu : m. ué :f.Tended; bent, raught,extended,firet- |
ched out; fpred,or difplayed; pitched; inclined,or made
towards ; tendered,or offered unto ; layed,or fet fir.

Tenebres:£ Darkneffe, obfcuritie, dimuefe 3 alfo, the
feruice ufed in Popifh Churches the three dayes next
before Eafler ; whence; Les trois jours de tenebres;
be thofe three dayes.

Tenebreux: m.eufe: £ Tenebrous,darkefome,obfture,
fill of darknefe,or of obfcuritie.

Tenebrions : m.Night-[pirits,Hobgoblins, fucb as lone,
and line in,continuall darknefe : qRab,
Tenement: m, 4 countrey,tervitorie,or lands poffelfed,
or beld abfolutely; alfo,a tenemét,inberitance,or lands

beldinficf, by Cens or a chiefe rent. À

Teneinentier : m. 4 fenantor farmer.

Tenefme: m, 4 great défie, deuoid of power, to
purge.

Teneur: m, The Tenor part in Muficke,

Teneur: £ The tenor, content, fluffe, or fubRance of a
matter; alfo, a continual order, fate, fafhion, race,
courfe; an vnflopping,or unintermitted continuance of
things without any change in the manner thereof.

Tenie: f. 4 fillet head-band, or haire-lace ; alfo, a kind
of brow, or iuttying in a piller.

Tenir. Te hold bane, keepe,enioy, poffefje; take; detame,
withhold ; refèrue;retaine; alfo, to beare uphold.fi
port, füflaine,maintaine ; alfo,to per firme, effect, ob-
ferue, make good ; alfo,tolet, flop, binder, impeach; go-
uerne, keepe in order, bridle,refiraine; alfo, toindge,
deeme,account, repute,efeeme ; alfo, to cleawe, cling,
adhere, ficke fire cloftor ft fere,vato,

Tenir adverti de, To gine notice or intelligence of.
Tenir des bafics marches, To bold of the fimocke,bis
wife to be bis maifter. &. ‘3108

Ténir le becen l’eau. To delay, or dallie with; Looke
under Bec. Rs

Pa rla bride haute à, To awe,re(raineskecp fhort,
bold in. ' und
Tenir bon. To be firme, or confiant ina matter; to
continue or ay it,to bold or fland toit,witbout a-
ny flinching or {brinking. rip al € 31
Tenir bon à quelqu'un, To held bim play. : :
Teñirfon coeur. To malice imvardly, to beare a


grudgeunto.. + Say
Tenir coup à la befongne, See dre FE 1
Geog iy enir |


T EN


TEEN


Tenir court. To refiraine,curh, keepe (hort.
Tenir de court, To preffe, vrge, lay at or follow
clofe, unto,
Tenir yn enfant fur le fons,To Chrifien a child,
Tenir l'Efchiquier. To fer keepe a Court, in th’ Ex-
chequer,
Tenir fon eftat à. To gine maintenance vnto.
Tenir à fable. To efleeme or account of, as a fable,
Tenir fief, To pofft {fe a feodall imberitance.
Tenir en ficf. Looke under Fick
Tenir dela Lune. To be inconflant, variable, or
changeable, as the Moone ; alfo, to bee alittle fran-
LIT CHERS
Tenir le livre, 11 veut toufiours tenir le livre, Hee
talks continually, or fo much as no bodie elfe can fpeak
for bim.
Tenir le main à: &,Tenir la main pour. Looke un-
der Main.
Tenir le marché fai&, To fland to his bargaine.
Tenir le menton à, Te fupport, upbold, beare up;
whence the Prouerbe ; Celuy peut hardimentnager
à qui l’on tient le menton, ; |
Tenir à la mer. To yorke or fayle again[t the tidesor
current of the fea.
Tenir la mule à, Il Juy fit tenir la mule. He ouerru-
led, ouerfiwaycd, or ouer-maifiered bim ; alfo,be made
him tarrie bis leafüre,or daunce attendauce on bun,
Tenir la plaidoirie, To keepe,o7 bold,a Court.
Tenir pied à. Ie ne leur tins beaucoup de pied. 1
gaucthemnot much confent,affifiance, or countenance;
alfo, Lfiayed not long with them ; 1 beld them not tack,
or play,any while,
Tenir pied à boule. To applie bis bufineffe throughly,
to bold bard or fland clofe vate it.
Tenir pied en foulier. Looke under Soulier,
Tenir ia queuë de la paelle, To rule, fway,or difpofe
of a bufinefe; to bane the chiefeft dealings, or moftau-
thoritic,in it; and bence the Prouerb; Qui tient la
ueuë de Ja paelle il Ja tourne là ou il veut.
enir fur les rangs, To deride,mocke, flowtjeaft at,
make bim{elfe merrie with,
Tenir ferre. To keepe in, to bold bimfelfe clofé, tore-
ffraine bimjelfe.
Tenir table, Looke under Table,
Tenir teftc. To fland unto it. À
Tenir tort. whence ; 1] fçait bien le tort qu'il nous
tient ; He knowes well ynough the wrong be does us,
Tenit au vent. To fayle verie neere a wind,
. se Tenir. To beare, or carrie himfelfe ; alfa, to abide,
continue yemaine; se Tenir de; Toforbeare,
se Tenir à vn denier. To fticke at, or dodge about,a
penie. : aoe
se Tenir debout. To fland,or fland upright,
“se Tenir fort. To préfume,rebe.or build vpom; totruft
vnto,bane confidence à


ein.
se Tenir furle bon bout ; &.fur le haut bour,Looke
er Bout. + .: - 4
Faire tenir quelque chofe a, To conuey,or fend a
i thing unto, ‘ = , .
rs Tobe luftie, play the gallant, dc, as


|


‘$ be L that.
Te fuy que. LT af bio esi tbe wth


Bicitized by CaO gle


could to feere fencible of this r¢fifall ; alfo, as wnder


Tente:f. À tent,or panition; alfo,an open booth for a


_‘Acelanetienne. For that not «pin matter let that
Tenue: f.A tending bending, teaching; Pretcbing,
pes

4 e
| af bangimgs fra camber


| Hrientcant de moy. He prefümes, relies, depends
much pô me; be hath that cofidence in;that
le amet ue rg Oe


I ne tient qu'à cela. There needs or wants but that;
that done will ferue the turne; that done eur taske is


done.
life tint fort parle nez de ce refus.He férbore all be


CZ. }
Je n’en voudrois pas tenir dix efcus. (Vftd von an
accident, or occurvence tbat pleafetb)1 wold not fir 10
Crownes it were otherwife; or, 1 am as glad as if one
had ginen me tenne Crownes; (but upon any other oc-
cafion)1 would not take ten Crownes fir it sand thence
alfo; ‘

Us n'en euflenypas voulu tenir yn denier moins.
They would not bane taken a penie leffe for it; elfe they
made themfelues as fure of it as if they had beld at.
lefçay bien à quim’en tenir, 1 know well ynough
whom to thanke,or whem 1 am bebolden to, fir that. |
Ou vontils tenir ? whither goe they to keepe, dwell,
foiourne,vemaine abide? ;

Ou ils n'ont que tenir, where they baue nothing to
sa bold of, where there & nothing that makes for
them,

Sans cela ils n'auroient que tenir.without that they
knew not what fhift to make,what courfeto take ; they
knew not bow to carne their bread,or what in the earth
to doe,

Tout ce que ie vous dis ie le tiens de luy, 1bawe all
pre 1 tell you from bim, 1 beard all that Itell you of

iM.

Vous ne m'ytenez pas. You haue me not there as
yet, you haue not got fo much from,or out of me.

Qui tient fe tienne: Prov. He that bolds let bim
bold (till; or let bim that bath a bold keeepe it. ;
Mieux vaut vn tenez que deux vous l’aurez:Pro.
Better one bird in the band then 1vr0 in the bufb.

Tenon : m, A tenon; the end of arafter ér c;put into a
morteifè, dc. P
Tenons. The vice nayles wherewith the barrell of a
peece is faflened unto the locke; alfo, the (leasberne)
bandles of a Targuet. :

Tenre. as Tendre : Pic, |

Tenfer. To chide; Looke Tanfer.

Tenfit:m.iue :£ Bending,or piffe-bent.

Tentation: f. A temptation,tempting, proofé,e[Jay,pro-


uingaffay 3 i
nt The pofing (for the paffing) of Gradnates ;
Se or examination of fach as are to take a
[2


égree.
Tentatoire : £ A proofe,ellay,offer;attempt.


Pedler,&c ,alfo,a tent for a wound,
Tenté : m. ée : £ Tempted ; effayed,tried proued fonn-
dédtaficd ; alfo,pronoked,or moued(vnie euill.)
Tentement:m. 44emptings an e[jaying, tying, pro-
wing, founding;tafingsatiempting; al/o,a fuggtfiing,
proucking,or mouing(unto euill.) . à
Tenter. To sempt;to prone,tri¢,foundeffay,tafiattcmpt;
alfo,to rép Fabre or moue(vnto euill.)
Tenteresse:£. A tempterepesaweman that tempts,
Tenteur:m, 4 ya: 3 altempter sefayer.
Tenthredon, 4 hind of flie. = 3
Tentier:m. 4 tent-keeper ; or one that lines ina teat.
FAR + mA vinging,y founding tink ling timg-


ifplaying ; pite
re ce Dore. SO fuit


Original from


THE“OHIO:. STATE-UNIVERSITY


T ER
Tenu: m. ué: € Held kept had enioyed, poffePed,rebai-
| ned,referued, detained, withheld; An el arte
beld; per formed,effected,obferned ; Ropped,bindered ;
bridled,reftrained ; indged, repated, efeemed; bound,
or beholden vnto. c À
‘A toy n'a pas tenu. Thou wert no hinderance, thou
gauelt no impediment, broughteft no impeachment ; it
~ was aot long of thee. And,S't\ n'euft tenu à toy. With-
out thee, had it not beene for thee.
On luy avoit teñu fi avant la liberté, de. Hehad
fi much libertie giuen bim, or men bdd [o long (uffered
int 10,

Tenué: € Hold; apprehenfion; performance; alfo,a Te-

nure im Law, : À
Femme de proiiefle, & de tenué. That will fay and
bold, that is as good as her word. :
Homme qui n'a point de tenué. Cet homme n’a
point, &c. There is no certainesie in bis [peeches, no
conflancie in his attions ; we cannot build any way
upon him. 3

Tenué: com, Thin, flender, fleight, fine ; weake;leane,
gaunt; little, pare, [nall.

Tenuëment, Thialy, flenderly, fleightly;weakely;leane-
ly, gauntly ; finally, poorely. ,

Tenuité: £. Tenuitie, thinne[e,exilitie, fleightnelfe,fine-
nefe; leanneffe, gauninefe, flenderneffe, (cantnelfe.

Tenure: f. A tenure ; a bold,or eftate in land.

Tenure brifée, A diffeifin,

Tenure : com. as Tenué,

Tenurement. 2s Tenuëment. f

Tenurét: m.ette:£ Somewhat flender, thin, fleight ;
verie little, (cant, final.

Tenureté: £ Looke Tenuité.

Tephramantie : f. Diuination by afhes blowhe,or caf,
Up into the aire. @Rab.

Tepidité: £ Luke-warmenefe.

Terapeutique.as Therapeutique.

Terbenthin: m, The Turpentine tree. à

Terbenthine: £ Turpentine; Looke Terebinthine,

Terçage:m. A third breaking, or digging vp of the

ound,

Teco) m. A quantitie of wine taken by fome Lords
upon euerie velfell belonging to their valfalls ; who à
they broach any befèresor before notice thereof giuen to

… the Lord, or his officers,loofé 60s Tourn,

Fate, To till, breake, or dig up the ground a third

. time. :

Tercer, as Tercéer.

Tercot: m.4 little afh-coloured,ahd long-tongued bird,
called a Wry-necke. :

Terebentine. 2s Terebinthine.

Terebinthe: € The Turpentine tree. 2

Terebinthine: f. Turpentine ; the Rofin, or Gumine of
the Turpentine tree: (This is the right Turpentine,

whereas that which is commonly fold for fach, is the li.
uide Rofinof the Larch tree.) == ?
Texcbinchine CAE L Me par of hn a
vight Turpentine; (Fnt s of England, and Ger-
marie, the liquid Rajin taken from the barke of young
Firre-trees rie ed called, Terebinthina Veneta.)

Terelle. as Tarelle |

Tete Liquid SMañna; of the colour, and confif-
tence €}. |

Terges: f. Little fmagés of Saints made on peeces of

as pa irae leather, dnd worne, like brooches, in
the hats of tbe youths of the parifh,at publick meetings,


or on folemne dayes. ,
Tergiverfation: f. Tergiuérfation ; a flinching, with-


TER


drawing, fhifiine, flinking, or fhrinking backe ; a baf. |
ting, dodging, paultering, or paultrie excujing, a Non-
fuitin Law.

Tergiverfateur: m. À flincher, fhrinker, flarter, hf.
ter, dodger, paulterer; one that w nonfuited, or with
drawes a fii,but with a purpofe to begin anew,

Tergiverfer. To finch; ro fhifi, flinke, or fhrinkee backe
from to dodge, paulter,hagle,or bift ; 10 wrangle; ex-
cufe deny; withdraw a fuit, fall to à Nonfuit;run bach,
but not gine ouer. ok

Teriere: £ An Augur. - :

Teriz: m. A kind of long-beeled Linner.

Terme: m. A terme,time,or day ; alfo, a tearme, word,
theech; alla Pillar fafhioned at the upper cnd,like an
arme-leffe man or woman; and (more generally) any
arme-leffe Fmage ; alfo, a croff way; alfo, a great
high way; alfo,a fone bound,limit mere diuiding land
from land. Ds
Eftre en termes. Et fomimes nous eñ ces termes ?
What ¢ are we at this point ave we come to this pal]?
Mis en termes. Difcufed, examined, deliberated of,
or fallen into deliberation,

Tenir terme.Quel terme il tient, what face be fits.
on it, what countenance be fbeves in it. ;

Le térine vaut l'argent. The terme is worth my
moncy ; a Prouerbe wherewith diners, that haue
borrowed much vpon long dayes, are apt to flatter
themfelnes, boping that fomewhat may, in the meane
while, occurre to their fürther benefit, or fall dif
charge.

Il n'y a terme qui pafle par delà celuy de frere Pro.
No title goes beyond the deere name of a brother,


Terinement: m, The appointing, ot feiting dowme of a’


certaine terme or time.
Terminaifon: £ A termination. RES
Tertnination: f. A determining, faifhine ending: al/o,
”_ a limitting,or bounding,
Terminé: m. ée: f. Determined , ended, failed
bounded, limitted ; alfo, tading, finifbing : Viemtting,


bounding, ~. .
Terminer, To determine, finifh,end ; limit bound. |
bo Ct. To appoint a terme, affigne a time, limit or

eta day. ea .
Ternaire: com, Of three,or of a third. as
Ternenaire. A number containing many threes.
Hé To throw a tre, or three.

erni: m. et € Wan, lew, pale, bleake, fallow, difcolou-

red, of a duski{h or deadlie tne whofe laffer is loft, or

verie much decayed, ee

Yeux térnis. Dull or déad eyes ; eyes that are e

heauie,or be nothing fo quick linelie,ot piercing as they

haué beene. 3 M RS SR
Ternier: m. The finall Hickway, tearièd à Wali-pec-


se Tettiir. 79 wis pale,wan'tevo,Dlexke, di(cotoltred,, or
Salles of oon £4 bale, vt decay ted te it former


lufler. ee AUS ran
Ternifferit : th. 4 bleahet,blemifber,difeotourer >"
Terhiflure: £ Palenepe, bleakene|fe, wanrefte, leaden.

nefe pfélens: « [Aleadectel ar date fan ne
Terr: €, as Tertalle ; alfo,a Terrace, ot igh,and open


Ga : ~ irs Breas
Teérrage: m. Ficld-ent, country toll ; which is" (if in
the tenants Graunt, or Leaf, there be mo certcide rate
Set done) the twelfib Soe , or bundle of all forts of
Corite, Flax, Heinpe,cid Fruit gotten om à tevenient;
onely the profits and increafé of Meddowes, Woods,

and Vineyards are exempted,valefie there be à mt

$ cuftome,


THE: OHIO SF


#
FR
a


ete ee: PTE ts RS s ee oe
) "ee =. ù r 5 ‘1


‘a


TER


cuflome,or condition to the contrarie.
Diline,& terrage à deux mains, Looke vader Main.

Tetragé. Terre rerragée. Land held by the title,or lya-
ble to the payment,of countrey toll.

Terragcal: m. ale: f wbence, Grange terrageale. A
Barne for the receit,or keeping of countrey toll,
Seigneur terrageal. 4 Lord that receiues Terrage
from bis tenants.

Terrageau, as Terrageal, or Terragier.

Terragcr. To hold,or let out, lands for which To is
due; alfo,to fort or lay out the fruits belonging thereto.

Terragerele. Grange terragereffe. as Grange ter-
rageale,

Teen: f. Field-rent ; or, the bauing of, or holding
by, freld-vent.

Terrageur : m. One that bath Terrage,or field-rent.

Terra apr: m, The tenant that yeelds,or payes his Lord
field-rent.

Terragier: m. ere: f. Held,or holding,by Terrage.

Terraignol: m, A borfé thats bardly raifed from the
ground.

Terrain: m. (Forced) earth, land, foyle; or, a heape
thereof. z

Terrantole. # Tarantole.

Terrafle: f, A plot, platforme, fort,or bulwarke ; alfo, a
banke heape,or billocke,of earth; alfo,a Pond-head; al-
fo,as Terrace ; alfo, an earthen panne.

Terraflé: m. ée: f, Felled,ouerthrowne,or caft downe,
to the earth; alfo, floored.

Terraffernent: m. An ouerthrowing,or cafling downe ,
to the earth; alfo,a flooring, the laying of a flore,with
earth; and the flrengthning of the infide of a wall with
a banke,erc,of earth,

Terrafler. To fellouerthrom,or cafi downe,to the earth ;
alfo,to lay,or make a floore of earth,érc.

Terraffer vne muraille par dedans la ville, Toram.
pire, firengthen, or fill up the infide of a wall with
earth,

Terraflier: m. An ignorant, or bome-bréd clovene ; one
that nener flirred off his owne dunghill,

Terrau: m. Mould, faple, fat earth; alfo,as;

Terraul: m, 4 Plot, or Bulwarke of earth; alfo, a peas
of earth ;, allo, a feat 5 eas in an Arbor ; alfo, as
Terrau.

Terraut. 4s Terraul.

Terre: £ Earth, Ground, Land,Soyle; alfo, a Mannor,
Farme,Clofe Field speece of Ground; allo,a Land,Re-

ee re. Countrey ; ; alfo, the world, or the whole
earth,
Terre Ampelite, 4 bla earth, which broken, re-
into oes) old ra annointed Vines with-
- “all, thereby to deftroy Caterpillers, and other vermine
wherewith they ahs infefted.
~\Terredelarnage. À whiti{h clay,or fat earth; wheres
of, in old time,Gold{miths melting pots weremaile,
Terre de Beauvois. A certaine earth whereof pots, or
” welfells may be made. ©
BS Leg
la fuite neere vuto


we) tberefire cr ae


h
3 and alee tn as


se a sot pean Skies


| Gosse by Go. gle


jte afh-coloured earth, whichis |


TER


Terre à degraiffer. Fullers earth.

Terre Eretrienne, 4a dflringent, and yefigehstine

earth, whereof there be two kinds, one exceeding |

white, the other afb-coloured.

Terre Guerinienne. Terra figillata, (4 medicina-
ble earth.)

Terre à laver. Fullers earth.

Terre Mclic, ou Melienne. Arough, and afh-colon-
red earth, which being tafled of, bites, and dryes, the”
tongue like Allum ; and is ofed for the clenfing of the
ay outfideyrober eto jt gines a linelie,and gracious
He,

Terre d'ombre. Beyond-féa Azur; an earth found in

+ hes es,and ufed by Painters for fr #

harmacite. as Terre Ampelite.

Terre Pnignite, .4 gluie, and afh-coloured earth,
which is good to coole bot bands,

Terre de S.Porcin, as Térre de Yarnage.

Terre Samienne. 4 white ht, foft gnoiftand gluie |
earth, which drunke in water, is good againft poj{on,
and the impoyfoned biting of venomous beafts.
Terre de favon. Fullers earth, ~

Terre fecllée. The medicinable earth called, Terra
figillaca.

Terre Selinufienne. 4 white, Shining, and brittle
earth, which quickly melts in liquor, and is an excellent
skewrer of the skin.

Terre de Venife, 4 white earth,or tlay, ufed by Pot-
ters,

Terre Verde, Borax, greene earth; alfo, a kind oF

eng gr greenifh clay, whereof the bef earthen vefels


Terre à ‘vigne. as Terre Ampelite.
Enfant de la terre. Worldlings ; Looke under Ep-
ant
Mau de terre, The falling fickne([e.
Terre à terre, Euen by,clofe vato,the ground.
Manege de terre a terre. A manage more low, and
more quicke then the ordinarie gallopsor cur uet.
Sous terre. Vader band,in buggar muggar.
~ N'avoir ny de terte iatitne, ny de la blanche. To
baue neither gold nor filuer ; to be in a verie poore, or
. miferable cafe.
Faire de la terre le folles &, De terre d’autruy rem-
plir fon foflé. Looke Fofle.
Ine marchoit de pied en terre. He was foglad that
‘he could fland on no ground, or felt not the ground be
went on.
Mettre d terre; en terre; & parterre, Looke under
Mettre.
Prendreterre. To proceed, goc forward, rid ground,
et on apace; alfo,to land,or get afhore. ©
erre chevauclice eft à demy | ¢: Pro.Farre-
of land oft rid to halfe pends it felfe, The like iss
erre loing de foy n' apporte que flafcons, & bou-
” teilles: Pro.
Debonne terre bon tupin: Prov. Good earth good
© pipkins yeeldeth. ..
Nulle terre fans guerre: Pro. &, Quia terre fia
uerre: Prov. No t Law; no contentment
‘without contention, ***
Telle terre telle cruche: Pro, See Cruche,
A urd'huy en terre demain enterré: Pro. To dey
NL the earth,to morrow in it.


$ À

i ner: i: Pe Gd it bean
f k fa terre:

ie D raion der ip a cs


Original-from
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY —


a TG A
—_—<$—$_$—$ $$$ ©


N


* their lands,” \
Tant vaut l'homme tant vaut fa terre : Prov. So
prete as aman is makes be the things belonging to
We AL
Terreau: m. Mould, foyle, fat earth. ;
Terregarde. Matiere de ter. 4 controuerfie about the
meeres,or bounds of land. : 3
Tere-né: m. ée: f. Borne, begotten, or bred of the
earth,
Terreneufviers. New-found-landers new-found-land-
men.
Terre-plein: m. A platforme of earth ; or, the earth
: PA à is rampired, and filled unto the infid of a bul-
warke,or wall, .
Terrer. To terrifie,deterre, feare,skareyaffright.
Terreftre: com. Terrefriall,earthlie ; lining on, or be-
» longing to,the earth, © 3
Terrefterrité,& Teérreftteré: £, Zarthlinefe, worldli-
neffe ; alfo,an earthlie light,luftor appetite.
Terre-tremble: m. 4 earthquake.
Terreur: € Terror, feare, dread, galllineffe, horror. .
Terreux: m.eufe: f Earthie,earthlie,of earth, full of
earth, y ;
Terrible: com. Terrible,dreadfull,moft fearefull; gaft-
lie, fell borrible,moft cruel.
Terriblement. Terribly dreadfully moft fearefally;gaft-
fully horribly, moft fell;


ly.
Terribler. To make terrible, or make a terrible fhew.


man.

Terrien: m.enne: fTerreneearthlie, confifting or [a-
uouring of earth. $ k

Terrier: m.The hole,berrie,or earth of a Connie ot Fox;
alfo, a little billocke ; ao, as Papier terrier; alfo, fat
earth,mould,or Sale
C'eft vnetoux de regnard qui vous menera au ter
rier ; viz. au fepulchre,

Terrier: m. ere: £ Of carth,or foyle.
Papier terrier. The Court-roll, or catalogue of all the
names of a Lords tenants, and of all the rents they pay,


and féruices they owe, him. :
Terriere: fA Terrieror Augar. |
end nay seems PE
errine: f. An pot,or 4 ar, ly,a
panne (of earth,erc) for a Clofe-floole.


‘erritoire: m, A territorie ; the compaffe, or continent
of land or countrey belonging to a Cutie,Towne,Parifh,
Lordfhip,or Mannor. | ai
Territoire d’un Iuge; comprend tout le refort.

:L'Oifeau, |

Tertoir:m. Soyle, ground, or land ; alfo, as Terri-


Terron: m. Soyle,manure,dung filly incorporated with
1 theearth. i , i
Tertiane: f. A tertian Ague.
Teitre : m. A little bill; a hillocke,or barrow.
Teruié: com, Thin, flender. I
Terzerol: m, A mizxen,or poope-fayle. \
Tefine: m. A theame, argument, LE crea à
Thon m.A Mbesie, depofition, e-
: idence. act rm
Tefinoigné: m.ée: f. Teflified,witneed.
Tefmoigner, To teftife,witnepe ; depofe. PE
Tefinoing: m. 4 noel eer &deponen
\ov'one that giaesineuidence,


Tefmoings. ( Are fometimes) a mans teflicles, or
gy eae Sa


15


:


Go. gle


Terrien: m. 4 man of meanes or poffeffions, a landed |


Me a. ae
TER
Prov. Not clenlinefe but coflline(fé makes men to fell | Tsnoing affe lettre: Pro. Seeke Lettre,


Diere, 4 Taniere: £ A denne, à
Tefleré :m, ée:f. Squared,or made foure/quare like a
_ aye,
‘Teffon: m, 4 Gray,Brocke,or Badger; Taiflon;
an little pire % pds 5
onneau: m. À young,or little Badger.
Teffons d'un preflouér. The fide-boords of a prefe.
Feit Be m. The féalpe, or feull of the head, oc; Looke


Teftable: com, Teftable; that can make a Will ; that
may be denifed by will.
eftament: m. A Tejtament,or will; alfa, the wit,con-
ceit,underflanding ; bead-fürniture.
Elle fgait bien tout le vieil teftament,& le nouve-
au, She hath throughly learnt her lyripoope.

Graffe cuifine maigre teftament: Prov. A fit kit-
chin a leane will ; great boufe-keepers often die beg-
gars. Fe

Teftamentaire: com. Teflamentarie, of a Will or Tef-
tament. ;

Teftard: m. The Pollard,or Cheuin fifh; alfa, the little
blacke water-vermine called a Bullhead, ;

Tee: m,arde: £, Headie, felfewillie,beadjirong,ob-

inate,

Teftarderie: f Headineffe obftinacie, felfewillineffe,
eftateur : m, À teflator; one that hath made a Will.
efte: f, A bead, pate, skonce,nole,coftard,noddle; alfo,
headinefe obftinacie, felfewillinelfe.

Tefte d’un anneau. The beazill, or collet, that part
wherein the flone is fet.
efte d’'un’armée, The front, or forepart of an Armie.
Telte d'Afne, The Gull,Bullbead,or Millers thumbe;
(alittle fib.)
i de boeuf, An Oxehead,ioulthead,ercyas under
oeuf,
Tefte de cerf. His hornes; which we alfo call bis
ead, :
Tefte de chien. fs vader Chien.
Tefte creufe. À fhallow braine,addle head.idle affe.
Tefte groffe. Looke bereafter,in Grofletefte.
Tefte de grue, Pinkneedle Shepheards bodkin,Storks
bill, Cranes bill,Hearons bill; (an hearbe.)
Tefte de Linotte. 4 light head, fhittle pate, giddie
drame,
Tefte de Moine. A kind of blunt, and round-nofèd
Porpofe ; alfo, the bearbe Dandelion, Monkes-hood,
ue oan Piffe-abed, : J end bp He
ede More. 4 Moores head ; and by ci 5
any blacke, or blackifh bead ; whence, Cheval tefte
de More, 4 Roane horfé with ablacke face ; alfo, the
Knights , a crooked pecce of timber in the fore-caftle of
a fhip; thus tearmed, becaufe the upper part thereof is
now dr then fashioned like a Moores, or Sarracenes,


ad, :
ae de moufche. er under pean -

efte d'un pennon, That part there! com-

alfes,or per ARO hited flaffe.

efte de rapport. Looke Rapport.
Tefte d'une rofe. The bud,or bottomé of a Rofe.
Tefte faine. A found, or iudicious bead; an boneft,
or innocent heart ; both which are confident ; and
thereupon the Prouerb,Hardiment parle tefte faine. |.
Tefte de veau, Calues {nowt ,Snapdragon,Lyons nap ;


(an -hearbe,) ay
Tefte de vedel. A ninnichammer, fot, fillie fellow. |
Tefte verte. .A young, rafb, wild-beaded, or baire-
braind cocks-combe. Ta SES
Crinons


T Bs


Crinons en tefte.Il a beaucoup de crin: en Ia tefte.

Hi head is fill of crickets or crochets ; much troubled,

or perplexed ; he beates it exceedingly about fome odde
, matter or other: Hence the Prouerbe, Crinons en

tefte gaftent la fefte; to fignifie how unfit, and un-

iuft a man,in that mood, is to wntertaine,or accompanie

his friends which would ‘faine be merrie.

Le derriere dela tefte. The noddle, or nape of the

necke; the feat of the memorie; whence, la le derri-

ere dela tefte vn peu large. ‘He hath but a bad me-

morie,

Feu en Ja tefte. Ila du feu en latefte. He is verie

chollericke, furious, or courageous ; be will carrie no

coales,

Grillons en Ja tefte; &, Tintouins en latcfte. as

Crinonsen tefte.

Grofle tefte.ll a vne groffe tefte. He is a ioulthead,

or iobernoll;be hath more bead then wit;he bath a dull,

heauie, or erofe head of his owne : But when telte is

before groxe, thefe words haue another fignification ;

as, I n'a pas la tefte fi grofle, His capacitie is not fo

large, bis vaderflanding not fo great, bis infight into

matters not (à decpe.

Mal de tefte. The headach; alfo,iealoufie.

Mercure en latefte. Seeke ‘Mercure.

Os delatefte. Is properly the forbead bene.

Tefte à tefte. Face to face, cheeke by iowle, fellow-

like, euen with, affrent,one ouer agaimfi the other,

‘A telte baiffée. Defperately, furioufly.

‘A fatelte. As pleafeth him,of his owne beadsafter his
owne fancie, according to his luft or liking, ewen as he
would haue it.

La tefte levée. Bold!y,daringly confidently, with head
Lift up aloft holding vp his head,

* Avoir bonne tefte. Il abonne t. He is hardie, flout,
valiant : Elle a bonne t. She is maifterfull, curft,
Jbrewd; aviragoor (cold.

Avoir la tefte bien faiéte. To be iudicious, learned,
difcreet.

Avoir la tefte prez du bonnet. Looke vader Bonnet.
Avoir vne tefte.To be wilfill, beadie, felférillie; to be
obflsnately bent unto,

Baiflerla tefte. Looke Baifler.

-Branfler latefte. ‘To fhake the bead; a geflure deno-
ting mockeric,or contempt (We fay of one that fhaketh
bis head,it (eemes he is not verie well pleafed,) |
La tefte luy branfle, Said of one thats in a great
feareor that hath taken a pot too much.

Donner delatelte. To buts,or iurresalfo,to tune his
head againfi.

Ine fait ou donner de la tefte. He knowes not
whither to turne or betake himfelfé , be knowes wot
what to doe,

Faireteflea. To refift,or withfland.

Faire hon de la tefte. To fèeme loath,or Sew himfelfe
vnwilling,to doe a thing.

Te ps que ne la ag then F

- thinke goo: a7 wil doe but «el pega me,
Hocher de la tefte. Looke Hocher }
bot Lan To chide, reproue, taunt, or checke


verie bitter
HT To per fuade, fuggef, moue, or.
: pc “iA Home ad, fag ma the a


or fet ,to confront with.
oh telle Se Hema, bebehea-


re re


CO: gle


ET —————————————— —


CE À :


of fiscceffion, is taken for an heize; whence, if there be
three or foure,they fay,Us font tant de teftes; and if,
one of them die, and leauc many children, they fay that
altogether, ls font vne tefte ; viz. are to haue amen
them the part which he bad or fhould haue bad.)

= plaindre de faine tefte. To complaine of bealth,


cafe,
Prendre fa tefte. Elle a prinsfatefte. She is groun-
ded in witfilinefesef. a fetled obflinacse,refolued t to doe
but what fhe lift.
Rompre la tefte à.To trouble ;vex,or wearie with ex-
treame babbling.
Tenir tefte. To (Land unto it,
Autant de teftes autantd’opinions: Prov. As many
men [à many minds: The bkeis; ‘Autant @ hommes
autant deteftes.
En petite tefte gift grand fens: Pro, Within a little
bead great wit.
Groffe cefte & prim col, c’ eft le commencement
d'un fol: Proy. (althim a foole,and feareno checke,
whofe great head flands on flender necke.
. ‘A laver la tefte d'un afne ee ne perdquele temps,
& la lexive: Pro, Seeke Aft
Le poiflon commence 4 ifencir toufiours parla tef=
te: Pro, Fifh euer begins to taint at Lu head; the firft
thing that’s deprau'd in man's bis wit.
Le ventre emporte la tefte: Pro. The bellie ouer-
beares the res Sceke Emporter, :
Telle beftetelle tefte: Pro. Such as the beaft fuch is
his head; a or nature hatches good,or bad in-
tentions.
- Tenez chaud le pied, & la tefte, au demeurant vi-
vez en befte: Pro.Keepe head and feet warme for the
reft, thou muft refoluc to line a beaft; 2 ag to eat,and
drinke no more then will doe thee good.)
Teftelette: f. A little bead.
Teter: Lomakeawill; to deniftbequeath cou in}


Tefticule: f, A tefficle,or flone. ù ;

“Tefticule de chien. Dogs tefticles, dogs calins logs
floncs, baftard Satyrion, Standlewort. sAdders-eraffe.
re m. ere: f. Headie, ruling or pofiefing tbe


Teftiere: f. Is generally any kind, of fafhion of head-
peece; but particularly;a Scull, Salletser ‘fieele x 2h


the crovne of abat 3'alo, the bead-flall of a brid.
\valfoa bor (é-collar.


thon d'un boeuf, The yoakingof an Oxe by the


Teftification: fe A teflification, tefimonie, witnefing,
ay bearing ; a a | prowitng, or confirming, by a wit-


Toke: m,ée: Eeflifedwtnefed rowel com

med. by witnelfts, So MD 2e non

Teftifier. To by wimefe, bene ee proue by
teltimonie,con firme by witne, essints! À

LE mange tp” ss nur E HE ie
e ox, OF € t es
a ce fi sal, a Te Tefaone a | pie of cid |
Te de fn teftontxfolzs &, & Il fair de fix folz wn
ce) Two Prouerbes s applyable to a bad,and a a good |

and. x

Teftonné: m.ée' f. gore led, pentramelled. Li

Teflonner. Te re 2
Toner la boure, aoe Ja batre, ( thereby to


_ make it the more oft 2 the bead D
g a pot-
"hard,


Tefts: m. vhf


Original from
RHE OHIO STATE UNIMERSITY


| Tet


THT


| hard, or the peece of à broken pot; alfo, the hard (hell
4 a (rab,Tortoife,drc.
u: m. The Pollard,or Chenin; alfo, the Cod-fifb.

‘Le teftu d'un maffon. A Mafons hammer. M

Teftu: m.ué: £ re heads ado.
nate; alfi,headed,ar bauing many heads,

… Chardon teftu. The hundred-headed thifile, field E-
ringus,Leuant (ea Holme champion (ea Hollie.
Femme teltué. 4 domineering, or maiflerfull houfe-
wife; one that(at leaft)would be her husbands maifter;
one that hath too much bead,

Tetard.Grand tetard, A great facker,a child that füc-
keth much,

Tetafle: f. Along; froagging, flaggie, withered, and fil-
the dug ; whence, Avallé en tetafle de vieille. Han-
sing downe like the wrinckled, and ouglie breaft of an
0. hag,

Tetaffier: meere: £ Duggie, bauing great or long


dugs.
Tete: f. 4 teat, Pap, dug.
Teté: m, ée: f. Sucked as a dug ; Looke Terté.
Teter. Tofickeadug,
Tethe. as Tette,
Tethine:£ A littleteat, pap,or dug.
Tethye: £. 4 certaine deformed nds (being nei-
ther filb,nor plant) of the fea,
Tetin : m. The nibble,or nipple of a dug.
Du tetin en hors, Frombis À ana
Tetine: f. 4s Terre ; alfo,an infirument of glaffe,where-
with new-delivered women get out their beejt, or firft
grolfe milke out of their breafis.
etineux: m. eufe: £, Duggie,or haning great des.
Tetons. Little teats,or dugs.
Tetrade: f. A quaternitie; or meffe; the proportion, or
number of foure.
Tetradique: es Of,or belonging to, foure.
Degrez tetradiques. which haue betweene euerie
foure fleps one bred one, called by our workmen the
: ne J4 lace.
Tevagnathe, Awhite, rough: legd, and moft venomous


sutahieesidl as pac PR You

me com. Quadrangle,or of foure corners.

Tetrahilou Tetrahit. The Judaicall bearbe, called o-
therwife,Glidewort:


| Tetrafyllabe: com. Of foure fyllables.
if Tetri ue: com. Rude arfb,onpleafant, rough, fore,


| crabbed, froward,croffe,hard to away with.
Tette:£ A teat, pap, dug,breaf. -
pet m. écif. Sucked; drawne,or milked by a lobe


‘is much worth,or much good fluffe in him.


| Tettée: £ One fucking, a childs meal much a til


füacke at once.


| | Teteer. To fucke a dug.


|


pe reefs hors le bhaive,jifina - hour pradiife,
A e-14y are, wit
‘nde 9m series boird d whereon C Closhwwor- ; tique : à co CoPiagsbealing.sobent
| kers doefheere their clothes. . etherapeutique. That tels es Part of
Texte: sm ATeXts the original words, or (biel of a Phi lebich preferibeth redler ene of |
a ie tie Set ré Re Seg FE:
times made. | eraputrice @Rab. cea
1: m. elle: f Ofjor ina text: | Therbenthine. 2s Terebinthe. MEN
Tenge qui fon bons textuels, Leerhdext-eaie, RÉ ETES esti)
D nid 1 Sap A ARIE nen Pe mene =


Tetthe,& Tetther. as Tette,& Tue.
Tetthons.


Lu de 7 0
Tevot: m. A cowardlie br adocbio one that will


Go gle


Texture: £ A texture contexture,web,or weauingycom-
Tez. Le tez de la tefte. The feaulpe, or full of the
Tezez. (Rab. Shauen, or bald fellowes ; or, a Ni
Dr ae ASE
Dm pe, 0 To wither.

Taie The fea. @Rab.

Thale: £ A Greene; ré

Thalent. Looke T:

Thaller. Corneto bud, sai cout their tops, or begin to


Thales m, The JewifhThalmud ; a ae


Dininitie.

Theologie: ETheologie Diinites the prof fn
| Theol A Theologian. inine, pro of Di
fla a tetté de bon lai. He bath beene well bredsthere MR ent : pi '@ fier
Theomaches: m. Warriors again the gods, as the a
| Theophaine ute Epipbanie or Twelfth day incite
Theop


T H:Er


good booke-men, Juch as cant ily cite ali the bookes
which are in a Cafe: = à


pofition,worke, frame.


head,


Thos A na aa pile in the fundamen Rab,


adie. Looke Rhagade.


alafié: m.ée: f, Sea-ficke.


eare,


blafphemous Booke,or Law, deuifed by thew Rab-
Sevan of great authoritie among them.

Thalmudifte: m. 4 Thalmudift ; a à der rar
of the fuperftitions contained in the Thalmud

Thamarinde. as Tamarinde- :

Thapfie: £ The linking or deadlie Carrot.

Tharir. Looke Tarir.

Thaflot: m. 4 Newte,or Aske.

That: m. ASalamander. SA

Thaumafte.qRab. 4 wonderer. T

Theatins: m. The Theatins ; a [et of Priefis, in cake
about Pope Clement the feuenihs time, and of more
antiquitie, by fome few yeares,then the lefuits.

Theatral:.m. ale: £ Theatrall ; of, belonging 10,or done |
in,a Theater,

Theatre: m.4 Theater; a publike Play-houft; antalf
round houfè wherein people fitso. vpn |
or Games. * :

ic.”


Theie: £ An Aunt.
Theion: m. 4nW1
Thelemite: m. A Libertine ; 3 me that does what be lift.
Theme: ii A theame ; alfo, the Bill put into à eue
a plainti
= rf Theaogellblnging ta Dis
tie,or


Vin Theol Notable good,and wink: or

the bef clogs Nu tied foster, + j ”
Theologalement. Ban ey vires
Theologaftce: m. Pall or fmple Die ent.

die of holie things.

ninitié.


ned to haue beene.


Coté Late (ai


bites com: LouingG Gods. slant | -
Theosic: €. Theorie i ntti dep pod 1222


Re rhe à re and, the knowledge ofan Art


Ti H! O:


Theriaque:m, Treacles
Theriaque des Alemans, The ivice of Gineper ber-
aies extracted according unto Art.
Thermes: m. 4rme-leffe Fmages,coc ; asin Terme.
Thermes: £ Hot bathes; or waters which be naturally,
and continually, warme,
Thefaurier,& Thefaurifer.as Thezorifer.’
Thefe: : A general queftion,argument,or pofition; alfo,
asTede, _: 19 7
Theforifé: m. ée: f. Threafüredvp; boorded as threa-
fure,
Theforifement: m. A threafuring up; a hoording of
threafure.
“Tpefonier, &Theforizer. To threafire vp; 10 hoord,
gather threafire.
Theutnulle:6 4 (oat armor, or horfemans coat, wore
by a Prince,or Generall on a day of battaile,
Theütonique: com; Tentonicke,German, Allman,
Alliance Theutonique.The Companie,or Corporati-
on of the Hanfe murchants.
eze. as Tede,
Thezorifer. To heardior gather threafure; to thréafure
up,to lay up threafure.
Thibauld. Theobalde; à proper name for aman.
Thie. as Tede.
Thiclles. 4yrie inflamations. ŒRab.
Thierti. Theoderick; à proper name for aman,
Thilibié. whofe flonesbe wornesor wafted away.
Thimbre. The bearbe Sauarie,
Thimbrée. Looke Thymbrée. :
| Thinnicule. The fh Tumnie:
Thiphaine, The Epiphanie,or Twelfth day. |
Thiriaque: f, Treacle.
Thiahic. Hauing bruifed or broken tones, ai
Thoë. A kind of firong, fivift, and fhort-legd wolfe,
rough-coated in Winter, bare in Summer, and a great
friend unto men, whom He defends, and fights fr, a
}  gainflother mankind wild beafls, \ {
Thomas, for Eftomac.@Rab, >.
Thon: m. A Tunnie fifh. {
Thonneu. as Tonlieu,or Toulieu. ,
Thonnieu: whence; Droiétjou Gabelle de thonnieu.
A certaine toll,or impofl,leuied ta the Duke of Buillons
 Pfesvpon enerie Tinne, and Hogshead of wine,ar other
drinke fold,in groffe within his dominions,or tranfpor-
ted out of them... +t nb
ine: f, The backe,or backe-parts,of a Tunnie,
orachique: com. Belonging to the breaf, er fio.


| ‘Aree, & Veine chorachique. dante Amer, &


c. S dsl]

À Thore: m. A certaine thicke and round circle,or mem-

Thore: f. The hearbewolues-bane; alfo, Napellus, or
ai hood: both of one peyfonous rot

iller.& Thouilleur. as Touiller,& Touilleur.

Thrafonien : m, enrie of Boafling, prod, infolent,


€


. bumtélance ; and-particularly, the (Fr
narie rouenueor ‘ome oo Proce
des chiarttes. © 3 0r any place where-
(eee econ
le. 7 : ber of a Cities or,


Spider T à ges rt
ss Holl.


Threforerie: £. 4 Treafurerfbip ; the office,or place of à €


- and Gard,


L


~ ted them to {crue by turnes;one his yeare.


\ maire des guerres! Threaficrers,or Paymaifters for the
\ foot-Regiments;of tao forts either general ones which


- Threforiers de France. The Threafierers of Franté


. num


| Realme (howfoeuer ftiled
: Threforiers


hs riches an
aes ert :
nr | Titlesuerie fpecious (the better to make money of) their
Places held bonorable,their Autboritie great and their


hreforier: m. A Threafurer ; whereo


Threforier des Chartres. The Maifler of the Rolls


but half asmuch.The Office,at the firft inflitution was |


» erie Generalites) which “no moncy , but looke


Threafurer ; alfo,a Threafurie;the place wherein threa- |


(ure is kept. RE MT,
there be diners |
forts (as esi in France. LE 51 : TOME
Threforier de? argenterie. ‘The Threafurer of the
Kags ordinarie Wardrobe who payes for his Aaiefties
apparrell,and for that which is allowed vnto bis pages,


Threforier de la Chambre aux deniers, The Threa-
Sisrer,or Paymaifier for the diet;and for the implements
(as innen,veffell ec) belonging to the diet,of the Kings


Houfe.


or,more properly, an officer that keepes all the Euiden-
ces concerning the Kings threafure. À

Threforier du Domaine, The Receiuer General! of
the Kings demaine ; as alfo of all moneyes made by the
legitimation of baflards, naturalixing of firangers,and
ennobling of Roturiers. ans
Threforier del Efpargne. The Threafirer(fomewhat
refembling our Chauncellor) of the Exchequer; was at
the firft but one,made by Francis the firft, and appoin.
ted to be aboue the Receiuers generall, fer the bringing
in,and laying vp,of all {uch finance as fhould be leftin
their hands,after the defrayment of the ordinarie char-
ges,and extraordinarie neceffities,of the Realme:Hen=
ry the fecond (his fonne)made two of them,and appoin-
esfor the which
he receiued 2000) flerling wagessthe other(who
onely made vp bis accompts for the yeare before) hauing


not vendible ; but being made alteruxtiue, it became
extreamely fhbiell to thevordinarie Office-difeafe of |
France, à

Threforiers extraordinaires, ou de I’ extraordi-


are but foure;or particular and prouinciall ones which
à diners ; dibdterhative; and waiting enerie yeate
tyrnes. |


at firft there wanbnt one, an officer of the Crowne, aiid
called the great (ox high) Trea[urerof France: Afiér-
wards, Philippe de Valois made. fecond, Charles |
the fift a third, and Charles the fixt a fourth ; which
ber continued untill the raigneof Henry the Je-
cond, who, at one clap, made 16; à proportion, though

reat, yet verie moderate, inr of the multitude
Lost in by his fuccefors, and continued to thefe |
times, wherein there be aboue 200; (viz, 10,07 12 in e- |:


L 3

that the Kings demaine be husbanded, his rents gathe-
red, his houfes, exe,repaired, his debts gotten, and bis
moneyes brought in, to his pa iy as pd al.
though they be not officers of the Crowne (as the ff
high Threafurer-Was ) nor Lhe et hg aaa the |
h iers de France, &

Géneraux,& Generaux des financés)
as the foure auncient Threforiers were, yet are their


Priuiledges many, =. ' |
ier de lamoïfon du Roy.The Threafurer of,
ifler for, the boufekold ; payes onely all koufe-
cers,and ftruants their penfions,and wages.
orier des: menus. ‘The of the prinie
an officer which bath him ten crownes


à day for the Kings extraordinarie,and idle expences.


- Threforiers ordinaires ( ou del ordinaire)).des


pie. The Paymaillers for the Genfdarmerie. à
hreforier des parties c


Aujourd'huy threforier demainærefarriere: Prov.
Looke Trefarriere. '

Threforillon: m. A little threafire. »

Thtiacle: 1: Treacle ; See Theriaqu


laque. ‘ : : ®
Thriacleur: m. A maker, or feller of Treacle; alfo, a


Mountebanke,limpoftor,Drug-feller,Quack-faluer.

“Thriaque. as Theriaque. id en 263

Thringle. Looke Tringle. Ri

Throaies de fang, Clots, or clutters of congealed

loud... ’ ; i

Throne: m. 4 Throne,a ropall Seat.

Thrubal. @Rab, 4 Trumpettor.

Thun: m. The fifh called a Tunnie.

Thunine; & as Thonnine; or,asTun. bit

Thyim: m, The hearbe Times al(o, a certaine kernell in
the kannell bone of man, or beaft; alfo, a kind of wart
within a womans pritilies, |

Thymbre:f, winter Sauorie,Pepper Hy/op.


and (by fome) alfo,Balfamint,or Balme-Miat. &
Thymelée: £. Spurge-Flax,mountaine Widow-wayle.
Thymique. Veine thy. Zeoke Veine. 7
Mine, A compofition of Time, Pennyryall,Rue,
ry barlie meale, falt, water, and vineger ; good a-
gaint the gowt, ventofities,and weakeneffe of the flo~
macke, and a good enaguator of -grofe, and blacke
Thyn: m, a Thon: ::.
Thynnuncule, 4 little Twanie fifh.
Thyon: m, The Bunting; (a bird.) - si
Thyphaine, The Trwelfib day in Chrifimas. |
Tiare: f A round and wreathed Ornament for the head
- (fomewhat refembling the Turkifh Turbant) worne, in
old time, by the Priaces,Priefis and women of Perfia.
Tiburon: m. A kind of fea-Calfe,in the Jndian fea.
Tichous: m. Little cakes made of egges, and flower,


with a little butter (and fometimes cheeft among)eaten


ordinarily with figar and Rofewater.
Ticq: m. as Tiquee; (in the laft fence.)
icque torche lorgne. Voices or words, whereby,as by
our thwicke throacke coca beating,or cuffing with the
fifts,c c;is expreffed, ; ‘i
Ticquet. as Tiquet. …  : |
Tictac. Ticke-tackesa Game at Tables,
ie. as Tede, ; we
Tiedes com.Luke-warme neither hot nor cold,betweene
bot and cold; alfo; faint, flow, remiffe, or backward in
a matter,
Tidlenscn. Lafesomee nb bacewerd
icdement. Luke-warmely ; backwardh.
Tieder. To warme , to make luke-warme , put fome
warmth into, giue a little beat vato. sig
Tiedeté: f warmeneffe Juke-warmene[fe.
Tiedeur: € Warmth; alfo,moifineffe,or moift warmth.
Tiedi: m. ie: £ warmed, a little heated ; alfo,bathed in,
or bedewed with,teares,
Se Ticdir: To wax warme, grow luke-warme; alfo, to
bath, ov bedew imfelfe in teares. |
Tien: m. enne: f. Thine,belonging to thee,
oo : m. A flay for the hand along the wall of a
aire. ‘
Tiens-le-bien : m.A Crians;the long lune or line which
is tyed vntoa Hawkes leg,to keepe ber from flying away


« The Threafurer
_ for all fach moneyes as be raifed by the fale of Off-


brée: f. Fifh-Mint, water-Mint, Brookes Mint 5 |


at her firft luring. “
| Tierçage: m. A third earing, tilth,or culture of ground.
Tierce: f. The 24 part of a Seconde; a maruellous little,

= {and the leaf) weight ufed by Fewellers,
 Tierce. L'heure des tierces. The fecond quarter, or
third houre, of the artificial day 3 im Summer eight of
the inWinter tenne. Et
Tierce, whence, Fievre tierce. A tertian ague ; Locke

Tiers, whereof this is the feminine, F
Tiercé: m, ée: f. Ploughed, or eared the third time;al-

| fo,raifedsor increafed a third part euerie yeare.

Tiercé de, Ja the third place; (a tearme of Blafon,)

Paroles tiercées. Broken or vuper fect language, dis-

jointed fpeeches halfe words... :

Tiercelet: m. The Taffell,or male of any kind of Harke,
fo tearmed, becanfé be is, commonly, a third part lee
then the female,

Va tiercelet de Iob. An excecdingpatient mam
Tiercelin: m.Sarcenet. |
Tiercelin. Plomb tiercelin, Lead mingled'a third part

with white and fine, the other two with courfe and

blacke, fluffe. ;
Tiercement: m. 4 third ploughing, ov caving; alfoyan™
adding of a third part untoa fummesor the rifingyor in-
creafing a third in value euerie yeare ; alfi, a certaine
inferior officer in a fhip,erc.


| Tiercement. Thirdly.


Tiercer. To plough, till,or eare the ground a third time;
alfo, to.rife, or increafe a third partin values as in e-
‘erie yeare,from vs the firft,to vaj s vj d the fecond,x s
the third, cc.

Tiercer le cens. C’ eft quand pour vingt folz de
- cens le fübjeét doit au feigneur cenfuel trente folz
pour le profirde cens. €Ragueau. a

Mes Là m,Certaine croffe branches ait the outfide of

. avant, sme €

' Tiercerons. The fame. BL

| à m.4 Song of triple Stanzoes,or Stanzo of three

' Tierciere: f The vefell,or meafure called a Tierce.

Tiers: m. Atierce,third,third part,or thirden-dealé;al-
fo,as Harle ; alfo,a kind of play fomewohat like our Bar-
ly-breakes : af he
Tiers en afcendant (in the valuation of Offices) is as
much as a halfe, whence, if an Office be worth 2000
pes; the Tiers en afcendant is held to be 1600


pounds.
Droitt de tiers & danger. Looke Danger. .
fers: m.erce: f. Tertians third,the thrid.
Droiét de tiers denier. Looke Droiét.
Efcheoir,tomber; ou venir, enmain tierce. A noble
or free Faberitance, bought bya Roturier, to come by
difcent unto.a third Roturier (the purcha(or being the
fir, and both-he and his next-fucceeding boire hauing
done homage for it; ) Jn which cafe it may be parted a-
mong heires in the fame manner as it fhould bane been,
had it continued [till in the hands of a Gentleman,

Tiers-pied. as Trepied.

. Tiers-poinét:m, Voure poin@ué comme À tiers-
re Aa a little bigher then the bemicicle, or
circle,

Tieutieu Margot. The voice of countrey people calling
their Kine vnto them,

Tieul, for Tel, Such;(anold word.)

Tifé,& Tifer. as Artiffé,& Artifter.

Tiffer. The fame; alfo, to tifle with the fingers, or bufie
the hands long about a thing, to. the end it may be done
well,or to the good liking a os does it. ©

H


Go gle


Pe lee


TOL Ti TEN
Tige: £ The flaulke, or flemme of an bearbe ; alfo, the


maine flocke of a Familie,or Pettigree ; w whence;
| Tant que tige fait fouche elle ne branche iamais.


cot feemes agreeable, as to the fence,in his, Timbre
qu'on met fus'vn Heaulme ; and Vigeniere vpn Li- |
uie ; in bis, Vb portoit au timbre de fon cabaffec

vne figure de poiflon ; yet L’Oifeau, a late and lear-
ned writer, appropriates it (im bis Booke des one)
- onely to the Helmet,

Vn timbre de Martres.A certaine quater num

ber,of Martins skins,

Timbré. Armoiries timbrées. Timbered,cr jcreafled; a-
dorned with a creaft,er with a mantle, belme, creaft
cbc; or (onely) infigued with an Helmet, - «
Cerveau mal timbré. Amidle, ignorant, or ilLfir-
_ nifhed braine ; a wit that wamelh fi, or due orna~
ments. .

Timbrer. To timber ; to cet rie aderne wit


As long as there be any beires of an elder Prince — the
blond,the younger cannot baue the Crowne,

Tigette: f, A little flalke,or flemme.

Tigname.Red Stirax ; an aromaticall Indian wood vfed
by Per finmers.

Tigne. as Teigne. .

Tigueux. Looke Teigneux.

Tignon: m. A feurfe,or fealinefte of the skin.

Tigre: mi. 4 Tiger,

aloux comme yn tigre. Extreamely iealous ; (for fo

is that beaft reported to be.)

Tigreaü: m, À young,or little Tiger.


| Tigrefque : com. Tiger-like; fierce, cruel, violent, a creaft, or with a mantle and creat (as one of
swift, fauage. our late/t Blafoners expounds its)or (ane) to garnifiser
Accouttré à la tigrefque.Horribly beatenor beftrat- infigne it with an belmet.


ched,cruelly handled.
Tigreffe: £, A Tigrefie,a fhe Tiger. ©

Tigrin: mine:  Ofa Tiger ; like a Tigerscrelerce,
ne frift.

PE com, as Tigrin.
m, The Line, Linden,or Teylet tree; Seeke Tillet.

Tiles The finall moats of duft appearing, and wauing vp
and downe, in the Sunne-beames vohich come into a.
roome at the crannies,or boles of walls crc.

Tilet: m. A ticket, billetor little note.

Tilier: m. as Tillet ; the Linden tree.

Tillac: m. The Orelop,or Arloup;or more eae
hatches of a fhip.

Tillaquer. To boord,or flore the Orelop of afp.”

Tille: f The rinde,or pilling of. nes alfo,the fruit
of the Linden trees alfa kind of wimble.

Tillé: m. ée: f, Pilled,or fhaled,as Hempe. i

Tiller. To pill,or fhale Hempe.

Tillet: m. The Line, Linden,or Teylet tree; 3 alfo,a or
‘billet, or little note.

Tillet femelle. The female Line tree, called in fame
laces,the broad-leafed Elme, ÿ BO
illet mafle. The male Line tree; the timber whereof
i yellowifh, and more knottie, hard, and fubftantiall,
then that of the female, which is whitifh, plaine; fmooth,
» and foft in the handling and cutting.

Tilleul. 2s Til.

Tilleux: m. eufe: £Kxobbie, fealie yough,rugged.

Tillier: m. The Linden tree.

Tiltre: m. A tittle; à (mall line dravene ouer an abrid- |
ged word,to fuupply the letters wanting; alfo,a title, or
infcription ; alfo,a title, mame, firname, or addition of
‘dignitie; alfo,a title vato land,erc ; alfo,an Euidence,
Deed,or Fnfirument of Purchafè,&c: alfo, a brace of
dogs layed in a place to be let flip at a Deere as he paf:

. Seth by; alfa, the ne value, or degree of goodneffe of

- gold,and nes higheft of the firft being 24 heed
“and of the fecond 12d; but to be wrought by
 fathes,&c, at 24 graines nie a quarter pos se


| and 11d 10 graines the fA a bre
1 A Coat. yon coat © » 4
se pop
bon. of brafèn Drimme.

Us; or the Hall-bel of à Col:


Timide: com,Timerous, feare b Pil fine
pp à fils fil F


La mere du timide ne {gait que ceft de pleurer:
Pro. The mother of a a parep Jonne knowes not what
TimideentTinorany are comardh bff
imidement.Timoron|ly,feare cowar
Tünidité:f. Timiditie, timoroufneffe, fearcfillnefie,
faintheartednelft comardlinelfe sbi
Timon: m. The beame,or draught tree ofa wagon,ec;
ple A agen nr ie


Timoré, ty éc:f. righted, shared, put into a fèare.

Timpan. Looke Tympan. .

Timpanifé. Baftiment. timp. Hauing a gable-end.

Timper. To tingle, to make ring or found, oe; as A ris
ter. qRab,

aa m. Tinne; alfa singing’ 3 yumbenee ; $i

) _ Lesoreillesme font tin. Mine eares tingle,or glow,

“Tings m. A (oleflaffe, or Stang; a big flaffe whereon a
burthen is carried betwcene two on their fhoulders.

‘Tine: f. A Stand,open Tub,or Soe,moft in-ufé during the
time of | tee and bolding about foure or fiue paile- |
fulls,and commonly borne,by a te eae |

Tinker £. A Stand-fill,or Soe-fill,

' Tinel: m. A boufebold,or familie; alfo,the roome cet

re Rs prea a dine and fup; alfo, as


Tinet: m. “The whall tearmed.a Horlepoole, or whirle-
poole; alfo,as Tine.

“Tinerte: £ A little Stand,Soe,or Tub; a bathing tub.

ba m. Long white rockes bing wader mets
ea.

Tinne. a Tine, ag ip

Tinole: £ A little Soe,t'ub,Stand,erc.

Tinon: m. A little Soe ; a Stand,or fmall open Tu

- Tintalorifé. Grimme, frowning, frowar

_ Tintamarre: f.4 cla ees gs or ging-
ling noife,made int ¢ fall of woodden ¢,07 vefels of
mettall ; alfo,a blacke Santus ; the lowd wrangling,or
iangling outcryes of , ae. or fcoulding fellowes; any
extreame ov horrible dinn

Tintamarré: m. ée : f. crafhing gingling ; wrangling,


ling; extreame-dinne-ma
Tint Ti garnie PAR


tr


Ld ts L'on oe


of} waa ere CSSS


4


‘4
=
:


or Clifler ; alfo,the bel of a little Clocke ; . A tinging, ling tomlin,
Re rember fée | rebontagatere fudge
font Fot the creaft,or cognifance,tbats | Tinter. ea ring, AE Sr ibrltste refound, or
om of. Les oreilles me tient. Sine cares inglesr gl,
Pies as Tithymale. +


‘Tin.


rig 1 frorh


THE-OHIO STATELUNIVERS


Tori Re.


TIR


Tintillant: m. ante: f, Tinging, ringing tingling; tol-
bang} réfounding,"-01 1:18 19 KU3D 2117 AIN Et


Tintimale. as Tithymale. 5 QUE
Tintin: ne The tinging,or tolling of a bell; alfo,the war-
ble,or forg of a Nightingale, "110 yey ae
Tintiner. To ting,or toll,a bell,
Tintoins; Looke Tintouins, : |
Tinton: m, The burthen of a fong;alfo,the ting of a bell;
alfo,a kind ofdance. = Se
Tintoner. To11g,or toll often; to glow, tinglesdingle.
Tintôuin : m. A ringing, finging,or tingling in the head,
about the cares ; alfo, great caré,anxietie,or troable of
[pirit ; whence; | HUE
Il a beaucoup de tintouins en la cefte. His thoughts
are verie much bufied,his pate fore troubled,braïne ex-


trcanely purled'; his bead rs full of proclamations,per-
- plexitie,dinne. Meo
Tintouiner-as Tintoner; 40, to refoundin the eare;
aad to trouble, puxlesor perplex the braine, :
Tinture: f Red wine, or Aligant ; ( belike becaufe it
flaines.) F
Tiphaine: £ The Epiphanie, Twelfth day.
Tipher: as Tiffer.
Tiphoine. 4s Tiphaine; (Ruftiquement.)
Tipule: f. A water-fpwter; a Spider which runnes onthe
water withont fidking.
Tique: £ The vermine called a Ticke. |
Tiquet: m. as Tique; o”,a little Ticke; alfo,the hearbe
Kick Ricinus,Palma Chrifti; alfo,a diféafè which on
afnddaine jtopping a horfes breath, makes him to flop,
andfland fil. faghort :
Au tiquet. 17 an exceeding flrait or extremitie,at bis
wits end nat knowing further what to [ay or doe.
Prés du tiquet dé la mort, Neere his laft galpe, rea-
die 10 breath his lafl. eipulies
Tiqueté: m. Ticketted,or appointed by ticket. +
Tirace. Looke Tirafle, Fou: VER
Tirade: f. Adrauzht, pull, plucke; fhot,or fhoot:a dvaw-
ing, pulling; fhooting, eS
Tirage: m. Draggage; or, a drawing, baling, pulling,
pluckingtowing,tugging. - A TTUO
Droitt de tirage pour le fel, ou pour le Vin, Looke
under Droit, an .
Tirailler. To vend,or teare in peeces. mestshy I
Tiran: m. Any fring, lace, line,or cord, which pulled at
one end,clofes at the other the thing it 1 faftened unto;
Hence, Les tirans d'une bourfe; &, les tirans d’un
chaperon de faucon; the firings wherewith they are
font.” Ba i
Tirans: m, as Trayans. - .
Tirant: m.ante:f, Drawing, dre; Looke Tirer.
Tirafle: f. A Drag-net for Partridges,é>c; alfo,the firap
of a boot, :
Tiraflé: m. ée: f Dragged, pulled,baled,towed along,
or towards. / ‘
Tiraffer. To drag, pull,bale,tow along,or towards.
Tire: f. ‘Adraught, pull, plucke twitchsug,lug sfretch,
retchs alfo,a fhot,or {hoot,hurle, fling throw,cafl pitch;
alfo,a tire;a its kicke, yarkesiert ierke,tmang,
twine; alfo,a rcach,gatescourfe,or length and continu-
ance of cour(e ; alfa , the drawing out of a womans
gone fléeues wit Cobweb-lavmne, dre. : "7
‘Atire d'aile. By force, with might of wing; alfo, with
long and much flight,or fines i '

\ “Attire & à aire. Ouite and cledne; Looke Aire. 1
Tout d'une tire. All inone continually or con
tinuedly sat once,at one iert,all together; withois flop,
intermiffion,or delay. Pees Ant


À


fè,mo
alfo.
T


Tiré: m. €e:& Drawne,haled,draggeditiwed, pulled,
plucked lugged ; trayled along, or towards; alfa, firet-
ched,petched ; alfa, fhot burted,throvwnescaft, fiuny;al-
20) ritied,
| on forced from; al/o, fhotor flaine, wish a Pifloll, ee’;
»\-alfo,dravne, pour tr ayed delineated, 832+
Tiré deloing. Farre fetched, 9s
_ Bien tiré. well dranmne ; aljo,neat, (pice; fine, trick
festrimme oo orf fie Te
Tire-balle. An Faftsument wherewith Surgeons déaw
bullets out of the bodie,
Titées fas Tire, «9 |
Tirée d'oeil, The fight,view, looke, or glaunce of the
eyes > on 0


? med induced, perfuaded ; uljo,wicftedsextr.


Tirebourre: f. 4 worme, or skrue > the Faftrument
wherewith a charged Cannon is unladen.

Tire-feu: m. 4 medicine, or plaifier for the drawing of
fire,or extreame beat,out of a wound,erc.
ire-fiens: m. A Drag wherewith dung istaken vp,vp-
on the remouc of a dunghill. aM ‘

Tire-fleiche: f 4x Jnfirument wherewith Surgeons
draw arrowes out of the bodie.. z

Tirefond deChirurgien, A Surgeons Terebra,or Pier-
cers an Inflrument which he puis unto diners vfes. !

Tirefond de tonnelier. A Coopers Turrell ; the Augar
wherewith he boreth boles.

Tirelaines: m.. Cloke-twitchers rogues which in the
night-time lurke about the corners of flreets, to (natch
away the clokey of fuch as pafse by them.

Tire-laiffe: m. A forgoing of a new-taken bold; à fpee-
die reftorall, or gruing backe,of a thing feifed as his
owne,but prouing another mans. !

Tire-lardon: m. A lickarifh,oi greedie fellow.

Tire-larigaud, Boire à tire-las To carowfe luftily,
qualfe extreamety. ast.

Tirelire. 4 Chrifimas box; a box hauing a cleft on the


lid, or in the fide, for money to enter it; uftdin France |


by begging Fryers, and here by Butlers, and Prentices,
: dre; alfo,the warble,or fong of a Larke,
Tirelirer. To warble, or fing like a Larke.
Tirelupin: m. A catch-bit, or captions copspanion ; a
’ Rowdrell, or fcuruie fellow. : ‘ x
Tirelyre: 2s Tirelire. |
Tirement: m. 4 drawing, baling, dragging, trayling,
towing; pulling plucking ,rwitching,along,or towards ;
alfo,a retching,or fretchiag ; alfo, a fbooting, darting,
flinging spurting throwing; alfo, a wore fling exatlingor


forcing from ; alfo,a drawing, delineating pourtraying; |


alfo,a yerking, ierting, kicking ; alfa, a goimg along,or
making towards, MALE LENS
Tire-pance. ‘A tir.-Hold beliie hold, or till the bellie
crac ey DE trun Let iesi yt
Tire-pied: m, À Shoomakers flirrup.
Tire-pierre. À Surgeons


picker at the one end,like abooke at the.other;and vfed


for the drawing of flones,& cout of the bladder,creyor |


bullets er cout of the bodie: 0
Tire-poil: m.4 haire-plucker; an infirument medicine,
or plaifler; for the plucking away of haires 9)
Tirer.T0 draw,drag,trayle;tow,balespull,plucke,lug tue,
twitchy, bring, lead,along, or towards ; alfo, 10 firetch,
retch, dilate, extend, wiredraw, alfo, to dart, {hoot,
fling, fling,burle, coft, throw, pitch frommards; alfo, to
hoot one witha Piftoll,exc;aljo,to take sextrattwreft,
or force from; alio,to yer ke,winge, fling,or five out with
the beeles; alfo,ta wend, gor, traucll, make along or to-
wards ; alfo,to draw,delineat¢,or pourtray; allo,te re~
fenblesor draw neerevatoz 7: "3 us


Hbbhy Tirer


Original trom


THE OHIG:S TATE-GNIVERSITY.


it nina de th a à


ument,made like a tooth- 5


Li hd ds 1»:


:
iw


ey ibid liées) if


war


TES


Tirer des armes, To fence. ;

Tirer arriere, To gine or fall backe,to retire,

Tirer à l'aviron, To row hard,to tug at an Oare.
Tirer au bafton. To flrine, contend, le,wrafile;
alfo, to fight, or deale blowes ; whence, Tandis qu’ils
tiroient au bafton, whileft that they bickered, er lay-
ed about them,

Tirer les chaufles. To tipe vp the heeles,to dye.

Tirer au chevrotin. Looke Chevrotin.

ise au collier avec, To firiue,contend,wraftle hard
with,

Tirer à confequence. To make an example, or prece-
dent of.

Tirer Ja couverte de fon cofté. To pull the Couerlet
unto bis fide; viz, all dealings, or gaines unto bim,and


his,
Tirer de deffous l'aile. To purloyne, fleale cunningly, |


filch priuily from,
Tirer l'eau, To leake,or let in water.
Tirer l’eau à fon moulin. Looke under Eau.
Tirer l'efpaule, To fhrinke in the necke, or lift up the
Shoulders, as one that hath no liking of, or fancie to, a
matter,
Tirer fon efpingle du ieu, To flinch,or flinke away in
an extremitie,to flip bis py des of the collar.
Tirer à faure. To miffe,in (hooting.
Tircr ala fin. To beat thelaft caft, lye a dying, ap-
proach unto bis end.
Tirer des flancs. À hor(é to firike often at bis owne
bellie, |
Tirer du foing aux chiens. To (pue, vomit, cafihis
gorge.
Tirer la laine. To füatch a cloake off a mans backe,
and runne away withall,


Tirer la langue fur, Scornefülly to put out the tongue


at,

Tirer hors ligne. To famme up,rc ; as under Ligne;

alfo,to exprefle,mention, fet downe,

Tirer à la main. A borfe to prefe upon the band , or
ffriue to get forward,and goe fafter then he fhould,
Tirer l'orcille, Secke Oreille.

Tirer pais. (7n hunting) 10 runne his countrey ; or, to
fire diretlly forward , (in trauelling) to goe on, rid

round, gaine way,
irer la quintaine. To runne at the Quintaine,

Tirer auregnard, To (pue,caft,vomit,

Tirer le rideau. To difplay,manifep make apparent ;
alfà,to conclude,or fhut vp.


Tirer au rivet. To fow like a Shoomaker; alfa, to |
another. +


lucke as much from one as
Lire la robbe. Looke Robbe.
Tirer le ferpent du buiflon, To performe a difficult,
or dangerous exploit.
Tirer fon vent. To fétch his breath,
Tirer les vers du nez à. To pumpe, or draw fècrets

tof, to undermine. a :

at que le vaiffeau pe tirer. As long as it will

mmesorbathany thing init.
; > tire. = bellie frouts,retches,or is rea-
; cracke,by fullne,

Chafcun tire à fon profit: Pro, Euerie one lookes af
_ ter bis ovene profit,or inclines “+4


under ; + 2 7 Fi |
Pour bien tirer il faut prendre vifée: Prov To doe


= BS Go gle


Tithymale: m. The hearbe Spurge,Tishymale, Wolues-
1 mi


unto that which is likeli
to à x
. Mieux vaut tirerque rompre: Prov. Better to bow |
thentocracke;tobendthento breake, =
_ Onne peur tirer dufac que ce qu'y eft: Pro, Looke


TD: ESS


things well we muft confult aduife. or
Qui bien tire deux en a: Pro.who pulls amaine does
rend in twaine ; be that plucks hard gets two,

Ce qu’ affemble pille pille, defaffemble tire tire:
Pro. What hath beene got by miferie and pillage, comes
to be fubieét to unthriftie fpoylage.

On touche toufiours fur le cheval qui tire: Pro. The
free drag-horfe is alwayes ouerraught.

Tiret: m. A little draught, pull, plucke, twitch, tug,
re, as in Tire; alfo, a little flroke, or tittle in wri-
ting.

Tiretaine: £. Linfie-wolfie ; or a kind thereof,worne or-
dinarily by the French pe ly ce

Tireur:m. A drawer, puller, plucker, baler, lugger,
tugger, tower; a fhooter, darter, cafter, hurler, flng-
er; a retcher, flretcher, extender, lengthener, wire-
drawer. ‘

Tireur al aviron, 4 Rower.
Lo de laine. A Teyfer of wooll ; alfa, as Tire-
aine,

Tirin, as Tarin.

Tirofageur: m, A cheeft-eater. (Rab.
iroir: m, A ring, or any other thing, on the outfide of
a doore, feruing to pull it to, or flut it after one that
goes out, :

Tirouér: m. Tiring for Hawkes ; alfo, a Drawer und
a Table,or Cupboord ; alfo,as Tyrouër.

Tiroüoir. The fame; or,as Tiroir.

Tirfe: f. The dart,or iauelin of Bacchus.

Tifanne: £. Ptifanne,Barlie water.

Tifon: m. 4 fire-brand.

‘A Noel au Perron; à Pafques au tifon:Pro.warmth
at Cbrifimas,cooth at Eafter; the fire which Chrifi-tide
fpareth Eafter fpendeth,

ee Ofien to fire firebrands,or lay them clefe to-
gether.

Tifferand: m. A weaner.

Tifferande: £ A woman weauer.

Tiffeure : £ A weaning; or,as Tiflure.

Tiffier,& Tiffiere: f. as Tiflerand,& Tifferande, —

Tiflotier: m. AWeauer.

Tiffu: m. Abawdricke, ribbon, fillet, or head-band, of \


wouen fluffe. '
Tiff: m. ué: f, wouen; plaited, interlaced, wound one
ithin another.


w. D
Tiffure: £, 4 weauing; or plaiting ; an interlacing; alfo,
the wooft,or wefi ; the thread which croffeth fluffe, er
oeth ouerthwart itin the weauing ; alfo, any wouen
ÿ €; but efpecially cloth of gold, filuer, filke,@c.
Tiftfe, To weave ; alfo, to plait, infould envorap, iater-
lace one within another. 1 à
Titan. Le Titan. (Poetically) the Sunne.
Titanique: com. Belonging,or,like to the Sunne.…
a Titanique. Huge, mightie, Giant-like force.


Titeller. To ting,or tingle, as a (little) Bell.


\


Tichymale Amygdaloides. as Tithymale Characi-
ps dre nr ren me USE
Tithymale Caryites. Myrtle Spurge, female Spurge.
‘Tithymale Characias, Wood Spurge,or male Spurge. |
Tith Cypariflias, Cypreffe Spurge, Pine-
Spurge ; or (as Mathiolus thinkes) finall Efüla. -
Fo er Se ge ag
. sand rockes,to a tree-like beigh err ce |
“Ti femelle, Myrtle Spurge, female Spurge,
ke Spurge. a


TOI


TOL


Tithymale Heliofcopius. Swnne Spurge, time Ti-
thymale. Ne ?
Tichyinale Leptyphyllos. Small-leafed Spurge.
Tithymaie marin, Sea-Spurge, fea-Wartwort.
-Tithymale mafle. Wood Spurge, male Spurge, Al-
mond Spurge. :
Tithymale Myrfinites, & Myrtien. 4 Tithymale
femelle. : Nb
Tithymale Paralius. Sea-Spurge,Wolues-milke, fea-
Wartwort. à ;
Tithymale Platyphyllos, Broad-lea fed Spurge,
Tithymale fuyvant le foleil. as Tithymale Heliof-
copius. + y
Titillation: £ A tickling.”
Titillé: m. ée: f. Tickled.
Titiller.To tickle; to flirre,touch,or moue with delight.
Titrac: m, The fafhion,or order ofa thing. °
Titre. Looke Tiltre, dete y
Titubant: m. ante: £ Tripping, flumbling, flaggering;
faultering, fiutting lammering; alfo,quinering ,doxbt-
full,wauering, 4
Titubation: f. A tripping, flumbling, flaggering;a faul-
tering, flutting, flammering ; a quivering, trembling,


doubrfillne([ewauering. 7.
Titulaire: com, Titular ; hauing a title; confifling of
titles,or onely in title.


Tochere. Fearne,brakes ; or a fearnie ground. (Rab.

Tocque: f. as Toque.

Tocqué: m. ée: f. Coyffed. We

Tocquement: m, as Toquement.

Tofte: £. as Toufte; alfo, a plant called Spunge of the
Riner, :

Toffu: m. ué: f Looke Touffu.

Toge: f. A gowne; long robe,or garment,

Togue. as Toge,

Tohu. Confifion, Rab. * ea

Foiét: m. The roofé,or couer of a hon{e; alfo,the houfe it


felfe. .

Toile: & Cloth, linnen cloth; alfo, « faulting horfé, of
cloth,eoc; whence,Chafler à la toile; d/o,the cawle,
or kell within the bellie; alfo,as Peritoine.
Toiledearaigne, À Cobweb,

Toile baptifte, À frong,and verie white (but courfe)

Cambricke whereof Nunnes make their vayles, :

Toile de Cambray. Cambricke. d’ Hollande ; Hol-

land. ane

Toile Gautier. See Gautier.

Toile de maifon; &, Toile de mefnage, A good

‘firong hafwines,or houfebold,linuen cloth, :

lour de toile, À Court day,day of Pleading,Hall day.

Vn penitent de quatre aulnes de toile. 4 mall, or

eight repentant (God he knowes. pres
A toile ourdie Dieu mande le fil: Pro. Seeke Fil. .
Toiles: f. Toyles; or,a Hay to inclofe,or intangle, wild
- beafsin. "CF à à

Toilette, f. A Toylet; the fluffe which Drapers lap a-
bout their clothes ; alfo, a bag to put night-clothes, and
buckeram,or other fluffe to wrap any other closhes,in.

re nr PARE ere
oinin: m.(Adiminutiue of Anthoine)Tonie.

Toifage: m.A fadoming; or the meafiring by fadomes,

Toile: f A fadome'; a meafure containing fix feet in
length; This is the moft ordinarie Toile, howfoeuer
the Kings be fenen foot and foure ynches ; and fome of
particular places longer, fome le[fe.

Toife des bois & forefts. The fadome for woods,
and fore(ts; is (by the cuflomes of Orleans) fixe
foot and a halfe long. :


ee ee ee ee tea


am Ci


Toife de Bour c. TheBurgonian fadome, is fe-
uen foot and a half : ca te
Toife de charpentier, The Carpenters fadome, is as
the fadome for woods, crc.
Toife cube,The fquare fadome,or a fadome in fquare,
ataines all ouer 216 feet,
Oifede Maflon. The Mafons fadome is (as the ordi-
narie one) fix foot long.
Toife des Mefureurs de terres, & vignes. The Sur-
ueyors fadome,is but fiue foot long,
Toife de Roy. The Kings fadome, is, among Archi-
tects, three moderate paces; and among Surueyors,fe-
uen feet and foure ynches.
Toifer. To fadome,or meafure by fadome.
Toifeur: nm. 4 fadomer,
Toifon: m, A fleece of wooll; the whole wool of a


fheepe. é

Tolerable : com. Tolerable, fufferable indifférent, @-
Soaable ; that may be borne indured,abidden.
Rente ne. Lu » on oi which cannot be
extinguifhed,nor bought out,but muft be borne, cr payed.

Tolerablement. Tes fer. Bak

Tolerance: f Tolleration, fufferance, permiffion,indu-
ring, patience, forbearing, Se

Tolerer. To tolerate, fuffer, permit, beare with, winke
at,indure,abide, :

Toliban: m. 4 Turbant,or Turkifh hat.

Tollart: m. An executioner, ahangman; and bence, the
Prouoft Marfhalls attendants be (in difgrace) often-
times called Tollarts.

Tollere. A Turki{h coyne worth about ij s flerling,

Tollet. 4 Thowle,e>c,2s Scalme,

Tollieu. as Toulieu.

Tollin: m. The toll taken by a Miller.

Tollir. To remone,take away ; difannull, abrogate,can-
cell,abolifh,make void. , .

Tollu: m.ué: & Taken,remoued Jift,or carried away.

Tolopan. as Turbant, 2 :

Tolte:f A taking,exatlion,lenie.

Toinbant: m. ante: f Falling, or tumbling downe, a-

. lighting upon.
Tombant levant. well or ill, bittie miffie, here or
there one way or other.

Toinbe: m. 4 Gurnard fifh.

Tombe: f, 4 tombe; a tombe-flone;or graue-flone.

Tombé: m. ée: f, Fallen, tumbled downe or into; fight


upon,
Tombeau. A tombe, graue, fèpulcber,
Toimbement: m, 4 /2Ling,or tumbling downe; a ligb-
ting upon. at ek ae


Tomber, Tofall,or tumble donne or into; al, to light


upon. lite a .
Tomber deez. To pife,or makewater. -
Tomber à faux. Looke Faux, ;
Attendre le gland quitombe. (47 ordinarie perfon)
~ to line in expectation of profit,or preferment,at Court.
Jecrains fort,outombera cecy. Fgreatly feare the
fücceffèsor iffive of this matter;&,ouveulent tomber
ces belles paroles, 7 doubt me 29 good will come of
thisgloxing.
Qui chope, & ne tombe adioufte à fes pas: Prov.
The man that trips and falls not ,gaines a fle
Vn mefchant vaifleau iamais ne tombe dela main:
Pro, The beft things runne more haxerd then the worft;
ill vefells neuer, good ones ofien, fall.
Tombereau: m. 4 Tumbrell, or Dung-cart.
Fe de he Looke Verberie. ©
Tomberel, # Tombereau. ss
Hbbb iÿ Pren.


vue Go: gle


| Tome: m.A Tome,or Volume;part of a Booke,or Worke,


RS ID 2 it I à mb lil dt CNE à d'ürs Lasd : . GE 2»


TON ET si


Prendre les perdris au tombercl viz, by twnnel- | Tonnelle: £. 4 Tunnel or fanlking borfe for Partrid-


ges ; alfo, a round Arbor, or an Alley Pry nae
Tor berelée: £.A tumbrell full,the load of a tumbrell. with the interlaced branches of aVine,eoc; Gom à
Tombier: m. À Tombe-maker. Tonnelles.


The tender branches of trees Had, or
Tombir. To make a noife with flamping, or trampling ;
to ruflle, or burrie, like the feet of many gallopping
borfes.
Tombiflernent: m. À flamping,or trampling noife; the
| raflhng,or burrie of running bor(es feet,


interlaced together as they grow.
Tonneller. To take Partridges with a Tunnel, or Saut
king borfè.
Tonnelleur: m. 4 Tunneller a Taker of Partridges
witha Tannell,
Tonner. To thunder.
On n'orroit pas Dieu tonner. The noife, or dinne
. they made was moff extreame ; à thunderclap could not
LE beene beard among them,
Quand il tonne en Mars nous ons dire helas:
Ger We fay that,Winters er is Summers won-


- in one volume,

| Tome: f.. A traine with a lame and difarmed Heron,for
the making of a young Falcon.

Tomin; m. Six-pennie weight , or the weight of a Spa-
nifh Real.

Ton: m. A tune,or found; alfo,the Tunnie fifh.

Ton: m. ta: f. Thy,belon nging to thee,

Tondailles: £ 4 fheepe-fheering , or the feaft made
thereat.

Tondelet: m. (4 fafhion of) Bafès for a horfeman,or one
that rides.

Tondereffe: f. 4 woman that fheereth,or fhaneth.

! Tondeur: m. A fheerer,clipper, powler, fhaner ; bar-


Tate tonne gail p Pil pleut; &, Tant tonne, & vente, |
que pluye defcend : Pro. So much it thunders that at
length raine falls; Looke Plouvoir.
Tout ce que tonne ne nouseftonne point: Pro. AL |
that does thunder makes vs not to wonder, :

Tonnerre: m, Thunder
Apres gros tonnerre force eau fur laterre: es


|
ber; vermine-(nipper. Pr a furious thunder much raine the earth doth
Tondeur de draps. À Shearman,or Clotbworker, ler,
Tondeur de nappes. as Efcornifleur. Dons m. eufe: :€ Full of thunder, thunder-like,
Tondeufe: £, The wife of a Clethworker,or Barber; al- thundering.
Lo, a woman which lues by fheering of cloth, or cutting | Tonnine:f. A meat made of Tunnie ; or,as Thonnine.
of baire. Tonnoirre: m. Thunder.
Tondoifon. as Tonfure. Tonfilles: f. Certaine kernells at the root of the tongue,
Tondre. To fheere, clip, cut, powle, nott, pare round; ee unto inflamations, and er ay cran by
fiveepe cleane,or cleere away. e falling dovene of bumors from the head.
Tondre fur vn oeuf, To accuse truth of falfebood, Ton ure. as Tonfure,
chorge vertue with vice, find a fault where there is | Tonfure: £, A fheering clipping, probe. notting, cut-
© none; ; alfo,to make a commoditie of any thing,bow bare pré paring vound;alfo,the {hauing ,or fhauen crowne
foeuer it be ; whence, Us wouveront à tondre fur of a Priefi ; whence, Tonfure clericale ; &;
vn oeuf, ‘Afimple tonfüre.Such Clergie men as are but meere-
Si ie ne fais cela qu'on me tonde, Let me be bafied | b Clarkes,not bauing taken Orders,nor undertaken the
if F doe not that. charge of foules; of’ which ranke are Prebends,Canons, |
Aprez raire n'ya que tondre: Prov. Sheeres upon | Deacons,éxc.
fhauen places doe no good;nought's to be got where all's Alleguer fa confire. A Prieft, challenging the priui«
alveadie gone. . ledge of his Orders,to appeale from the ciuill Iudge un-
Ton} m. Shorne,clipped, powled, notted, cut, pared | us Ordinarie.
Tonftré, m. éc: £ ‘Sheered, clipped, powled ; alfa af


La ste none i thet hare pa À hath not me us

arag to couer his tayle withall;alfo,a le wencher; ercs to teres. Shoanliags Priefis.

"5 Feffe-tonduë, ; Tonfurer. To clip, ar, ln alfo,to foane,

| ren ne ve | Le Tonture: on

He bath failed of bis purpofe,or fuit.

Tine craint ny les rez ny les tondus. Looke Tepe: he The making of Fmages ia, or Arbors of;


‘Toutesfois fur le pré tondu. Yet was the meddow
mowen; the bufinefe ended. Topiquer. Se t . To me: nace men 10 sake offence
at; ; alfo,10 oppofe,conteft bandie againf. ’


d a ed with.
per kia lof? ea steuelled or lay euen Topi ques: m, Topicks ; Ar icall ine |


ure,
Tonieus rh re unto the Lord of a Faire or Mar- uention; alfo,remedies (as plaifiers, ec) ap ed unto
Ae) unfound parts of the bodie.


Fe ms ,0r flanding of cattell, and other com- r fo si {|
Ur: m. Anacute or difbuter;or,an in- À
ee alfoan arbor, pater of Lagical,end CA +


T he: mate Pyles. +. À:
To e:f. Thedefériptionof aplace, = =|
ieee ere pb + Wafh (becanfe vabuse |.
Toque: £ 2 (bios e bonnet, or cap (fomewhai li
“tar ater ee carn rm ek. .


lers
Tone, argent Plated clthof god.or fer;
filuer,


im Ame Gea) am get fl
re Lig a og eo
ar Tunnel for Partridges.

Cdi soe comncan. Tha he eh aie,


eus ripe with gold
To.


from


D'OR es gle THE QHIO STATE UNIVERS


T OR.


| Toquement : m. as Toque; alfo,the wearing of, far- |
| mifhing the bead with, a Toque; alfa, a clapping, bit:
ting or knocking againf Sars is
-oquer. Toput ona Toque ; to furaifh or attire the
Ay, therewith ; up es ba againfi;al.
Si;to tunable a woman. Kate î
Toquefing :m, 4a Allarwm bell; or theringing there:


OF
Toquet : m. A little Toque; 07.4 hind of bonnet not fo
large as the Toque,worne moft by children,
Torasse:f. 4 lw and little-bedied Cow, which couets
the Bull more then other kim, and neither gives much
milke,nor brings many calues, - ;
Torce. as Torfe. sheet
Torche: £. A Linke; ao, the wreatbed clowt,wifpe,or
wad of (traw,layed by wenches betweene their heads,
and the things which they carrie on them; alfo, the
beart, or pith of a Pine, or of any Rofen-yeelding tree;
alfo,as Torchon de paille, in the later fence,
Torches, #5 Fenons.
Torche de fonte. A fafbion of great Linke (made all
of: mes and sg ftaffe, or handle) borne anights
efore great perfons by their Pages, rc.
Latorche : poing. Withas much fhame as may be;
or, asin Amende honorable. ;
Torche lorgne, words like our thwicke thwacke,ex-
preffing a liberall and free dole of blowes; alfa, here
and there,without difcretion,at randome.
Torché : m.ée:f. wiped, made cleane.
Torche-bouche, Banquet à tor. Which cofis « man
nothing or whereat be nothing payes.
_Torche-cul :m, 4 wifpe forthe tayle,
Torche-culatif: m,iue:£ Taile-wiping.
Torche-pot: m, The bird called a Nut-iobber.
Ilrefemble au torche-pot.He is bis wines Maifier,
or dare {choole bey when fhe doth amiffe; (from the


5 HT OOTR
horfes dogs; crc. Sah PE CA

seed m. The bedder, or under fione of an oyle-mill,

__orpreffe, :

Tordre. To wreath,twine, twift, writhe, bend or turne

… round, wind in, whirle about ; hence alfo, to crifpe, or
cutle; alfo,to wring wrefl, wrinch,

© Tordre le col à, To make a wrie nccke,or caft a wrie
ps to (corne contemne ,defpife,

Tordre le nez à. To make a noje of voax of ; to wreft,

wrie,manage,turne,at pleafure,

se Tordre & fourvoyer. To goe afide out of the way.

Ne faire que tordre,& avaller. To make brick walls

of bis cheekes, 10 wallow bis meat balfe chawed , to

yrs it once about his(paued) mouth, and then ler it


ee
Femme qui fon alleure tord; &c; Prov, Looke un.
. der Fetome. , pr :

I ne fe tort pas qui va plain chemin : Prov, Hee
that goes on plaine ground fpraines not bis foot ; mif-
chiefe attends thofé that take rugged wayes.

Tore: £. Broad-leaued Wolues-bane ; or as Thore,

Toreati :m. 4 Bull; SeekeTaureau.

Toret: m, 4 fall wimble :

Torment: m. Torment,or torture ; extreame affiiflion,
great vexation, bellifh anguifh, borrible paine ; Looke
Tourment. :

Tormente : f, A tempeft, or fiorme of wind at fea.
Les tormentes des procez, The troubles,or trouble.
Some vexations attending on fnits.

Tormenté : m.ée:f Tormented, tortured, excrucia-
ted; extreamely vexed , griened , affliéied s@orribly
tofed. ;

Tormenter. To torment, racke, torture, excruciate;
grieue or afflict extreamely, put unto borrible paine;
alfo,to toffe,as a raging fea doth a fhip.

Tormentille: £. Tormentile Setfule (an bearbe.)


propertie of the cocke Nat-iobber, which beateth bis | Tormentine: f, Turpentine. ae
benne when foe bath wandered any long time from | Tornadot:m.A returneof Dowrie;the giuing backof a
him. womans portion.
Torcher. To wipe;or make cleane;alfo,to buffet,or cuffe | Torné. as Tourné,
with the fills. Torne-dos. Looke Tourne-dos,
Torcher à autruy Je cul de fa chemife. To belpea | Torner.To turne,alter change, @rc sas Tourner.
man (but as be could haue bolpen bimfelfé) onely by bis | Torneroft : m, A Turne-(pit.
owne meanes; (Looke under Chemife; ) The like is; | Tornes. as Tournes.


Torcher le nez de famanche, To pay 4 man with

bis owne money; to give bim an apple out of his ovne

Orchard,a loafe of bis owne batch, a pig of bis owne

Sow, :

Torcheux: m.eufe: f. Full of Linkes; of a linke;
is 3 feruing for a linke,

Torchon: m. A rubber,a wipers [hooe-clowt,
Torchon de paille. A wifpe of ftraw; alfo,a handfull,
or fall bundle thereof; as much as a Thatcher layes

= atonce. “

Torcionné : m, ée:£ Wrefled, wrinched , violently
writhen, ba iy aa ey


Toreis de vermillons. 4 wreathed bunch of finall


Tornefol : m, Turnefole, Heliotropium,wartwort.
Tornier. Often to flagger, or turne round ; like a Stag
thats drunke with brouxing in May ; alfo, to beat vp |
and downe,or flie round, thereby to deceine the dogs
that pur[ue bim, «UT
Torpille :£ The Crampe-fifh; a fib that benummes the
bands of {uch as take,or touch,tt. :
Torpin. as Torpille: €Marfeillois. eG
key © :f A final groue, or tuft of wood, growing by
it
Torqué : m.ée: £Writhen,wreaibed; woundin,wrap-
ped about. PA SS :


Torquet. To writhe wreath; wind in; wxap about.


wormes. Torqueure:f. Awreath; wreatbing; place or thing
Torcol: m, The little afh-colowred, and long-tongued writhen ; and particularly, the wieath whereby the
bird, called a Wrie-necke,


foot of a graffe is preferned from the iniurie of wea-
À


Torrefié: m. e:f. Scorched, parched, toafted; dried
by the fire,or in the Sunne and then done 10 duft,

sn n Yo (corch,parch, toa to drie¢> afterwards

oevnto dufl,

Torrent: m. À torrent, ay floud, fe of pue from
a bill,caufed by raine,or (now; a fwift fireame run.
ning with agreat,and violent freepe. : = :

or:


Torcollet :m. The fame.

Torcu. 4 certaine unluckie bird, of a browne, ov (as in
ome places) of awbite colour, :

Torculaire: com.Belonging to the tuunell of the braine;

_ whence ; Veine tore. Laoke Veine. :

Donner pee = ing twining;wring.
ing,wrefling ; a er ‘curling, sin:

Tordille: oe fleabitten,mentiled, or (potted colour of


‘ T oO R .


Torrentin: m.ine:£ Belonging to, or abiding in, tor-
vents,or fifi and violent flreames,

Torride: com. Torride, (corcbed,burned, parched ; al-
fo, dried,or dried by the extremitie of beat, °
Zone torride. The torride, or firie Zone ; a circle or
certaine breadth in the firmament, under which, by
veafon of exceeding heat, few people inbabit.

Torrillon d'un Canon, The middle of a Canon, or the
wreath,or band about the middle part of it.

Torrion: m, A great tower,

Tors: m. torfe:£ Wreathed,or twined ; alfo, wrefted,
wrinched wrung; bowed,crooked wried awrie.

SA tors & a travers. Ouerthwartly, bere and there,to
and fro, without any manner of regard,
I] s’eft tors. He is wandered,or gone out of the way.

Torle :f.4 wreath;al/o,a wre i, wrinch;wrythe,wrying;
a bending wandring,or going out of the way.

Torfement :m. A wreatbing ; alfo,a wrefting wrinch-
ing; writhing wrpingsa bending, firaying wandering,
or going out of the way.

Torsion: f.4 writhing wrying wrefling; griping ywring-
ing. ;

Torsionnairement. # Tortionnairement,

Torfure :£ as Torfement.

Tort :m. wrong, iniurie, burt,offence, dammage, dif:
pleafure,

‘Atort.#Wronefally, vniufily,;vnæortbily.

‘A tort ou à droit, By booke or crooke, by right or
wrong,by one meanes or another. ñ

Vay tort. 1 am to blame ; Vay le tort; My caufe is
naught 1 am in the wrong.

Torteau : m. A Pancake; or as Tourteau.
Torteaux. Torteauxes, and by old Blaxonners, Waf-
tells; muji be round, whole,and of fome colour, not of
metiall ; therein to make them differ from Befants, _.

Tortelle :£ Banke Crefes ; fome alfo call fo, the Rape
Chadlocke,or Charlocke ; others wild Muftard ; others,
Rocket gentle and Rocket gallant; but erronioufly; for
thefe bearbes onely refémble it.

Tortellées: f The curled toppings of the baire.

Tortement. Crookedly, wryly, crofly.


| Tortice. as Tortiffe (the feminine to Tortis; ) whence,


___ Veinestortices; crooked,or crankling veines,

Torticoler. To writhe,or wrie the necke, .

Torti colly. A wrie-necked fellow.

Tortillé: mée:f. Wreatbed,twined ; curled wryed;
alfo,gnawne,or chawedinpeeces. ;

Tortillemens. wreatbes,wreatbings knots curlings.

Tortiller. 70 wreath, twine, rwift, to twirle, or wind a-
bout ; Hence alfo,to curle,or tie on many knots; alfo,to

wrinch or to wry.

Tortillon: m. Atte wreath; alfo, a curled locke of
baire; alfo,the twirle, or twirling tendrell of a vine;
and generally any double thing writhen, twirled,
wound or twifled together, or one within another.

Tortillonné: m. ée:f. Wreathed ; wound vp ; curled;


t ok 4 ed,twirled,twined. —


loner. To wreath, twine,twirle twill,curle,
ge ur : com, Wrong full uniufl,or uminflly wref-
ea sherds tok gd Aa sis x
tae aril rail t. on, ve miufily 5 coke db,


Torin, dr Estrin ete :
png mn, A (play foot; a foaling, or fplay-footed fel--
Fortis: m. Awreaib; a garland. .
Toe cavez. craked patbes, turning wayes, —


: | Tortis de cire. Awreatbed Linke,or great candle of


TOR


wax; moft in vfe about Candlemas.


Tortis: m.iffe :£ writhen,writbing, crooked, or dees


king.
Tortiz. Lime, or loame which bath firaw chopt into it:


Gafc. i
Torterelle :£. A Turtle Doue. ,
Tortouërc:£ A bunting pole. f
Tortu: m.ué +f, Crooked, awrie,bent bowed ; writhing,
twining ; verying, crooking ywinding in and out, tur
ning often, full of crinklecrankles.
Tortuë bufche fait droi& feu: Prov. (So comes a
crooked thing to be good forfometbing.)
Tortuë:f. ATortoife. :
Tortué de bois, A land Tortoift, garden Tortoife,
wood Tortoife. ;
Tortuemént: m, A crooking bowing, bending, wrying,
writhing; often turning, winding in and out,
Tortuément. wryly, crookedly, crookingly, vayingly,


" writhingly,


Tortuéusement. of! wryly , crookedly, crookingly
wryingly, writbing!y, "3 | FOOT

Tortuéux: m. cuse:f, Full of crookedaeffe or croo-
kings , fill of turnings, windings, crinklecrankles.

Tortugue. as Tortuë.

Tortuofité:€ À crookedneffe,a crooking, bending win-
ding in and out a crinkling or crankling.

Torture :£. Torture,torment,aracke,or aracking.

Torture : m.ée: f. Tortured, tormented, racked ; alfo,
wrefled or made crooked wrythed or wried afide,

Torturer. To torture, torment, racke ; alfa, 10 wrel,
writhe, wry afide, |

Torty colly. See Torti-colly,

Torve : coin. Grimme, flerne, fell, pightfidl, frowning,
lowring, vnplealantly looking.

Toft. Quickly presently Suddenly, fwifily.
Parler toft. To fpeake thicke,or faflsor(as we fay)nine
words at once : &Orleannois,
Plus toft. Looke Pluftoft.
Qui toft donne deux fois donne: Pro. He that gi-
ueth quickly gineth nwicesor;be gies as good as twice,
that giues things in a trice,

Toftée: f. A toalt of bread : ŒPic. |

Totage:m.The whole fumme, fubflance;matter of; tbe


whole, all,
Total :m. The totall,or whole fumme.
Totalement. totally ‘wholly ,vtterly,abjolately,through-
bin all forts, altogether,
Totalité : f. A totalitie,the vttermoff penie,the totall,or
or whole funcme. ae ;
Totene. The Sleeue,or Calamarie fifb : ¢Marfcil.
Totiens quotiens, asin Quotiens.
Totinge. as Totage: qRab.
Totum. À kind of game with awhirlebone. —
Toüaige:m. Towage ; the towing of a fhip by boats, er
Gate rfbip ~ |
Toüaille:f, A Towel, £ |
Toiiafle : m.vn gros tous A lampifh,ignorant, or vn-
mannerlie clufterfift. £ :
Toüaffer : m.ere: f. Clownifh,rude,ignorant, unman-
nerlie lumpifb. | ‘
Touc :m, A finke,or filtbie gutter : Breton.
Touchant. Touching,bandling ; alfe,concerning,as con-
cerning,as for, about.
Touche: f. 4 couchflone ; and thence, a trial; as alfo,
the allay, or goodnepie of mettall ; alfo,a fefcue; alfo,
a penne or pinne for a paire of writing tables; alfo, a
flop or fretin a Muficall Inflrument ; alfo, abit, or
venie at fence.
Tou.


TOV
Touche de bois, A howl! ; a little thicke groue or tuft
of bigh trees, efpecially fuch a one as is neere a banfe,
and fèrues to beautifie itor as a marke for it,

Bois de touche. Tbe fame,
I eft de bas or, il craint la touche. Hé caufe or con-
(cience naught makes bimauoid all trial, 52

Touché: m.ée : Touched, felt,bandled ; alfo,firicken,
blified; bit; infpired; alfo,drinen, asa beaft; alfo,
brought,as money,unto, \
Nous avonstouché fur les articles. we bawe onely
mentioned,or fpoken lightly ofsthe Articles.

| Touchement: m. A touching, feeling, handling; al-

j | fo, a firiking, blafling; bitting ; infpinmg; alfo,a dri-
wing of beafls,erc ; a bringing of money unto,
Toucher. To touch, feele,handle; to approach,concerne,
or come neere unto ; alfa, to firike, bit; blaf}; infpire ;
à alfo,todrine beats crc; or bring money unto.

7 Il toucha la main entre leurs mains, He layed bis
band betwerne theirs ; or, be gaue them bis band, and
promifé,that be would be theirs.

Il leur toucha dtous la main. He tooke euerie one

of them bythe band; &, eur toucha en la main;

He tooke them by the bands,as defiring to be better ac-

quainted with them, '

Des yeux il touche iufques au cerveau.lt reacheth,

or goeth from the eyes to the braine,

Ontouche toufiours fur le cheval qui tire : Prov.

The forward hor(é rs alwwayes moft put on,
Toucheur: m. 4 toucher, feeler,bandler.

Toucheur d’afnes. An Affe-driuer.

Touchon: m. A little touch-flone.

Toudi. as Toufiours: @Pic, ay

Toué :f, A little,long, fhallow and flat-bottomed boat.

Tour. To towa fhip;to bring her along tied unto boats,
or at the flerne of another fhip.

Touffe debois, À hoult ;a tuft of trees growing neere a
boufe, and feruing for a marke,or grace, unto the feat
thereof.

bP - Toufte de cheveux. A tuft, or locke of curled baire,

+ Bois de toufte. as Toutte de bois,
Touffeau: m. as Toutte; or a little tuft,
Touffillon: m.4 fall tuft,or locke ; boult,or grone.
Touftu: m.ué: f. Ta ffiethicke growing, thick of boughs,
growing clofe together. - '
Touillaut: m. 4 fcuruie troublefome fellow; or as
Touilleur, |
Touillé:m.ée: f. Filthily mingled,peflered , or fluffled
together; alfo, durtied ,befmeared ,berayed, [meeched,
begrimed ; whence ; -
Avoine touillée croift comme enragée: Prov, In
mirie ground Oats gow as if they were mad,
Touillement: m. À filtbie mingling, beafllie confiun-
ding, ill-fanoured fhuffling together; alfo, a durtying,
beraying, befmearing, begriming.
Touiller. Filthily 10 mix,or mingle, confound, or fhuffle
together ; to intangle,trouble,or pefler by furuie med.
«ling; alfo, to bedurt, begrime, befmeare, [meech, be-


ray. |
Touilleur:m, APolipragmen, filtbie medler, fhuffling


or troublefome fellow; one that marres things by a


beaftlie mingling of them,

Touillon : m. 4 Scullion; or a filthie, greafie, naflie, or
flouentic fellow ; alfa clowt to wipe fhoves, or make
cleane veffelwithall,

Toulieu : m. Toll of Markets,and F aires.

Toulte: f. 4a exaéling,or extorting of Subjidies .

Tounine: €, 45 Thonnine; or Torinine,


TOV


—  — — —— 0.0000


or locke of wool.

Toupet:m. A tuft, or topping ; 4 womans baire layed
out on ber forbead, or temples, and called ber goldi-
mine: alfa, aborfes foretop ; alfo, a tuft, or taffell of


Ce

Toupiant: m. ante: f whirling about like a gig.

Toupie 26 Agigor PA taime, tiene fbell-fifb called
a Welke, or Winkle.

Toupier, Ta turne or caf? a top;alfo,to whirle about like
atop.

Toupil : m, as Toupie. :

Toupillon:m, A luitle gig,or cafling top.

Toupillonnet:m. 4 verse fall top ; er flopple,

Toupin: m. 4 fopple-for a bottle crc,

Toupon :m. A flopple.

Tour: m. 4 turne,round,circleycompaffe, wheeling, re-
volution, circumuolution, viciffitude, interchangeable
courfe of thins; alfo, a turne, bout, or walke, as (we
Say)in Powles ; alfo,the turne,courfe,ranke, place,or or-
der, wherein a man ts or flands; alfo,a deed, 48,
worke, part, good or bad Office, good or ill turne; al-
So,a feat, pranke, tricke, fleight, fhift,deuife salfo, a
(pinning wheele; alfo,a Turne, or Turners wheele ; or
a Tournoir; al/o, a Turnepike, or Turning-flile; and
the open turning box in the wall of a Nunneriewber-
by the fifters vaféeing and vnfèene, receiue in, and de-
liner out commodities, alfo, the Rooke at Chefis ; alfo,
the breadth of fine fingers in meafure ; alfo, a fafbion
of killing Deere cc, by riding gently neere them, and
bauing en croupe fome Bowman , who may with ad-
wantage,and on a fudden fhoot at them,

Tour de Bafche,ou de Bafque. Nimbie knauerie.

- Letour de bafton. The fees, or vailes comming in to
an Officer, ouer and befides bis ordinarie wages,
Il {gait bien le tour du bafton, He is a crafiie, fub-
tile, or cunning fellow ; hee knowes well ynough the
trickes,and fleights of the world,
Tourdebec. A kiffe.
Tour de bras. “A tour de bras.with maine firength,
or with confident authoritie.
Tour de guerre, oude vicille guerre. Seeke under
Guerre.
Tour du Labyrinthe. li fait le tour du Labyrinthe.
He treads a Maze ; be uwyunne into an endleffe Labo-
rinth; or he toyles extveamely,and yet is neneï the nee.
rer;alfo,be falls againe after many digreffions er much
adoe,into his former argument.
Tout leli&. A clofé, or whole curtaine, incompaffing
a fefhion ef bed, that(commonly) wanteth atefierne.
Tour de mulet, Aiadifh wicke,

Tour de pefcheur. 4 daungerous aduenturing for
eat maticrs. 3 :
Fourda roule : & a tour de roule. Seeke Roule, -
Tene leur donneray ny,tour ny attainte, 1 will net
touch, or bandle them; 1 will not approach, or come

neere them,

Faites vn tour iufques icy. Make a flep bither.
Ch:fcun a fon tour: Prov. Exerie one bath bis time,
or lurne,

Chafcun à fon tour: Prov. Everie one in bis time,
ranke.or turne,

Tour: f, A Tower. :

Touraille: € A Killjor Kilne to drie mault,&rc,on,

Tourban. as Turban. 1207 SOM

Tourbe:f, A troupe,rout, crue,rabble 3 preaft crowd,
thraft,throng,clutterment of ;alfo trouble, fire, bufi-

ele ,debate,yuffiing.


Toupeau : m. A tuft, or taffell of filke, oe; a flocke, foteaite, By flockes or multitudes ; with confifèd
F voy=


: See gle


4
4


T'O V


voyces ;all,or verie many,at once; trouping,or crow-
dink Log einer. Jot

Toërbiginaux : m. wreathes of old ropes, dipped in
greafe and pitch,and to be burnt in Crefets. s

Tourbilion. les tourbillons d’une fleuve. Th’eddie,
whirline,round inrning,of a fireame.

Tourbillons detefte. The turning, or fivimming of
the braine ; ov a giddineffe comming thereof.
Tourbillon de vent. A whirlewind, alfo,a guft,
flaw, beirie, fudden blaft, or boifterows tempeft, of
wind, .

Tourbillonner. To whurle about like a “une
deale boifteroufly, or fweepe all away befire it,

Tou ville foe : eee : f.Full of whirlewinds like
awhirlewind whur ling about as a wbir lewind;boifle-
TOUSTAgING uly acs.

Tourchon: m.4s Torchon; 07 as Torche,in the fecond
fence.

Tourd: m.A Thrufh; er a generall name for the Thrufh,
Throflle,and Fieldifare.

Tourd de mer, The fea Thrufh; a certaine rock-fifh
not much unlike a Pearch,or Tench; of f[undrie kinds,
and each of diuers and [undrie colours.

Tourdelle:f. The ercal Thrufh,or Fieldifare.

Tourdion:m. 4 tutang, or winding about ; alfo, a
tric e,o1 pranke ; alfo,the daunce tearmed a Round,

Tourdre ;in,4 Tourd 54 Thrafh.

Touré: m.ée:& Towred, füull of, graced or firnifhed
with, Towers. ; ]

Tourelle :f, 4 Turret,a fmall Tower.

Tourelle cul le lampe, Afinall out-iuttying gar-
retor Tower like a garret,on the top of awall,
Touret:m. 4 Throfile, or Atauis ; alfa Drill, the In-
firament wherewith boles are made into mettall,é»c;
alfo, ibe chaine which ws at the end of the checke of a
Bit; alfo,the annelet, or little ving whereby a Hawkes

Lune is fafiencd vato the Feffes.
Tourct de nez. 4 Muffler,

Tourette: £ 4 Turret,or finall Tower.

Tourier: m. The keeper of a Tower; a watchman in a
Tower ; aifo,a Goaler. *

Touricte. Leoke Tourriere. RE :

Tourillon: m, 4a inner Verrillsthe round plate of y-
ron whereby. a peece of wood,often turned on,is prefer-
ned from wearing and burning,


* where it is ioyned with the fhoulder blade,
.Tourment :m. Torment,or iorture. oF
Affez parens, aflez tourmens: Prov. Many kinf-
men much trouble ; we fay (with fome difference) many
kinfimen few friends. te
Tou te. Looke Tormente,
Tourmentine :£ Tarpentine, 8
Tournaille : f. 4 crooked turning, or winding in and
ont, |
Tournay:m, 4 Tourney,
Tournayer. Locke Tournoyer. SN
| Tourné : m. de: f. Turned; rounded; changed, alte-


nue ted; alfo,tranflated ; alfo,bending or incli |


in excbange,or 10 boot ; alfo,


ed,or aflonifhed : €Breton.).


urmez. In-crefants; Crefjants turned


Tourillon du bras. The bead, or top of the arme |.


| Tournet:m, 4 fmall turning rundle, or ring, in the


milke pert. Vhs.
| Tourniquet sme The pinne ofa Vielle; that which ibe
: fquec pinne of a i 6; y :


T'OV


or becaufe at his comming out be twrnes(ofbinfelf, or |

by the, Midwines belpe)bis beeles he pie à °
Tourne-bouler, Toturne round. tab: T8
Tourne-bride. A veturne,or turning backe.  ?
Tourne-dos: m. A turne-backe,sun-away coward.
Tournée: f, whence; Partournées ; Euerieoneirbis

turne or cour(eranke or place. "134837 T


Tourne-fol: m. 4 turning file, |

Tourne-liét :m, 2s Tour deli@,onder Tour.

Tournelle:f. A Turret,or little Towers (See Tourri-
on; ) al{oya Pavliamentall Court for criminall caujes,
whereon the Judges of the otber Courts doe fit by fene-
rall tunes, 1 Ent ar EUR

Tourne-main: m. The turning of the band; whence ;
Dans vn tourne-main; Ina trice,on a fudden,before

jou can fay,this. ! 8

Tournement: m. 4 tukping; rounding; revolution;
a conuerting, changing; achonings tranflating; a

… beading,or Saclining towards, sad
Tournemewt de tefte, The turne-about fickneffe; a
giddineffe,or dixzine[fe.a fwimming of the bend,

Tourneployer. To turne,wind,bend,or bow which way
Socwer one will haue it.

Tourner, To ture ; conuert, alter, change; exchange,
gine in exchange,or to boot ; alfo,to tranflate ; alfo, to
round or make round; alfo,to make fowre; aljo, to 7e-
tuine ; alfo,to bow,bend,or incline. gl
Tourner Ja charruë contre les bocufs, To fet the
cart before the borfe(we [ay ; ) 10 doe athing prepofte-
roufly ; alfo,to alter ones talke,or anfiver fiom the pur-
een toflop, or fupprefe,an argument handled

ejore,
Tourner court. See Court.
Tourner fueillet. To change a cuflome,alter a wont,
or (as we fay) turne auer a new leaf.
Tourner fa Le pa To turne bis coat ; viz, Breake

_ his faith and oath; or quit bis eligion,opinio.or Prince,
and follow another or a contrarie one, for what refpeét
Joeuer, À mds !

_ Tourner les truyes au foing. Te anfwer from the
matter, or as if bee knew not what demauntl was
made, { ; te
C'eft la Maiftrefle rouë qui tourne Je moulin. See
Moulin, | |
Il nous refte quelqu'autre moulin à tourner.
There’s jeta further mattér to be bandled, looked un-
to,done. x :

Bon charron tourne en petit licu: Prov, A skill-
full Coachman turnes in a finall roome; Looke Char-
FOREE 2574 4 : Dr

Tournerie:f, A tuming ;alfo, Turners worke,or tur-
ners ware. * H+

Tournerot : m. 4 turne-roafl,ov tarne-fpit, |

Tournes en eschange,ou partage de biens.æSoulte.

Tourne-foleil : m. Torne-fole,Eeliorropium.


mouth of a Bitte = :
Tournette: f. 4 Rice,or Yavwingle to wind yarne on.
Tourne-vent: m. 4 fafbien of penthoufe,or portall fet
_, before a doore, for the keeping of wind out of a roome;
alfo,a Hor{e, or mowable Louer, of mettall,on the top
of a. chimncy,or houfe, :
Tournevirer, To whirlesor whurre about,
ourneure :f A tarning, alfo, any thing that turnes,
er makes a thing fowre ; as leauen doth bread,vnnnet


_ Vielleux surmes wib bis
4 a - Tour-


Originaltrom


= THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


T o've


wheele, called a Lathe,or Lave ; alfo,the vice,or v
ofa Preffes dr peser La 3 alfo,the or winch


| Tournois : m.4 French penie ; the tenth part ofapenie


Sterling ; which rate it bolds in all btber wards (aé the. |


» Sol,or Livre) wher eunto it à idyned.- i
Tournoy :m. A Turney,or Tarnament; alfa, ai Tour-
noir, A" oF.
Tourñoyant. Rowliag, wheeling, turning roind, fetch-
peas A tt Sept yn nes
oltrnoyementim. C4 rowling, wheeling, turning.
round, fetching a compalfe, goin, about: a laggering
| courfé, uncertaine gate reeling, dixzine/, giddine fe;
alfo,an ennironing,or incompafing; ao; ufing of cir-
cumftances ; alfo à turneying,
Tournoyer.To role wbeele,turne round, fetch a com-


pallé, goe aboats CDN veele,flagger,ymake indentwres,


»


Cafe an-vunceitaine courfe ; alfo, to enuiron , incircle,
-< incompafee ; alfo, to vfe fhifis, or circumfldnces ,
without comming at all to the point; alfo,togoe about,
“or fpie on enerie fide, the meanes of prenailing with,
“or atiempting-on, athing; alfa, to turney, iul? or fight.
in a Turney.

Tournure. as Touineure, :

Tourrelé : m,ée: f. Towerie, tower-like, begirt or in-
compafjed with towers,

Tourtier : m. The keeper of a tower; a Goaler of prifo-
foners which be in a tower.

! Tourriere: & The Nunne which attends on the Tour,
or turning box in the wall of a Nunnerie.

Tourrion : m. 4 fall Turret (leffe then the Tournel-
le,and commorily made off the wall by iuttying where-
as Tournelle és ener boult upright ) :

Tourte:f. A Turtle Doue ; al/o,a great loafe of bonfhold
‘or browne bread (called [o in Lionnois, and Dauphi-
né; ) alfo,the made-difh which we call a Florentine ;
alfo,a Trundle head of a Mill, —

Tourteau: m, 4 cake (made ,commonly,in haft, and
of lefe compafe then the Gafteau ;) alfo, a little loafe
of boufhold , or browne bread; alfo,a Pancake; alfo,
a wreath of pitched cord for a Creffet; alfo, the Crab-
fifh tearmed a Pungar. à
“A celuy qui a fa pafte au four on doit donner de


fon tourteau : Prov, Be not a niggard unie bim thats -


able to requite thee.
Tourtelle : £ See Tortelle.
Tourterelle : f A Turtle,or Turtle Doue, nf
Tourtillon : m. 4 verie little loafe of boufheld bread ;
or a final! Tourteau. :
Tourtoire: f, 4 hunting pole ; alfo,anyrontoole(with a
woodden handle) wherewith a Cooper notches, and
drawes on,the principal boopes ofcaske. =
Tourtourain: m. The nature of the Turtle.
Toufé: m.ée :f. Shorne,clipped powled, cut, notted,pa-
red round." * ; we
Toufer. To fheere,erc; as Tondre. 2
Tousjours. Ahwayes,euer, (till perpetually,continually,
+ for ener and encr ,enermore.
Nous avons trois tousjours. How/oener or as bard
as the world goes, yet we baue three. : k
Touffainéts. la T. All-Saints day, AUballowday.
Touffant. Coughing,
Toufler. #5 Toufsir, es
: Touffeur :m. 4 cougher, —
Toufsir. To congh,
Touftade. Alezan touft. 4 burnt forrell ; a darke-ved
colour like wood {corched, or mettall burnt , in the
fre. ; =


| Tournoir:m. 4 Thrne, turning béelé, or Titers


‘TOV


Tout: m,(Sabfantinely.jan alla total or whole fuimme;
any,or emerie thing. : Là
* C'eft mon tout. Tis all,ris tb'onely, or chiefeft thing
Treli¢on A net banal 2
Dur convoité tont perd :Pro. He tbat couets,
pofes,euerie thing, "+ parent Sys
Qui tout me donne tout me nie: Prov. He that
te denies me alll demaund ; a tbing thane caf
granted nin effet denied. |
Qu detotit f taiff dé Eôut a paix: Prov, Looke
aix. : t QPF i LEE) PALME :
Tout : m. toute : £ Al,the whole, whatfoewer, euerie
robe + age is eat is
outes & quantes fois. As often as. 7"!
“A tout le poil. wbence, Né toute “poil. Seeke
under Poil," SANTE EPS :
De tout point, Quite and cleane, | Ms
Vnefcience Set Otto homme: Proy, One
Art well learnt takes vpa mans whole time, —
Tout. (Adverb) mbence; Tout ainf ; Euen as, euen
like,as it were,as much as ,to as great effet or purpofe
as,none otberwife then. . £
Tout autant. as Tout ainfi, ae te =i à
Tout beau. Soft and faire,not too fafl, yndugh 1 fay.
Tout à coup. Suddénly,at once,at one blow.
Tout à faid. wholly, throughly, aliogerber, viterly,
indeed, quite and cleane. «
Toût i theure. At the verie infant, ,
Tout fin. Hard by. neere band, even verie now;
whence, T out fin à Noel; Verie necie (biiftmas; &,
Tout fin mere nu ; Al diféohered, all ouer naked, or
(as we fay) flarke-bellie naked. ve
Toutincontinent. Prefeatly, firaightway , out of
band, by and by,
Tout maintenant. But enen now.
Tout outre. Throughout,through and through; whol-
ly,in euerie re[peët, 7
Tout à point Fitly,opportunely,(cafonably,in as good
time as may be.
Tout tant. All that ener : Sur tout tant; E/pecially,
chiefly,all otber occafions layed apart.
Tout dtrai@; &, Tout d'un mefine trai, Looke
under Traiét. Se
Tout vray. Afoft certaine, moft true.
‘Atout. with; [ufficiently, wholly, throughly; alo,
neuer theleBe, notwithftanding,
‘A tout jamais. For ewer and ener.
‘A tout rompre. At the moft, bigbeft ; or worft; when
all comes to all; come of it what come will,
Dutout. Throughly, utterly, quite and clédae, alto:
ether, : :
Par tout. Throughout, into euerie place or thing, eue-
where; entvie whither; whence the Prowerbe ; Qui
ar tout va par tout prend, ae
~ Erfurt tout befoing à eux de feretirer, dnd it was
beft, moft need fiill,or high time, for them toretire. ‘
Tleft tout prefché qui n'a curede bien faire: Pro,
ynough he's preacht unto thats careleffe of well doing :
or, too much bee's preacht unto that meanes not to a-


:


mend.
Toute-boritie: f. The hearbe Clarie,or Cleere-eye; alfo,
ood Henrie,or All-good, À
Fonte bonne des jardins. Garden (laries
Toute-bonne fauvage. wild Clavie, Ocle Chrifli.
Toutesfois, Yet,but, albeit, although, bowbeit, nener-
theleffe notwith/landing, i.
Toutesfois & quantes. As often, ;
Toutesfois fat le pré tondu: Pro Mawgre their flir |
yet


St de


sss ee ee ene


Ne


LE


RE: ....dûù


TRA


yet was the medow mowed ; *gainft all our bopes, their
wills the bufine|fe ended.

Tout-feu., A-fire; the name of a valley neere Eftam-
pes, thus tearmed becaufée much infefted by robbers,

Touton:m. Part of a womans prinities,

Tout-puiffant. A/mightie,all-able,

Toux:f. Acengh, - erie’

Toux de regnard. The Foxes cough; a rooted,or old=
growne cough, which waits on a man to bis graue.

Touzelle :f Fine wheat, whitewinter wheat; akind
of fnootbwheat, which hath an upright flalke, and a
verie white graine.

Toxaint: m. 42 Allarwm-bell ; or,the vinging thereof.

Toy. Thee ; thou.

Toye de plomb, 4 web of lead.

Toymefine. Thou thy felfe,thy verie felfe.

Tozelle. as Touzelle.

Trabe d'un ancre : m. The beame, or flaffe of an An-
chor.

Trabée:£ A purple and imbrodered caffocke , or robe
worne by Kings,or great perfonages, vader their man-

. tlesof Eftate.

Trabuchet. Looke Trebuchet.

Trac: m, A tracke,trach, or trace; a (frequent) footing,
beaten way or path ; alfoa trade,or courfe,

Trac de bataille, The traine.prouifion,or follovers of
an armie.

Tout à trac, Plainly, roundly, frankly, flatly; wholly,
throughly outright altogether,

Tracanard :m See Traquenard.

Tracas : m. Muchtrotting, or burrying up and downe;
hence alfo, tayle, trouble, turmoile,

Tracaflé :m.éc : f. Hurried,toffed; tugged,tewed; fpoi-
led,ouerworne,or mifit{ed by much remouing,

Tracafler. To trot,raunge, roame, burrie much up and
downe; 10 toyle moyle, or labour(in going )like a borfe ;
alfo,to tug,tew, (hoyle, mifufe,make hanocke of.

Tant travaiile,& tracaffe l'homme, qu'il fe rompt,
ou fomme : Proy, So long a man toyles that at length
be tires. a

Tracaflerie: € A reflleffe trotting, raunging, roaming,
burrying up and downe ; a bufie, or needlefe trauell,
tp ging ot toyling out of bimfelfe.

Tracasseur :m. A refileBe trotter, or burrier vp and
downe; a fond bufie bodie one that toyles, or trauells
much to verie little purpofe.

Trace : f.A trace, footing, print of the foot, ftep, footflep;
alfo,a path,or tract, :

Les traces d’un fanglier, The tract, beeles, or tallons

’ ofa Boare. tag Lire

Tracement: m. A tracing, inquifiion, following, or
bunting after by the foot.

Tracer. To trace, follow, pur/ie,inquire, feeke out bunt

after, by the foot ; alfoas Trafler; whence;

_ Tracer vneharengue. To minute , or make the fir{t
draught of, an Oration, ét

… Nature fait chien tracer : Prov. The hound by na-

__ furés taught to bunt,

Tracette: f. 4 little tracestraët,or footing, —

sure :f. 4s Trace; or as Tracement.


aceux:m.cule :£ Tracing out, following the trait,
A cl * of fraites(as of Apples, Peares,cre; )


Teacher Trade oye lt cle,
ies


| Tae de


begin te Le


Ty Ro AT 74 k


rinx,end at the lungs; > is t'inflrument of the voice, |
and of breathing, __ * + \ y less te
Trachie. as Trans : or the windpipe, - -.
Traction : £, 4 dranght,or extrattion,a drawing out. ©
Tradiment: m, Treacherie,betraying treafon, >
Traditif :m. jue:f Traditineor of tradition; whence;
Science traditive; 4 Science delinered by word of
mouth from father to fonne ; o7 continued, or left unto
poleritie by tradition, sath tt TA
Traditive”:£ 4 method of teaching,or of peaking,
Traduire. To tranflate out of one tongue pipe ha +
Traduit :mte:£ Tranflated, =
Trafique :£.Trafficke,trade,commerce,or intercourfe of
marcbandixing ; alfo,coufening, deceit, overreaching.
Teafiquer To trafficke, trade, occupie, ufe, commerce,
deale in marchandife ; alfo,to coufen, deceiue, beguile,
T eles F ick Yi à . “aN
rafiquerie :£ A trafficking ; alfo,marchandife, ware, |
or fluffe to trafficke with; alfo,a deceiuing, beguiling,


ouerreaching.


Trafiqueur: m. A trafficker,trader marchant, occupi
or faae in the world; alfo,a ciaihoar decane eer.
reacber,

Tragedie : f. A Tragedie ; a fatelie Play whofe conclu
Sion is dolefill,and doubtsill, ” pas

Tragée. Looke Dragée. , ; LS

Tregetaphes m, The great,and ng ‘Deere called,
a Stone-bucke, Deere-Goat, or Goalebart, becanfe
conceiued betweene a Buck-goat,and the’ Hind,

Traget: m, as Trajeët, ee


Tragique: com, Tragicall, tragicke, of or beloneing to
ais, Tragedie-like; bloudie, deadlie, dolepill
mall,

Tragiquement. Tragically ; dolefully, difmally,

Tien im. The bearbe Tarragon ; alfo, Amelcorne, or :
Starch-corre.

Tragoncée: £ as Tragon,

Traguetter. See Trajetter, ;

Trahi : m, i¢:£ Betrayed,treacheroufly dealt with.
Trahi Hal Is in auncient Authors a crie of warre, |
importing as welll feave as treafon ; as when an Armie
fighting in front was on a fuddez charged in the veere
by a troupe of unexpebted enemies ; or in the forcing
of aGarrifon: We may Englifhit wish a double, fur-
prifed, inclofed, forced,or taken,

Trahir. To betray ,o7 deale treacherouf with,

Trahifon : f. Treafon, treacherie,a betraying; alfo, any
lemdae|fe,villanie,ov difloyaltie,
Bois de la trahison, The name of a wood neere unto
Saint Germain en Laye, the branches of whofe trees
caf into the water, fiake like flones and lopped off, no-
thing doth afterwards come out in the place of them,

bc entrahifon. To firike a man behind bis


backe, or ere be be aware.
Traiclou : m,Tbe toole wberwith Sboomakers pull their

lackes out, et : >
Traict: m. 4 Dart, Arrow,or Shaft; alfo,a fhot,ov fboots
© (and thence,a nipstaunt, quip, cut; ) oe pase
line, freake,or flroakc.made by a penne,or penfill;(and
thence,the forme, fhape, figure, feature, lineaments of
the face, ar bodie, or of any other thing ; ) alfo,iengtb,
drawing out,prolongine of, leafure in,things ; alfo, tbe
whole, courfe , progrefle, or proceeding of a matter;
alfoya fubtile,or imzenious tricke part act,pranke [hift;
,4 draught of drinke ; alfo,a teame-trace, or trait ;
the cord or chaine that runnes between the borfes crc;
alfo,the draught-tree of a Caroche, ec; alfo,a Ume,or.
line wherein a Bloud-hound is led , and flayed im bis
parfute, in


RE ng ae


; de fo: gle


TRA


Vn traiét du lai@ d'une befte. A meales miles |
Cheval de trait. A drag-horfe,or draught-borfe.


PRIA


or bunt bim a cold fent; as alfo, to bunt
Pr hr paul abat pie


Gens detraict. The bow-men, or finall foot, of an | Traïne:f. The woofé, or weft in weauing ; alfo , agar-


Armie.

Franc au traiét. Looke Franc.

Par traiét detemps. Ia trac of time, at length, in
time,one time or another, !
Tout à traict. Eafily, faire and foftly,by leafure.
Tout d'un mefme traict. Atonce,all under one.
Parler à traiéts. To fpeake leafurely, foberly, fofily by
paufes,without haft, :

Tirer vn traict {us la lie, Seeke Lie.

Du dire au faiét y a grand traiét: Prov. There is
’tweene(mofi)mens word and deed, great (pace,and but
a little peed,

Traiét :m, te :f Drawne,pulled out ; prolonged; al.
fo,pliant,

Or traict, Gold wire, ;

Traiétable : com, Tractable,pliant, facile, intreatable,
courteous, gracious,

Traicte: m. 4 treatie ; a league agreement,or alliance,
talked offas alfo, one that is concluded on) betweene
Princes, érc; alfo,a Treatife,P amphlet, finall booke,or
part of a booke.

Traiéte:f. A draught, prolonging, or drawing out in
length; alfo, a courfe, trace, way, tourney, ogrefse,
proceeding; al/o,atranSportation, outward vent, or
Shipping over; and,an Impofition upon commodities ex-
ported ; whence ; à
Droit de traicte. as under Droid alfo, that which
ë due to the King, and to the Maifter of the Mint upon
the coyning of money. c -

Traiêté :m.éc:f. Treated, intreated of; intertained,
bandied,vfed ; made, contraéted agreed on.

Traigtement: m, A treating , intreating ; intertay-
ning,vfing bandling ; a contratting,or concluding of a
treatie,

Traicter. To treat, intreat intertaine, yfè, bandle,tend
or looke unto; 10 deale in,or meddle with;to difcour{e,
debate, or make mention of; alfo,to couenant, or con~
trath with.

Traiéter à la fourche. Looke Fourche.

Traictif: nez traictif, A prettie long nofe ; 2 nofe of «
gracefüll length,

Traiétis : m, iffe: £. whence; Trai@tifles mains.Loxg,
and (lender bands,

Traiétoire de tonnelier. 4s Tourtoire (i the later


ace. i
Traject: m, 4 ferrie; a paffage ouer.
Trajcétaire :m, 4 Ps alfa, one that tumbles’


through a hoope beld vp ; alfe,a Fugler, Impolter, Cou-


fener.

Trajeéter. To ferrie,tranfport,palfe,conuey, or carrie o-
sr from fhore to fhove RTE eprom} transferre,
pul,or caf through, i

TrajeCtoire: m. The cannon, or taile of « per fianing


ell.
Trajeétoire: com. Cafling, thrufting , putting, fèn-
diet ANR congas Suns ie
Trajetter. as TrajeAer, |
Taie: f, The fea Dragon,'iuer, Quauiner : @Mar-
eilois, u
Traillant. Reeling, or winding yarne; alfo; trayling a
Deere; Posen elite acold fint, or with à lime.
bound, :
Traille. fed fometimes in flead of Treille,


Trailler. To veele,or wind yarne ;alfo,to trayle a Deéve, |


Go. gle


ted of courfe cloth; alfo, a plot, prattife, confpiracie,
eui


Trainer. To weaue; alfo,to plet,contrine, prattife, con-

Jpre deu.

Train: m. A (great mans) traine, retinue, or followers ;
alfo,the traine,or binder part of a beaft 3 alfo, the pace
of a borfe,or moyle,erc; alfo,the trace, way, or courfe,
taken by a wild beaft, or made of purpofe for it; alfo,
any way, courfe ; worke,dealing, trade, prattife, traf.
ficke vfed, or entred into ; alfi,a crupper for a loa.
dea borfé, oe; alfo, afled, a drag or dray without
wheeles,

Le train de devant d’une coche, The fore-wheeles of
a Coach.
se train Le saris me

: Le train de praëtique. The flile,or forme of plead;
on of | names je s. Court, ER dint,
D'un train. Together at on clap,at once,
En bon train. In a good forwardnefe,
Mener Ie train de quelqu'un, Te doe any mans bufi-
nef[e for bim,
Mettreen train. To make a motion,breake the ice; im.
troduce or briag in, fet in the way.
Se mettre en train, To fet forward, or take his
way ; al/o,to bring bimfelfe into praëtife, put bimfelfe
invre,


De grand train àl'eftrain: Pro, From a great traine
into the firaw, ‘

Trainacer. as Trainer.

Trainage : m. Trainage; ot, as Droié de fuitte de
Difme, under Droi&,

ere 9 sm, ante: f. Trayling, dragging, drawing
after.
Trainant la vie, Liuing forrily, or but band
+ month; alfo, leading an pr or ue


Trainard: m.as Heu 0

Trainard : m.arde : t. 4s Trainant; 4/0, crawling, or
creeping along clofe by the ground:

Trainassé: m. ée : f, Dragged,or trailed along,

Trainafler, Te drag,or traile along.

Trainaflerie :f. 4 traine, traile, or long taile; alfa, a
trailing, or dragging aleng, ; é

Traine:f. 4 fled; a drag or dray witbout wheeles; alfa,

ee drag-net,or br a hé |
raineau : m. as Traine; al/o,draggage,or carriage.
Traineau à plommée, 4 Siellere ; mehr Veq
nice beame, fy the weighing of things. © -

Trainée:f. A traine for aWelk, ov any other fuch wild,
and raucuous beaft ;alfo,as Trainement,

Trainegain: m, 4 draw-latchlaxie companion, flouen-
lie lowe’; one that trailes the (cabberd of bis ford af:
ter him,or weares it fo low and fo looffely; that it dra gs
on the ground as be goes,

Traineller. Te trammell for Larkes,

Trainement: mi A trayling, dragging, or drawing a
long; alfo,a creepin,crawling,or running clofe by the
ground,


Traine-pieds : m.One that lazily or weakely,trailes his
legs after bim. re

Trainer. To traile, drag,draw,carrie or lead afieñbims
alfo,to Niue vpand downe, as a thing thats not
Se trainer. To creepe , or crawle along clofe-by the
ground. 1: ooaRgREe: |


liii Trai-


1X REA AT RTA |
| Trainer fon Lien, See Lien. Tranche-montaigne : m. 4 fwafh-mountaine;terri-
|


Trainer longuement, To be long ficke of adifeafe,to ble fwafh-buckler,borrible fwaggerer. FRS

… Languifha pe A while, - rt Tranche-plume : £ 4 Penknifecs af ’
Trainer longue queuë. To continue long, or be a Trancher. Looke Trencher. ' 5
ber while,in doing ; alfo, to be of great confequence, Tranchet d’un Cordoiiannier. A Shoomakers paring,
bane a ferre reach, carrie full many things along or cutting knife.
witb it, Trançon : m. .4 truncheon ; alfo,a litile peece of.
Trainer fa parole. To fpeake dreamingly , dray- Trangle. 4s Tring]. +,
lingly, draw-latch-like ; alfo, 0 finootb , claw, gloxe, Tranquille: com. Calme, untroubled, without fur.
flatter , fawne on, collogne witb ; (for commonly ges, quiet, fiill, bufht,peaceable,peacefull, ;
[ach as wive-draw their fpeecb are notable diffem- Tomienceen a filly peaceably ,with- |


blers.) out any manner.of tro:
Trainereffe. whence; Bonnettes trainereffes. The Tranquiller. Te calme, fill, quiet,pacifie appeafe.
drablers for a Saile. Tranquillité: . Trangwilitie, fulne [fe calmenefe,qui-


Trainierc:£ Commen Trefôile,tbree-leaued graffe,trifh
Shamraoks, Cockbeads,Suckles, Honifuckles.

Tramoir: m. 4 fled ; a drag,or dray without wheeles,

Trainon: m. A drag-net,or dray net for fifh.

Trainquenailles : m. Scoundrells, ragamuffins , bafe
rafcalls, flabergudgions.

Traion: m, The teat,or nipple of a cowes vdder.

Traiot: m, A milking Pale,or Piggin.

Traire vne vache. To milke, or draw milke from, 4
Cow.

Traiftre: in. .4 traitor; atreacherous,or diflayall per~
fon; alfo, a naughtie-packe; a lewd , or wicked fel-
low :


erneffe,peaceablenefe ; a calme; ref.
Tranquilliter. a Tranquiller.
Tranfacteur:m, A tranfaélor, dayes-man, accorder,
match- maker. ot
Tranfaétion:f. A tranfaction, accord, agreement, at-
tonement.
Tranfailles:£ Corne fowed in the Spring, as Barlie,
Oates oc. ‘ae
Tranfalpin: m,ine:£.Forrein,Italian,beyond the Alpes,
on the further fide of the mountaines. ”
Tranfanimation :£ Pythegoras bis Metempfycofa;
or the paffage of the foule from ome bodie to ano-


ther. ‘
Tranfcendant.Tranfcendant fermounting, furpafing,
exceeding.
‘Tranfchangement: m. An alteration, or changing o-
ser into another qualitie,or nature.
Tranfcoulation :£.4 gliding, flipping running,a dril-
ling,trilling ot srickling,through, ;
Transcoulé. Glid,flid, flipped, runne, trilled, trickled, |
firained through; aljo, fet packing, pumped, or let run |


out, }
TranfCouler. Toglide, flide, flip, runne, trill or trickle,

(aljo,toftraine) through; alfo, to fet packing,to pumpe,

or let runne,out, | GR
Tranfcrire. Totranferibe,to write or copie out. |
Tran{crit : m. ite:f, Tranfcribed, written out, copied |


Traiftreau : m. A young, or little traiter.

Traiftrement. Traiterou{ly, treacheranfly, moft diflay-
ally,or faithlofly. :

Trailtreufement. The fame.

Trait. Looke Trai&.

Traite: € A draught,or drawing out in length; aljo, a
courfe,trace, progre(fe, or proceeding; alfè,a tran{por-
tation vent outward, {bipping ower, and an Impofiti-
on vpon commodities exported or fo tranfported ; See
Traiéte. |
Traite de bleds; &, Traite foraine. Looke Bled;
& Forain, 1 Le

Traité.& Traiter. See-Traiété,& Traiéter,.”

Traitif. as Träiélif à

Tramail : m. 4 Trammell or net for Pavtridges,

Tramaillé:m.ée:£ Trebleamailed ; or rouen, bound,
or infnared by treble mafbes, or mailes.

Tramailler. To iveaue bind, fajien, or infaare by tbree-


th, L . 1
Tranfcrivain :m A Tranferiber, a bare copier out of
other mens writings, |
Tranfe:f, Extréame feare, dread; anxietie , ot per-


fold mafhes,or mailes. plexitie of mind; alfo, a traunce,or fowne; 4 great

Tramer: m. A Weawer. > | aflonifhment,amaxement, or appallment. T4

Tramblotis: m. A tremblin, Dormer en transe. To be dog afleepe,to bein a deepe
Trame. 2s Traime. dell 002 | or dead fleepe.. * KO hy cons TELE à

| Tramé:mée : € Woueñ,centrined. ©) 10 Tranfenter. To graffe out of one flocke into ano-


Trameau : ma {ind of Drag-net,or Draw-net for fifo;
… alfoja Trammell net for fowle;alfo,a Sled,or dray with.
out wbeeles. ok ne

Trainer. Toweaue,to contrive, dinesdie: |
Trameter, To continue a fuit, or bold on a purfute.

: Trameul : m. 4 yes CAAT.
ramillon: m. .4 kind of little Drag-net,or Draw-

MER TE EE


qd. Mefin of Oats, end Berlie mingled a
Tramontain:m. aine:f, Northerlie comming from,or


then de take a graffe out of one locke, and fetit in.
another. / RTE |
Transfer : m.ée: £ Tramsferred,tranfinittedpofied or
. pafed onex unto, ex: ep ;
Transfiguration: £ 4 transfiguration , ar transfor-
MAMI Na fO°32 ets
Transfigurer. Totransfigure, transforme, turne out of
. one fhape intoanotier, 15 SN à ae

Transfondre. To powre deriue;or paffe out of one vef |

fellinto another ; to transferre,totranspofe.
Transformation: f 4 transformation ; a change of |


t


an !


| Tr The North ; North-wind,orflarre. | ae st alitoesik ope as

: ) _ : si AAW Fi Trans ormer: Te remit, 2061,:bangr tenu af

|e o0ke 1: or ys My some Shape into another. mat sy

| Tranche: Akindof pruning knife, or inftrument, v- nn péter le:

i (ed eee fet of any thing, Transfuge : m, À runne-away ; one that runnes te,and

| Tr tule. Secge à hex nA OLB EL 2C fides with, apublicke enemie, lige!

| Franchelion : m. A aotable trencher-man: Rab. |’ ransfuyard: meqsTransfuge
ose MARR vite pan Tranfglou-


Originakfrom


THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


TRA


T ROA


Transgloutir les morceaux. Greedily to fwallow
dovene bis meat half chawed. ré:

DU rie m. À tranfereffor, trefpaffer, finner,
off endot.
Tranfgreffion :f, À tran/greffion;trefpa[fe,mifdeed,of.
fence ; alfo,a digreffion, , :
Tranfi:m. ie: £ Fallen into a traunce, or fowne ;
whofe heart, fence,or vital [birits faile hina, aflonied,
amazed appalled half dead.
Tranfi de froid. Berummed,or flunnied with cold.

Tranfiger. To accord,agree, come to a point, fall to an
end.or attonement.

Transiffement: m. 4 fawning, a falling into a traunce
or fawne.

Tranfitoire : com. Tranfitorie, momentarie, fraile, fa«
ding, flitting, fone paffing away.

Tranflaté : m.ée : f. Tranflated, <

Tranflater. To tranflate ; to turne ourof one language
into another ; alfo,to reduce, or remoue from one place
unto another,

Tranflateur : m. 4 tranflator.

Tranflatice: com. Tranflaticious, tranflatine; tranf-
pofed transferred ; alfo,tranfitine, or flitting,

Tranflation: £ 4 tranflation; alfoya remone,or a remo-
Hall ; whence, |
La tranflation S. Martin. The Tranflation of Saint
Martin ; a boly-day (kept in fome places) the fourth of

ulie,
Tranfluire. To be tranfparent, tofbine, or bee brigbt,


through.

Tranfinarché: m. ée:f. Tranfported, or font packing
into farre and forreine countreyes ; alfo,pafed, or fhif-
ted out of one countrey into anotber.

Tranfinarchement : m. A tranfporting; a fending in-
to farre,or forreine countreyes;alfo,a pajfing,vemouing,
or {bifting out of one countrey into another.

Transmarcher. To tranfport, or packe away into farre
and forreine parts ; al/o,to paffe,remone,or [hifi out of
one countrey into another,

Tranfinettre, To tranfimit, or paffe ouer unto another;
to fend froin one place to another; to gine, or let a thing
from bimfelfe to others.

Tranfmigration: f. A tranfmigration; a fitting, a
Shifting of aboad,a changing of place,

Tranfinigrer. To flt, fhift aboad , change place, de-
part firtber off, goe from one dwelling vnto another,

Tranfmis: m. ife :f Tranfinitted, fent away ; paffed,
giuen, let goe,pofted ouer to another, à

Tranimiffible: com, Tranfmittable,

Tranfinontain: m.aine : f. Forreine ; or,dwelling be-
yond the mountaines (whereby, moft commonly ,th’ Alps
are under|tood.)

Tranfmontane, 2s Tramontane,

Tranfinuër. To change,or alter ouer. gs

Tanfoutsion : £. A tranfinutation , alteration,

nges

Tranfompt: m. 2s Tranfumpt,

Tranfon: m, 4:trancheon,or peece of: ms

Tran{parent: m.cnte Tr pe her Siang,
or which may be feene through.

Tranfpafler. To

Transpercer. To pierce,thruft,or firike through,

irable: com. Tranfpirable, eafie to breath ont
or through,

Transpiration: f. A tranfpiration, euaporation,brea-
thing through, es

Transplacer. To traufplace , remoue, place or put o-
wer.


sor goe through ; alfo,to pafjeouer, |


Transplantation: f. A tranfplantation ; a remouin
poe in another Pre à e

Transplanté : m.ée:£ Tranpplanted,

Transplantement: m. 4 tranfplanting.

Transplanter. Yo transp'ant;remoue,plantor fet in a-
nother place,

Transplanteur : m, A tranfplanter,

Transpontin : m. A fhip-ladder; alfo,a little bridge o-
uer a ditch.

Transpontin : m.ine : f. Outlandifh, ouer-fta.

Transport :m. A transport , or transportation; à re-
tk > 4 Carrying ower, or out of one place into ano-
ther. :


Droiét par transport,A right,or title by affignement,
or meane conueyance,

Transporté : m, ée: f. Transported ; carried or conuey-
edoner; alfo,remoued out of one place into another ;
alfo,diftr aught, rauifhed,befide bimfelf ; whence; Tu
= l'efprictransporté ; Thy wits runne a wooll-ga-

thering.

Transportement : m. 4 tranfporting.

Transporter, To tranfhort; carrie or coriwey ower ,'re-
moue from one place to another ; alfo,to trans ferre,and
to flit,or fhifi places. Writs:
Se transporter. To flit,or fhifi bis place ; to remoue,
wend, oe,

Se transporter quelque chofe.To attribute or draw
vo bimjelfe, to take or applie to bis owne vfé, any
thing,

Transporteur: m. A tranfporter.

Transpolé: m. ée : £. Transpofed,

Transpofer. To transpofe ; tranflate,;remoue.

Transpofition: f, A tranfpofition ; tranflation, remo.
walt out of one place into andther,

Tranfvafation:£ 4 turning, povoring, fhifiing, remo-
uing out of one veffell into another. “Fi + à

Transvalé: m.ée: f.Turned,powred;fbified out of one
veffell into another.

Tranfvafement: m, 4s Tranfvafation,

Tranfvafer. To turne, powre, fhift, remoue out of one
vefsell into anotber.

Tran{ubftantiation: €. Tranfiubfantiation, alterati-
on or change of [ubftance, —

He Totranfubfiantiate, to alter the fab-

nce Of, j

Tranfverfaire: com, Travers, croffing,or crofie-wife,
ouerthmart, |
Mufcle tranfverfaire. A certain muskle which draws
the head afide. 4

Tranfverfal, & Tranfverfel. as @ranfverfaire.

Tranfumpt :m. A tranfumptor exemplification; the
copie of « Record, Srna

Trantaner.asTrantraner. © t

— mi. A peece of one worth a French penie, or’

ter. : \

Trantrac: m, The lowd refounding,or found,of a Hun-
ters borne. te hen GS

Trantran. The fame. IK

Trantraner. To wind a borne verie loved:; to make it
ratile, : ÿ \

Trape :f.A trap,or trap doore; (alfo,a boord ; (Cham.

IS.) :


a tra it Le get The ane of beauen, a
La a 'embas. À Pit or trap made ti
a Pitfall; alfo, a trap-doore in a lower . ;
or which opens into a dungeon, or deepe hole ; alfo,a |


Trape de eu, À fir for coles |
A fire- oy, =
ay ig Teil


tized Go gle


eee TU


dla: 2: CR
VAT


s
TAR HAL


Trape : com. Square quarrie, big fet, firong made, well
kit, well jquat, well timbered, well pitched on truft
together(but low withall.)

Trapelle :f. 4 little trap,

Trapercer. as Tranfpercer.

‘Trapeze. whence; Figure trapeze. Vaequally fided
and cornered,broader on th one fide then'on the other,
of unequall breadth,

Mutcle trapeze. The muskle whereby the fhoulder-
blades are drawne upwards, ‘
Trappan:m. A Stone-cutters Drill; the toole where-

with be bores little boles in Marble,érc.

Trappe: f. 4s Trape ; alfoya certaine trip, or tricke in
wrafiling.

Trappelle: €. A little trap; a Moufe-trap.

‘Trappu: m.ué:£ Thick aud fhort ; or as Trape : com.

Trapuffe : f. 4 trap. | :

Traquenard ; m. A racking horfe or guelding, a back-


aey.

Traquenarderie: £ A racking,or fhuffling pace,

Traquet: m. The bird called a Bunting; alfo,the clack,
or clapper of a mill,

Trafcendant. as Tranfcendant,

Trafle : £ A Thrufh,or Fieldifare.

Traflier:.m. A kind of the barren Skarlet Oake.

Trafler. asjTracer; alfà,to delineate, (core, trace out ;
or to draw the firft (rudejlines of a pitlure,érc.

Trafles;f. The (lot, view, or footing of a Deere,erc;
(Looke Trace.)

Trafleure : f. À ffreake,line,dafh,or fèore made with a
penne, or pen fill ; alfo,a tracke,trace, path, footing; or
as Tracement,

Traftravat : m. A horfe thats croffe-tranerféd; viz.bath
two onerthwart white feet,

Trau. a Trou: ¢Wallon, .

Travail: m. Trauell,tople,teene,labour,bufineffe,pains-
taking; trouble , moleflation , care; allo, the frame
whereinto Farriers put unrulie borfes when they fhooe,
or dreffe them, :

Vn homme de grand travail. 4 verie painfull man.
Travaillant. Laborious, paine fill, indufh ious, diligent.
Travaillé. Trauelled, 1oyled, laboured, much bufied,

or exercifed in; troubled, molefled, vexed,or wearied


with,
loye trifte coeur travaillé: Pro.Th'ageriewed heart
makes heauie cheere. ; :
Travaillement: m. .4 trauelling , toyling, moyling,
Swvinking labouring ;, molefling , harrying, trou-
ing.
Travailler, To trauell, fwinke, labour, toyle, moyle take
- paines, or bufie bimfelfe in; alfo,to exercife bold occu-
pied, fet on worke ; barrie, wearie, vex, trouble, tur.
moyle, difquietanfell. | .
Travailler.en bourdican. Leoke Bourdican.
Tant travaille,& tracafle l’homme qu'il fe rompt,
on :Prov. So long a man tayles,-and trots
downe, that at the length be burfisser falls flat


“Travaifon:£. A flooreor frame of beames;
© plankes, whereby one roome, or chamber

e- beame,or thicke planke,
Travat:m. A horfe which is trauerfed; viz. bath two


A DT Ni ome


LUI


or of thicke


fide... D'HIEE
: ding ; the (pace, and length; be. |
ames of a cart ne |


TRA


Travelure: f, as Travaifon; or,a frame of beames,

Travers :m. A Toll Trauers ; due by vafjalls unto their
Lord, vpon the tranfportation of their monables, com-
modities, or wares, out of bis territorie, by what paf: |
fage,or way foeuer (our Lawyers define it to be, Tok
thats payed for paffing ower a priuate mans ground; )
4 (but not fo properly) a pallage toll, or througb-
toll.

a traversdenez, À flirt, or cut, ouerthwart the
nofe.

Travers: m.erfe: £ Crofe, croffe-wife, thwart, ouer-
thwart ; ill placed,out of order,

Travers. De travers. (Adverb.) Acrofe, crofly, ouer-
thwartly; whence ;

Paroles de travers. Nips,quips,taunts,girds; thar.
tings,cro/%e or owertiswwart words,

Regarder de travers. To leere,to looke askew at,or a-
wry upon; to behold with a fell, flerne, angrie, frow-
ning,or defpightfull eye. - :

Travers. (Prepofition.) ‘A travers pais. At randome,at
rouers roamingly.

Traverfain: m, aine:£ Crofft,/ying or layed acroffe, 0
uertbwart,oblique,awry,crooked, fidelong.

Les plumes traverfaines d’un oifeau. Celles qui
vont, & fe coucheht, par travers: €Nicor.

Traverfan: m. A croffe rafiersor quarter;an ouerthwart
planke,or boord, :

‘Fraverfant: mante: £.Trauerfing,crofing,thwarting, |

lying acrofe,or athwart vuer.
Chevaux traverfans. Are due unto the Lords feodall
of Poiétou, à l'ouverture des ficfs;or,in lieu of them,
acertaine fumme agreed on betweene them and their
vaffalls: Thefe borfes, as it feemes, be infeviour unto
Steeds,or hor{es of feruice,

Traverfe :f. Acroffè-way,er by-lane,which leads out of
the highway; (An old French Lawyer defines it, Vn
cheinin, qui traverfe d'un village en autre, & qui

doit contenir, comme les plus. des Couftumiers
font d'accord, jufques à vingt, ou vingt-deux pi-
eds: ) a houfe in a fireet which leanes, or iutties out
farther then thofe that be about it; alfo, a croffe, croffe
blow, thwart, cuffe, misfortune, trouble, difturbance,
a barre, hinderance, in the courfe of a fuit, or bufi-
nefe. ; ;
Bois de traverfe. A fixe of billets which be lee then
the Bois de moule, iy |
Ges quelque mot à la traverfe. To caft out a
word.
Venir à la trayerfe. To come on the contrarie fide or
à fe againfl ; to come along in the way of.

Traverfe : com. Oeil traverde, A leering, or fide eye,or

caft ofaneye, — ve

Traverlé:m.ée:£ Trauerfed, croffed ouer; alfo, pier-
ced,or firucke,through ; and bence alfo,wet through,or

«(as we fay) to the skinne. +: RNY
Cheval traver{é. 4 thicke, broad-fet, well-trufed,
fhort-made borfe. tt HUM E

Traverfement : m, 4 thwarting , 4. goimg ouer-

: nt a croffing ouer; alfo, a piercing or firiking
t


Traverser. To thwart or goe ouerthwart,craffé or paffe À
ouer ; alfe,to firike or pierce through. sored
Traverfeux ;m.eufe:£ Ouerthwart, croffe, froward.
Traverfier: m. Such a Ferriboat as is guided by a rope
_._ fallened unto a poft,erc, on either fide of ariner ,alfo,
atranfome croffe beame, ouerthwart nr à
3


: timber, boord; alfo, the wine vefell, calle
Æ been, Poinfon, ‘ me la Tha


——


TRA TR
Traverfier:m. ere: Crofe or crofing,thwarting,ouer- {  Trefficbitumineux. #5 Treffle puant.
thwarting, lying ove-crofe, layed acroffeoner, = Treffle au liemagon. Snaile Clauer, borned Claner,
Sergents traverfiers, Extraordinarie Raungersyr | horned Trefvile ,medow F other.


Officers of a Forefl; wherein they bane no certaine


 walke affigned them, but are to vifit all the Pace of
t |


tend cextifievebat abufes are committed, what waft
made, in it, Ê

Traverfin: m. 4 croffe-beame, or peece of timber, ina
pre 3 alfo,a bed-boulfier. ;

se Traveftir. To di(guife, or fhift, bis apparel ; 10 maske
it,o7 take on bimanotber mans habit; to play the coun-
terfeit.

Traumatique : com. 4 Wulnerarie ÿ any oinment, or
falue thats fit, or good; for wounds, —»

Travoifon: f. A frame, feeling, or floore made with
beames,or thickeplankes, :

Travonaifon: f Anarched frame, (celing,or floore of
beames,ere.

Travonizer la muraiïlle,&c, Toarch; or fleore it ouer
with a frame of beames coc.

Travonner. as Travonizer.

Travouil: m, 4 Rice ;or,a turning vecle,

Trayans :m, The wires which are placed in the fore-
part of an arched,or old fafhioned Organ; and ferue to
flop, or open the Pallets thereof.

Traye:f. 4 kind of Thrufb.

Traÿer : m. 4 milking Pale,or Piggin:

Traÿme,& Traymeau. 4 kind of drag-net for fifhs
ing


Trayne: f. A great round poft,or peece of timber, like to
an apple-tree; alfo, as Traine,

Trayneau: m. a Traineau.

Trayne-guain. Looke ns

Trayons: m. The teats,or duds of a Cow,

Treau de Satiran. A bed of Saffron,

Treboufet:m. A kind of fweet wine, '

Trebu a Tripping , [iumbling , flipping downe.
wards.
Efcu trebuchant. which beares downe the balance,
or is much more then weight. 3

Trebuchement: m, A flumbling, tripping, flipping, or

- falling downe ;alfo, an offendiag, mifdoing, or mifla-


ine,

Teebucher, To flumble , or trip; to flip (and thereby
fometimes ) to fall downe ; alfo, to offend, mifdoe,
miftake ; alfo, to oucrweigh , or beare downe by

~ weight ; as, in a balance, a beauier thing doth a ligh-
ter,

C’eft tout vn de cheoir, & de trebucher : Prov.
There's but little difference betweeneifiumbling , and
tumbling, ; :
Ilvaut mieux trebucher vne fois que tousjours
chanceller; Prov. Better at once to fall outright then
enermore to flagger; Looke Chanceller.

Trebuchet :m. A pitfall for binds ; à pit, with a tra
doove, for wild beafts; alfo,a paire of gold weights; al.
fo,an old-fafhioned Engine of wood, from which great,
and battering flones were moft violently throwne.

Trece. Looke Trefle. Le

Tref:m. The beame of a boufe ; alfo, a Tent, or Pauilli-
on of firong canuas; alfo, a kind of {ayle in a ship;


whence s
“A plein tref. witb full fayke.
Trefle: m. Trefoile,Claner,Three-leaned graffe ; alfo, a
Club at Cards, :
Treffle aigre. wood Sorrell, wood Sowre, Alleluya,
t


RY ort,
- Treffle bas Jago fet, rough Clauer. -


Treilage :m. Grates croffe-barres,Lattice-worke; Ar:


Treffle odoriferant. Sweet Trifalie, garden Clauer,
Scillat (laner,
Treffle des pres Common Trefoile,medow Trefoyle,
Suckles,Cockbeads, ;
ie puant. Smelling Clauer, Treacle Claner,Piteh
Trefoile, (linking Treftile, Clauer gentle,
Treffefauvage (jaulne.) Wild yellow Trefoile wild
yellow Lotus. |
Treffle vraye.the right Trefoilesor as Treffle puant.
Grand Treffle. Spanifh Trifolie , Medicke Fotber,
Snayle Claner ; alfo, great Trefiile, winged Clauer;
and, (in the opinion of fome) horned (lauer.
oat br % jaulne, Pertie Clauer, [mall Trefoile,
e Trefeile, |
Treffoncier, as Tresfoncier.… |
Treftond. as Tresfond ; and, ground with the crop yet
growing upon it,
Trefont de Tonnelier. A Coopers Turrell; the Augar
wherwith be maketh boles : €Norm,
Tregenicr: m. 4 Salter; or,one that feleth falt(as fome
here aut of carts crc,
Trehu. a Treu,


bors; a rayling,

Treille: £ Lan Arbor, or walke, fet on both fides with
vines crc twining about a Treillis,o7 latticed frame.
Saulter de treille en paifleaux. To run(without caufe
or con{cience) from one fibiect vato another.

Treillé: mée :£. Grated, or latticed ; [upported or un-
derfet withheld up or in by growing or twining about,
lattices,croffe-barres,or grated frames,

Treiller. To grate,or lattice ; tofupport or under{et by,
qua or hold in with, crofieabarres, or latticed

‘ames.

Treillis : m..4 Trellis ; a lattice before a dootesbole, or
window; a grate (et thicke with croffe-barres of wood; -
any lattice,or (wovdden) grate ; any latticed, or grated


‘ame.

Trelis : mée : £Crofe-barved, latticed grated (with
woo ; ;
Trellifier. To lattice,croffe-barre,grate(with wood; ) to -
bold vp,er bonne in,by lattices, croffe-barres grates,
Treine. f. as Trene; al/o,a Dorman,or great beame.

Trelis. Leoke Treillis.

Treluire. To glifter,or fine verie bright,

Tremail : m.Barlie,Oates,cr Fitches,mingled together,

Tremaille: A Trammell or net for Partridges. ”

Tremaillé : m.ée : f Treble-mailed; whence,Alicr tre-
maillés A Trammell net,or treble met,fèr Partridges, À


oe.
Tremblant, Trembling, fhinering.

renbiaut one ee & chair, See Cuir.
Tremblante de moulin, A 1/4 hopper.
Tremblaye:£ A grouc of Afpes.

leim. An Afpe,or Alpen tree.
Tremblesf. The Torpedo,or Crampe-fih |
oo sg trembling, fhinering diddering,
ing or quaking. Bae.

Trembler, To tremble, finer; didder, quake, Jake,

Faire trembler le lard au charnier, To ferrifie,or

affright (fencelef[e or weake people) with big words, |
Trembloer : m. The Sound-boord of a Muficall In-

firument. Besse
Tremblotement : m. An ofien trembling ; a quaking, |

diddering ; panting. à LE

liiiiÿ Trem- |.


+e wa à - .


TRE


Rear To tremble,quake, pant(often; } to fhiner,

or didder

Tremblotis : m. as Ts or md eos
ment.

Treine. Looke Traime.

Tremeatr: m. as Trumeau; or a bough,or leg of Beefe.

Tremegifte :m, An excellent Maifier (of Trifnegif=
te,an excellent Philofopher : ) (Rab.

Tremeiller. 70 quake,to quauer,to wag.

Tremés. Bled tremés. Looke Bled.

Tremeur: m, 4 great fèare,or dread; a trembling foe
king or quaking(thereby.)

Tremezc. A kind of Rie fowed in the Spring.

Tremie de moulin. The Mill-hopper.

Tremoilc : £ The Scate called the Crampe-fifh: {Bour-
delois,

Tremouille. as Tremie,

Tremouflement : m..4 violent quaking, fhrugging,or
tremiblin ; alfd,a fuddcn ftarting,or luele flirring.
Tremoufler, To tremble, fhrud, (brug, fhiner,quakeex-
treamely,or upon an extréame feare; alfo,to totter ex-

ceedingly ; al/o,to flart{üddenty, [livre fprighifülly.

Tremoy: m. & Tremoye: f. as Tremail,

Trempé : m. Houfhold wine, or final! wine made, fr
the feruants, of water, and tbe grounds or bottomes
of good wine.

Trempe:f. The temper of'a weapon ; alfo,a dipping;
fleeping; feafoning, tempering ; aljo, ‘the temperature,
difpofition, or compofition of the mind; the mood, bu-
mor or temper whereinit i.


Soaked feafoned tempered,
Trempez en fang. Inblond ; imbrued, or diftained
with blend.
Apres avoir trempé longuement en prifon..After
a molt (iritt,and tedious imprifonment; after that bee

bad lien a long time by it.

Temprement: m. 4 dipping ; moiftening, wetting;
fleeping, foaking ; feafoning tempering

Trempet. To dip; moiflen, wet, fe, fees; feafon,
temper, [apple tiquor rc.

Trempette. À fop,or fippet,

Trempeur:m. 4 dipper; wetter, meitcnr oe,
fleeper; feafoner ,temperer.

Trempis:m. Filthie water wherein raw things baue
becne dipped, fleeped, or foaked.


hides after they baue beene in their lime-pit.

Tremué de moulin. 4 Sil-bopper,

Tren:m. dream (fret ie ale peare)
wherewith Marriners doe frike,and kill, fifh at fea.

Dre en if. A gripe, or a wring, av of the Col.
eC.

Trenchaifonner. To wring or gripe like the Chelicke,


roan


garpene(fe keenene/fe.
peat


Trempé : am, ée: f, Dipped moiftened , wet; fleeped, |


-Tempoir: m. The pit wherein Tanuers mr pee


“Tiachant: : m, The edge ofa weapensor toole; alfejcuts


_ Trente-coftes: m,d gangerel, flimme,long luske, lank


3 Trepigné. Trample


TRE


“Trcochées de S Maurin, Madd mad Bela


Teenchefile: : The head-band a booke; alfozasnaf- |
fle; or the mouth of a Lent watering Bit; ao,
the trench, or trenching ofa Croffebow firing; that
part thereof whereinto the neb of the arrow entreth, |
Trenchetile de foulier. The cordingsor binding ae
infide of the beele,or ties,

Trenchement: :M, A cutting, flicing ; cardingy bde-
ing,or pe in peeces.

Trenc ab Tranche-montaigne. |

Tren vire sh A Trencher,

Trenche-plume, 4 Penknife;

bo pra To cut; carue; ficesbacke, bew; to thwite

or alu
Trencher du grand, To take a great deaie of fate


Trencherle mot. To fpeake briefely and pr 10
A age pate ke briefely and properly,
Il en fauctrencher la broche. Th’ expectation there-
of is to be preuented,or cut off.

Trenchet de cordouannier, A Shoomakers cating,


Trenchoir. as Trencheoir. £
Trene. A threefold rope,cord,firing, or twifl, called by
Marriners,a Sinnet.
Trenne. as Trene,
Trenné. Chanure trennée.  Toifled, or made into a
T threefold rope.
renou: f. 5 raumpe,or tomboy.
Trenfe. as Tranfe. pa
Trentain:m. A thirtieth or thirtie,the nüber of thirtie,
Trentaine :f. as Trentain.
Trente, Thirtie.


loobie.

Trenticfine. The thirtieth.

Trepan:m, 4 Trepane ; an Infirument bauing around,
and indented edge,voberewith Chirargians open a frac.
tured skull,and ky the belpe of @ Lenatorie (withinit)

à vaifeup the crufbed, and deprefed parts thereof, and

v take out pecces of. bones and clotted bioud.
Trepané : m.ée :f. Trepaned.
Trepanation:£ A trepaning ; à round opening of the |
je with a Trepane,
Trepaner. To trepane ; toopen,or bore boles i in the skull
with a Trepane.

Se came To pale ouer,not to mention,

:m. ée:f. Trampled om, troden under foot.

Trepelu: ms + tattered rogue; a bafe,bare,and
beggerlie wretch,

Trepelu: m. uë : £Poore,bare,beggerlie spauliriebaf,
umwor

Treper.To bop, skip,trip or foot it fuient downe ; sa to
frsmpe;trample on,tread und

Trepidation :f. Trembling,terrour, feare..

Trepied: m. 4 Treuet.

Trepier: m. A place whereat three or fonte findrie
fireets,or bigbwayes doe mest a-bead,

d,daunced ; often read en,
‘aire Te ron 5 hop, skips daunce ; tread often


Tre billard: m.atde: :f. Skipping, bopping, dauncin
i Prvingt traumping or Maur on. =
Trepiller. a Tees
iné. as Trepigné.
Trepis de beftes. A trampling or often PE
seb eafis. ite |


Originaltrom
THE-OHIO STATE. UNIVERSITY


erate


:
Al
.


|
}
i
ig


TRE


‘


TIRSE


Trepointe. Souliers à trep. renverfée, Turne-ouers.
tes. A Particle, or undecliaable word;neuer vfed but
in compofition, and. then, for the moft part, adding te
baat which it precedes the fuperlatine energie of thrice,
moft, exceliently; exceedingly, paffing, or aboue all o+
thers, rc; Fn which fence being a de to manie
Verbes, and to the moft Adietlines, and Aduerbes;
(which are in their original, and. due places expoun-
ded). F haue. purpofely omieted all,except foure or fiuc,
of them ; it being. an eafier matter for fimple Readers
to find owt themeaning of therefiyby the application of
them to theft few, or by the generall direction of this
Rule, then for me to pleafè th4-indicious, by fluffing vp
(though with (ome warrant. of example) much Paper
| with necdleffe repetitions. i
| Tresabonefcient. Maft wittingly,ymoft earnefily,or in
excecding great earnefi. s
Tresacertes, Through}y,in greatiearnef,as muchjor as
farve as may be. ,
.Tresalant: m, ante: £ Scorching, parching, drping up
by extreame heat.
Trefalé: m. 4 fcorching, parchingiextreame drynefe or
drought by an exsreamie heat,
Trefalé: m.ée:f. Scorched, parched, vtterly dryed vp,
or drayned of moifture, by extreame heat.
Trefaler. Ta fcorch, parch, dry or-be dryed up, drayne
|’ or be drayned of all manner of moifture, by extreame
beat.
Trefarriere. Exceedingly backward,verie farre bebind-
hand; whence;
Aujourd'huy threforier, demain trefarriere: Pro.
No man knowes what his laft accomps will be ; or, no
Erich man knowes how poore be faone may be.
| vanne Trebuchant,& Tre-
ucher. a
| Trefcheur. (whence, Vn Lion enclos en un double
trefcheur;) 4 Tracke,or Treffeur (in Blafon.)
Trefeau: m: 4 e, flowke, balfe-thr aue, rowke, or
heape of {beaues in a corne-field;alfo,palfé a quarter of
an ounce in the weight of ware or marchandie,
Tresfoncier: m. iere: f. Proper, fundamental, bred
mith, or grounded in ; alfo, thats evner of, or belongs
unta,the foyles :
Seigneur tresfoncier. The Lord of the foyles he in
~- whom the prapertie(in whomfüeuer the pofeffion)there-
~ of is ; (Ce-mot-a Jicuen cas de roture ; fayes Ni-


cot.)
Trestond: m. The foyle of land; and, as Treffond,
Trefine,& Tr , as Traime,& Traimer.
Trefinoufler. To bring forth abundance of Mofe; alfo,
ai Tremoutfler. ; \
Trefñe. as Trene. :
Trefnon: m. A three-fold pp pr fring.
Trefor,& Treforier. Looke Threfor,& Threforier.
Trefpas: m. 4 doath,dying,or deceafe ; a departure out
of this world; alfa palfage; whence;
Trefpas de Loire. A kind of Paffage-toll, or Cuflome
> payed at Pafages over the Loire.
Trefpaffant: m. 4 Paffenger. ji
Tr sm, ée:£ Dead,deceaffed,departed this life;
also,exceeded,ouerpalfed. : ; £
Il pifle pour les ie Se An equinocation ; for it
may either fignifie the dead (vpon whofe graues the
- Papifis ve to fprinkle bolie water)or bane relation un-


Trefpaffer. To die,deceafe depart this lifes alfo,to aner-
fall exceed ; paffe on,or ouer.
refpaffer fon ferment. To breake, or goe from,pis
oat


Pees t. To pull, or teare into many peeces; (an old

ora, € :

refpercé:m. ée: f Transpierced, pierced through,

Tepes To pierce,or rink :

Tresque. Exceeding much. |

Fran daunce; (anold word) + s

Treffaillir. To flart ; alfo, to leape, hop, or skip; linely,
Grishifidiy ar apace; toiertor (bring up ; alfo,to ouer-
eape,and to leape ouers,.

Le coeur luy treffaut. His beart leapes, or pants, for


ayers :

Treffault,& Treffaut: m, A flart,or farting ; a Spring-
ing, liuelie terting, fprightfull skipping vpwards ; alfo,
a leape,or leaping over. :

Trefle de cheveux. A trefft,or locke of haire.

Treflé: m. ée: f. Plated wvowen,or made into treffes,

Trefleau. The name of @ fertile Vine. -

Trefler. To plait, weane,or make into treffes. :

Treflette: f. A little treffe,or locke, >

Trefteau, Looke Treveau.- it


Treftous. Al each,or enerie one, not one excepted, not


one tobe (pared. : .

Treteau,& Tretteau. A trefle fora Table,erc; alfo(as

Chevalet) a kind of racke, or flretching torture,
Treu: m, 4s Trou; abole, Picard, alfo,the toll,or cuj>

tome payed unto Lords, for (alt,and other commodities,

or marchandife,carried along by their dominions ; and
generally any toll,tax, orimpofition.

Le Droit de treu accouftumé, Looke Droi&,
Treüage: m. as Treu. .
Trevertin: m. 4 kind of marble, or marble-like fione.
Treves: f Truce ; a limitted ceffation fom warre.

Treves brifées,ou enfraintes, The breach, or vialati-

on of a graunted Protection. HAS
Treufle. 4 Club at Cards ; Looke Treffle.

Vn Nez d’az de treufles, 4 flat bottle nofe.
Treuil..as Trieule.. \ : ec
Trevifaine. La Danfe Tre. Lecherie. a
Treul: m. 4 Wine-preffe ; or (more generally) any


Pref. à r

Treule:f. A little fifb-net for Stues,and finall Ponds,

Trezain: m, A thirteene-pennie peece ; a coyne of bafè
mettall worth xiij d Tourn.

Trezain: mA thirteenth; whence; .. :

. Le trezain du pain. Vantage of bread ; the tbir-

teenth loafé giuen by Bakers unto the dozen.

Treze. Thirieene. eontigbte

Trezeau. Looke Trefeau. 45 2. py Tr

Trezeiné de bois: f.Tbirteene billets or logssar as much
wood asamancancarrie. a Me TitT

Trezeler. To make vp fheaues of corne intofhocks ; alfo,
to exclayme,or toraylesôm.. à +: +: op 77

Treziefine: m. 4 thirteenth; alfo,the thirteenth pennie,
or part, of the money for which land is fold, in many
places payed, unto the Lord feodal, by the feller (if -
there be no couenant to the contrarie;) alfo, the thir=
teenth fheafe due unto Lords for fome kinds of countrey
Toll... via
Treziefine de Vin. The thirteenth pot, or pennie of
the price of retayled Wine, due in fome places unto. the


to Traïéts paflez; draughts of drinke alreadie fwal. Lord of the Furifdiétion, or Soyle. et
“Towed downe, à Treziefne: com. The thirteenth... HT
Tout cela eft frappé à la porte d’un trefpaffé. Le treziefine denier, as Trezicfme in the fécond
 Looke Porte. . BY ast 7 fence. ; Here
à 5 _  Tria
pm ne 4
a ,
visitized wy CO gle FHE:OHIO-STAT


ci


Tricon : m. 7s (at Cards)


ey S15 3


Triacle: m. Treacle; See Theriaque.

Triaclerie: £. The making of Threacle ; alfo, an impof
ture,deceit, fophiflication.

Triade: £ A tre; or,a third.

Triage: m. Choice; a culling,or picking out from among
others.
Triages de forefts. The fewerall dinifions, walkes, or
parts,of Forefls.  *

Triangle: m. A triangle,or three-cornered figure.

Triangulaire: com, Friangular,three-cornered,of three
corners,
Mufcle ariangulaire, The triangular mujcle whereby
the hanch,or flank: is bowed.

Tribaille: € The Poultrie.

Triballer. To wagle,or dangle up and dovene;to goe din-
gle dangle,wig wag.

Triballeur: m. 4 Poulter,

Tribart: m, 4 fhore Cudgell.

Tribe. Looke Tribu.

Tribort. The farre-boord,or the right fide of a fhip.

Tribouil: m, Trouble, vexation, moleftation ; (an old
word.

Triboule-mefhage: m. dz il, or vnskilfil busband,
one that marres,or confounds,bis ovone bufinelfe.

Triboulet:m. 4 Triblet; the toole wher eon Goldfmiths
and Clock-makers put Rings, and little wheeles, when
they file, or otherwife worke, them ; alfo, as Triboul-


et.

Tribouller. To fhog,or iog like a Cart,érc, in an vneuen
way; and bence alfo, to inmble, diforder, or fet out of
order any thing.

Triboullet: m.2s Triboulet ; 4/64 flouenlie felow,one
that ufwally weares bis hofe ungartered,and fhooes vn-
tyed ; al/o,the name of a famous foole belonging to King
Francis the firft; and thence, any fop,cokes, ridiculous
ninniehammer or laughing-flocke.

Tribu: £. 4 Tribe ; Companie, Band, Ward, Canton, or
Hundred, ia a Citie,or Countie.

Tribulation: f. Tribulation, affliction, anguifb, paine,


trouble, gritfe. :
Tribule (aquatic.) The water Caltrop, Saligot water-
‘Nut.


Tribule terreftre. The land Caltropsor Saligor.
Tribun: m. A Tribune of the people among the auncient
Romans. . é
Tribut: m. Tribute; a general tax, or fubfidie raifed

ee the goods of fubicéts.

Tributaire: com. Tributarie,tribute-paying.

Tric:m. A word whereby Printers doe fignifie, that they
giue ouer working. eg

Tricdondaines: f. « Triquedondaines.

Trichard: m. arde: f. Coufening, cheating, deceining,


beguiling, k :
Tricher. To confen,cheat beguile deceiue, play falfe, vfè
0


Tri tie: f (whence,as it (eemes,our trecherie) confe-
e,deceit,a cheating, beguiling. 5


La
Tricheur: m. A couféning companion,


ache € 4 y to nurfes paps by
3 unto nur,
drinking downe a betralfe oaland smile clef
about the back-bone, running out in length, and often-
times caufng death; alfo (in horfts) a vicious inuerfion
= of the upper eye-lid,to _ the trouble of the under one,and
i t à | AUREZ
Trichoterie: f.as Tricorerie. sais
that which we now call, a
Gleeke of Kings, Queenes, Knanes, dre ; viz, three of


2e


a rca by Go gle dE €


them in one hand together.

Tricoter. To kuit.qOrleannois,

Ts pureté de l'or,&c, Toalter,change,allay;er
imbafeit,

Tricoterie : f. (oufenage, cheating, trecherie, deceit, in
the following of a fuit,érce.

Tricoteur: m, A knitter. €Orl,
Tricoteur de procez. A contriner, or canuafer of
faits ; a Pettifogger ; a craftie,or confening Lawyer,

Tricoteufe: f. A knitter,a woman that knits, qOrl.

Tricotter, & Tricotterie. as Tricoter, & Tricote-
rie.

Tricoufe: f. as Triquehoufes.

Trictrac: m. The infide,or playing. fide of a paire of Ta-
bles ; alfo,the Tables themfelues ; alfo,the Game Tick-
tacke at Tables; alfo,the clattering noife made by Ta-
ble-men,e>c.

Tride, Carriere tride. 4 firong, and peedie mouing of
a horfé in bw carriere,

Trident: m, Neptunes three-forked Mace; and thence,
any weapon, toule, or inflrument made of that fafhion,
or hauing three teeth.

Trie: f. A choice culling ,or picking out.

ig :m.ée:f. Chofén, culled,or picked ont from among
others,

Triege : com, Strong,luftie able-bodied (from the Spa-
aif Cavallo detricgo, a luftie bor(e; or from the cuf-
tome of Spaniards, to feed their beft hor(és of feruice
with Wheat.)

Triennal : m. ale: £ Triennak,of three yeares.

Trier. To picke, chufecull out from among others.

Trieule d’un puis. The round beame about which the
cord of a Well doth turne.

Trifere: f. A certaine compound, and delicious Elefua-
rie, called thus of a Greeke word, which fignifieth |
fumptuous,

Trifourché: m. ée : f. Treble-forked; three-fold.
Trigaut: m, An intricator,imtangler, perplexer of abu-
Jfine{fe; one that by tricks,or fleights makes it hard to be
roped 3 and (more generally) one that is full of [bifts,
“or fleights,

Tri Fores: m. Trigliphes; hollow grauings like three

rt gutters,or farrowes on Compaitiments,or Borders
in Mafonrie,

Trihoris,ou Trihory: m. A kind of Britifh, and pez-
fintlie daunce, confifting of three fleps, and perfor.
med, by thofe hobling youthes commonly in a rounds .

Trikatifte: com, Spitting fire, Rab.

Triller, To put on a new fbirtexcjand weare it untill it
be growne eafie,or foft.

Trillon: m. The ninth place in Numeration, and ahun-
dred millions in number,

Trilly 4’ Allemaigne.Fine Buckeramwaned like water:
Chamlet. ‘ Ly

Trimeftre: com, Of three moneths,

Trine: com, Tripled,compounded or made of three,

Tringle: f. A Curtaine-vod ; and more generally, a peece
of round yron,or wire,of the groffenelfe of a Curtaine-
rod,vfed for the ioyning of flones.or timber,and for the
banging up of things; alfova flat fticke,or lath-like peece
“of wood, /

Tringue:f. À drinking; alfo,as Tringle.

Trinité: £ The holie Trnitie, ot
Herbe de la Trinité. The Paunfie, bearbe Trinitie,
Hearts-eafe, loue inidlenefe,two faces under a hood ;

_fome alfocall fo the bearbe Harefoot, or Harefoot Tre-


Trinquamaille. See Trinquemaille.


Trin-


dFIginal from
PHE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY-


“TORAET


"| Trinqueballer les cloches.Tosanglesor to ring bels un
tuneably,and too much.
Trinquemaille: £. Such a box as Players take maney it
at their doores.
Trinquer. To drinke, ta quaffe,to carafe,
Trinquerie: £. 4 drinking quaffing,caraming,
Trinquet: m. 7s properly the top,or top-gallant,an any
Malt; the higheft fayle of a fhip.
Triochite, Triple-floned,
Triolaine: f. 4 if, file, feries; rabble, continuall or con-
tinued clutterment.
Triolet: m. Meddow Trefoile, common Trefoile, three-
leafed grafe.
Triolet aromarique, Sweet Trefoile, garden Clauer.
Triolet des chevaux, Melilot, plaifler Clauer.
Triollet, as Trioler.
Triomphal: m.ale : £ Triumphall,ofor belonging un-
| to triumphes,
ide gene Triumphanily, triumphingb à imtri.
umpb.
ee Triumphant, triwmphing:
Triomphe: m. 4 triumph ; a pompous, and publike


flew

Trioi nphe: € The Card-game called Ruffe, or Train 5 ;
alfo,the Ruffe,or Trump at it.

Triomphé. Triumphed.

ae dong m. A triumphing; alfa trumping at
Cards

Triompher. To triumph ; or greatly to reioyce ; alfo, to

| trampe at Cards.

Trion: m. Choice or picked graine,cleane corne.

Tripaille: & À quantitie of tripes,or guts.

Tripailleries: f. A4 kind of tripes.

ee f. A Tripe; (fn which fence it is moft vfed plu-
rally;) alfo,the bellie,or paunch; alfo,V alure,lrifo Tuf-
taffata, Fuftian an apes.
Les tripes d’un fagor. The finalleft flickes im a) fig:
got.
Tripe de morué, ‘The bellie, or fomacke of the Mo-
rué; which dryed, and then layed in water, becom-
meth Joft againe, and is ordinarily fold in Leat h =


Ta tripe groffe. (Said of) a Gorbellie, smagbelie,
Gulch, fat Guts. ;
Le tout pour la tripe. All for the belle.

- Tripe pleine ne combat bien, ny ne fuit bien:
ne: he thats full kb neither Fights m nor fies,


TripelievdsTxipoly.

Triper. To tread or flampe a, to rene Sout the
feetan |

Triperie: fA Triperie; ; a merke, fireet,or flop hate
tripes are vfually fold.

Tripetter: To trip,or foot it nimbly in dancing. JF

Triphere. as Trifere,

Tripied: m. 4 Treuel.

Tri an RSR a seller alfo,a gorbellie, sage


Ta it Lo coupe des deux collez)


One that ina correfpondencie with bot
"fides, rather to burt them both thex to belpe either.

Arras» en Er Scolding like a Butter-whore.

tripiere. 4 rayling tongue,
T ple; m. A Triple; aife,Galliayd.time,in afl.
bs le : com. Triple,threefold. -
2m, Get € Tripled,trebled.

Trpement: m. Atriplingsor making tel


Triplication: . A wight, he or doing; a


“TRE


Tales Totriple,or make threefold,


multiplying
| |'Tripliques fA Reeend reply,or the anfiwer of the plain-
Life unto the defendants Reioinder.
Tripliquer. 10 make a fecond reply; or a plaintife to an-
swer unto the defendants Reioinder.
Tripolion. Serapions Turbith, fea Starrewort, Hogs-
arr ng Camomill,blue Daifies.
: m, Tripoly; a “fone with the powder whereof
po i doe fimooth or polifh their iewels.
Fe Oe: m. ee tri à i
ripotage: m.A confifed inmbling,or budling of things
ae a 4 a confüfion. . viele
Fais tellement ton tripota pe que tu ne m'y mefles
point. Handle this thy a bargaine Jo,es
1 be not drawne into i.
Tripoté: m. ée: f.Bandied,or toffed to and froyas a ball
fbb Tene; af confie raed, budled,bungled, or
bbered ower. :
Tripoter. To play at Tenis ‘to bandie, or tafe to and
r0,45.4 ball at Tennis; alfo, confufedly to inmble, or
budle together ; illfauoredly to bungle,or [lubber oxer.
Tripoteur: m. 4 bungler; a confounder of bis owne
worke,or bufineffe; a berer ouer of things; a hud-
ler or fhuffler of t them together,
Tripotier: m. 4 great haunter of Tennis-courts.
Trippe. as Tripe.
Tripper. as Triper.
Pnque: m. éc: f. Seuered from, or culled out of, the


ref.
Triaupelriien: m, A toy,trifle nifle ; a thing of no
wort
Triq uedondaines: of, AU hind of fuperfluous trifles va
Fedur vfually beusbt,by women ; bence, any trafh, ni-
‘fles,or paltrie fluffe ; and,a rafcallie companie, or crue
of {cowndrels,
Triquehoufe: f. À boot-bo/e; or a thicke hofe worne in
flead of a boot.
Triquemadame: f Prickmadame, Sengreene the ef


ler,

Triquenifques: £. Trafh, trifles, nifles, paltvie fluffe,
things of no value.
Argumens de triquenifques. Vaine, fond, Sleight
arguments.
Monfieur de triquenifques. 4 gentleman of firaw,
a thred-bare gentleman,

Triquetrac. as Trié

Triquetre. A Triangle.

Triquette: £. À whirbgig.

Triquotter.To knit as Jlockings coc ; alin Tricher.

Lui m. À great great grandfather

riscacifte: com. Exceeding ill,or | thrice threefeld il


@Rab.
Taf +0, Germaunder, Englif Teegetilae hearbe: )
+com.Of three fÿllables. ..
Trifte: com. Sad, ry gk hay fontented,


icke,wwofill,dolefill,forverefiul ; aif, grame, |


auftere, fowre,harfh.
-Trifte comme vn bonnet de nui fans coiffe. As
meloncholicke as a coyfolefe nightcap.
Tiemene, Sadly, penjiuely, farroweilly, wofly, dote-
- grouely, aig eg Ba
ru OFLOW 5 QYICJEs penfinene
melancholie, difcontentment , mn, Pr


© | prieur: fas Triflefe. Sa
Trifulque: com, Having three edgety. oan


= Tris


’


|


See Àl tion > bi


sé à


ta én/Top; af, the fname of en Elephant af, the
or Like roome,


TR O


ét, nr"


Trituration: f, 4 crumming, crumbling, breaking, or
grinding finall.

Trituré; m.ée: £, Crammed, crumbled broken,or ground
fmall.


Triturer. To crumme,crumble, breake,or grind fmall.
Trivial: m, ale: f. Triuiall, common, homelie,ordinarie,
ufuall fleight of fmall worth,
Yeux triviaux.Eyes that be intentiue,or earneftly caf,
three or foure fenerall wayes at once.
Trivialitez: f. Trinialities ; triniall, fleight, common,
bomelie,ordinarie matters.
Triule. 2s Trieule,
Troc. Looke Troq.
Trocanters: m. Two proceffes, or bunches towards the
top of the thigh-bone; a great one (and the greateft of
the whole bodie) flanding outward ; a le[[e,and lower,
flanding inward.
Troché. whence, Tefte de cerftrochée. Troched, or
whofé top is diuided into three or foure fmall branches.
Trochée: f. A clufler of apples,éc;a bunch of nuts,e>c,
growing clofe together vpon one bough,
Trochelle: f. 4 certaine inftrument of torture vfed in
the Fnquifition-houfe. * .
Trochet: m. 2s Trochée; al/o, a kind of finall, white,
x and fiveet apple. :
Trocheure: f The troching on the top of a Deeres head;
or,the top troched ; as in Troché,
Trochile: m. 4wvenne ; alfo,a little water-fowle which
vfüaly picketh the teeth of Crocodiles; alfo, alittle
wreathed band,or member in Pillars.
Trochifque: m. 4 Trochiske, or Trofque; a little run-
dle,or cake,whereinto diners medicinable things be re-
duced,the better to be kept, and the readier to be vfèd.
Trochifqué: m. ée: £ Made like,or intosa Trochiske.
Trocifque. as Trochifque ; alfo,a flaulke.
Trocifqué: m. ée: f, Reduced, or made into the forme
of a Trochiske. +
qfocfiie : m. Privet,Primprint.
rofée. Looke Trophée.


Trognic: m. ique : £ Scofing, mocking, flowting,deri


dirige i “
Trognon: m. The flocke, fiump,or trunke of a (branch-
leffe) tree. 1
Troignon. as Trognon;al/o,the core within fruit,
Trois. Three.
Monfieur de trois au boifleau , ou de trois. àyne
cfpée, Looke Monfieur,
Secret de trois fecret de tous: Prov, As good let all,
as three,men know a thing. fri 10}
Troifiefine. The third.
Trokalazou, Looke Profchalazon. ROUBITE
Troller. Hounds to trowle, raunge,or bunt out of order.
Trollerie: £ 4 trowling,or difordered raunging a hua-
ting out of order, à A®,
Trombe: £ 4 round and hollow ball of wood, hauing a


| ‘peaks lea cling top, and making a great ni?


asa : :
: tthe Cramp- fh, searmed otberwifé Tor-


npe: f. À Trump,or Trumpet ; ao awrithen,and
x Hunters bornes al a opsafè the fol cal-


hom
Trompe
peu
hy
a: 2 off.
T
flocke
when
flemme.
7
pbuilt out | Tronçonné
£ maymed.
Lae mF


them. up

.Trompé: m, ée:£. Deceiued, coufened,beguiled,chea-
ted,circumuented,ouerraught,

Tromper. To coufen, deceiue, beguile, delude circum-
uent,cheat,ouerreach. .

Tromper vn corbeau à bouche beante. To beguile
or deprine a greedie fellow of a thing which he gaped
for ; or (much more properly) to bring him into a fooles
Paradice ; and, by commending, to get from,him that,
which otherwife he would not,or in diftretion he fhould
not, by any meanes haue parted with, t
Qui d'autruy tromper fe meten peine,fouventluy |

en advient la peine : Pro. Looke Peine.

Tromperie: f. 4 crafi,wile, fraud, fallacie,deceit, cou.
fenage, delufion, circumuention, ouerreaching, impof.
ture, fopbiftication,tricke of leger demain. :

Trompeter. To trumpet,or found a Trumpet,

Trompeteur: m. 4 Trumpetter.

Trompette: m. as Trompeteur.

Trompette: f. 4 Trumpet ; afo,the Needle-fifh,Garre-
Jifh, Horne-beake, Horne-fifh, or Piper-fifh; tearmed
thus ; becanfé ber beake doth fomewhat refemble a
Weft bon cheval d ompette. He fi

eft bon cheval de tr tte. He feares no noife,
big words affright him not. 6


‘A pain, & oignon trompette neclairon:Pro.warre
is feldome heard of in bare,and barren places ; poore
dad peaceably at


men may, if they lif, line quietly,
[2


Trompetté: m. ée: € Trumpetted, or noifed abroad ;
publifhed.or proclaymed with found of Trumpets.

Trompetteur : m. 4 Trumpeter.

roi ur: m. À deceiner, beguiler, coufener,cheater,

conycatcher, fraudulent dealer,

‘A trompeur trompeur &demy: Prov, Applyable*

unto a knaue, ouer-raught , or ouer-matched by a

ue à à
a plus de trompeurs que de trompes: Pro. The

pl A fuller of te Es of. pars ting.

Trompeufement. Deceitfiully,coufening!y, cauteloufly,
fraudulently.

Tron: m. A peece of a thing; eras Tronc.

Tronc: m. The trunke, flocke, flemme, bulke,or bodie of
a tree,crc, without the boughes ; alfo,atrunke,or head-
leffe bodie of man or beaft; alfo, the poore-mans box in
Churches ; alfo,the Boat called a Lighter.

Troncation: £ A truncation,trunting,mutilation, cut-
ting off. |

Tronche:f. A great peece of timber;or es Tronc.

ronché: m. ée:f, Stocked, growne a flocke,or in the


OCH. ,
Troncher. To flock,or yeeld a flock, or grow inthe flock, À
asatree. i
Troncher les grains. Many flantks,or eaves to Spring
… ftonrone root of corne, FT ORs
Tronchet: m. 4 truncheon; a little trunke, fiache, or


Tronchou:m. A certaine blew-backt, filuer-bellied,
© and fmooth-skind flat fifb;without shales, -
Len To cut es Lan mé into ram
Tr sm, ée:f. 1 5 lopped, or cut
made headlefe, branchleffe, memberlefe; mutilated,


BS Sen Ae : à
| amt iad Dem amie,
Tron-


. "1


‘| Tronfon: m.4 truncheon,or little trunkesa thicke flice,


“| Troquet: m. Akind of fnall,obite, and fect apples


| | T/ R' Or


Tronçonner. Totraakes lop cut off; tomake beadleffe,
branchlefe,member leffe ; to mutilate,or mayme. .
Tronçonneur : m. À traaker, or lopper ; 4 cutter of

things into truncheous,or lumpes. >: ur}
Trondel: m. The trandle, or trundling of a ball, dre.


Pic. | |
Lie ES To trundle as a ball, exc; or,2s Rondeler.
ŒPic. i 21 4 1 ) À
Trone. Looke Throne.

Trongne: f. The fase, afpeët, looke , wifage, counte-

« nance, RIDY

‘a la trongne cognoift on l'yvrongne: Prov. Two
things a drunkard doe diftlofe, a fierie face,and crim-
fon nofe, À
_ Bonne bouche bonne trongne: Prov. A temperate
-mouth-brecdeth: a fresh complexion; or, awell-fbap'd
mouth makes all the face fbev faire ; or, a filent mouth
fettles the countenance, :: ?. À r
Trongné. Of the face; alfo,fromthe teeth outwardsalfo,
mockine,mowingsor making faces at.

Trongneux: m-eufe:£ Making, yeelding, or fhewing
a (owre countenance.
Trongnon: m. 4s Trognon, saditt th tin std
Tronqué: mée:f, Trunked,cut off ut in two,or into

peeces. ;
Tronquemént: m, 4 trunking, Rocking,or cutting off.
Tronquément, Peecemeale,with whole peeces cut off;
alfo, lamely,or by halues.
*Tronquer. To trunkesto locke; to cut off,in two,or into
peeces..


luncheon,or peece cut off. ‘
Tronfonner. Loske Tronçonner.. 2... 01")
Trop. Too much, ouermucb, fuperfluous, or fuper fluitie
of, exce[feymore them needs; al/o,much,greatly, mainly,
mightily. ; À
Tiop eft trop; &, Trop n’eft point bon : Pro, Too
much is too much; and,too much ys good for notbing.
Afez y afi tropn'y a: Prov. Esoagh there is where
too much is not. \
Nul n'a trop pour fey de fens,d'argent,de foy:Pr6.
Looke Sens,or Foy. sut
Trophée: m.4 Trophies figne or token of viélorie; any
[paples gotten from a conquered encmie, and kept; or
hanged up,as monuments of the conqueft. :
Tropique: m. ATropicke, or Circle in the firmament,
|: spberennto the Sunne once commingseither deftends,or
afcends,as being at the bighefi,or lowefl; and hence it
Sisthat therebe two Tropicks. io te |
Tropique de Cancer, oud’ Eft. 7s abowt the 12 of
| June, when the Sunae (at the bighelt) enters into the
: ofirft point of Cancer. À boul
Tropique de Capricorne,ou d'hyver. 7s about.the
+2 day of Decémber,the Sunne then (at the loweft) en-


tring into the firft point of Capricorne..-
Troppeller. To troope sor flocke together.
Trog:m. À trucké on trucking,bartering, fwabbing, ar
exchange of one. thing for anothers... ae |
Troquer. To trucke,chop, fivab, feoorfe, barter, change,


exchange one thing for.another


: vr
» ;


on A trulfe,packet bundle, fardles< 507
rune ap st G2: s1a ool
tt e-queue: “4 dogke forthe traine fa bee |


su


re | W Paes ai
Trot: m. The trot of a horfe. giollishslAD
Troter,& Troteur. Looke Trotter Trotteur. ny |
Trotier: m. ere: f. Trotting, ar vehich trostethy ayo, |
t


Trotiere: £ A raumpe, fisgig, fiski


Trotigner. To trip it, trample faft, ar trot thicke and


posé: m.éc sf, Trotted.


Trot à
Trotteur>m. A traiter ; alfoan.earth-plantet; a roamer,


Trottier. as Trotteur, …
Trottouér: m, 4 board in the louer of à Douecoat for


Tok 207


gadding, or wandering much vp and downe; as in the
Prouerbe, Fille feneftriere, & trotiere rarement


bonne mefnagiere. ‘
¢ bufwiferaungia
damfell,gadding or wandering none i 4


fhorisalfo,10 gad,runne , roame, trot much to and fro,


or up and downe.


rotter. To trot like, or as, 2 horfe ; alfo,to gad, or goe
much abroad,
Trotter de ranco. To pafe from ranke to ranke, to
vs fromone 10 anotber,
e,as Troticre.


gadder,wanderer up and downe.


Pigeons to alight on; alfo, the Seat, or Tribunal of a
Iudge ; alfo,bablingjor pratling (in Pedlers French.)
Trottres: f.Low trefles to beighren coffers wihall. ¢Or-


canhois: UE
Trou: m..4 bole, narrow pallage, or iffue ; and thence
‘alfoja pore inthe bodie ; andthe bung-bole.fündament,
nock-androe. '
Trou de chou,de Lentifque,&c;(1n flead of Tronc)
the flemme,or flaulke of a Cabbage ec.
aces ‘Madame. The Gume called Trunkes, or the
Hote.
ioe dune rets. The mafh of a net.
rou d'un fouffler. The Gullet month, or nofe of a
’  paire of bellowes.
Trou de Ja Sybille, The arfe-hole. :
Avoir à chafque trou vne cheville. To have an an-
fiver for euerie obie£lion a folution for euerie queflor,
“an exeufe for euerie fault,or a colour for eucrie error.
Fairé vn trou àlanuié.. To walke, or goe abroad a-
nights; to trauell, or take a iourncy by might 5 alfo, to
… Pinke afide; or fly'y to he one before,be be miffed, or
Sfi{petted to flirre. sadsaaits 4 nets!
Sie vn pertuis dedans vn trou. To doe iuft no-
thivig. yo. RAV 4 Hoar
Le cats trop ouvert fous le nez fait porter fouliers
defchirez : Prov. \Glationie breedes pouertie ; the
month too open makes men weare lorne fhooes.
Se Troüant: Haling,or growing fill of holes.
Trouble: m. Trouble aifquiet,molefiationsdifixrbance, |:
turmoyle ; a fedition,tumult purliburlie; a furyescoyle,
or broyle; alfo, a let, barre, flopsimpcachment, hinde- |


rance. so
Trouble: com, Thicke myddiesunfèttled, pudliesdarke,
Gui ereets Mniatderhtes de ‘
\ Pefchenen eau trouble: To fifh im troubled or thicke
a to fecke for gaine out of otber mens brayles,or
elles; oQObT nb Sitiracs! nos à tasideent
. Vin trouble ne brife dents: Pro.Thick mine breakes
no mans bones ;- fees things, goe downe without a


fhoo-bor neg inn vs 61 ri liner Ja BELT Whey
Troublé: mée: £ Troubled, diftur bed, difquieted,
Tele ture 5 a lened, flopped, empeache hi


Tenable ke ay 4 vaine, or importunate buffaone;
» on any one wee by idle chat or va(rafinable cbidine ,of-
fendeth,or cloyetb.fuch as would be merriea 1. 1 ©
Tioublement: m. 4 troubling, bufiine,difiurbing dif
quieting ; letting impeaching pinderings. shel. ab.
Troubler. To #owble, difiu be, tarmoyle; buliesburrie, |
difquies midlefl; 1e marre;difor der confounds ¢ a


is Google


Original tron,
THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


EL 2 a


TR oO


alfo,to barre, flop,let,binder impeach.
Trouée:f. A gap,or mufet in a hedge,
Se Trouér. To hole,to grow fill of holes mufets,or gaps.
Trougne. Looke Trongne.
Froupe : £,A troupe,crue, rout, rable, throng, or multi-
tude of people, crc.
Troupeau: m. A flockesbeard,or drove of cattell; alfo,
a heape,or bundle.
Ofter les chiens pour venir à bout du troupeau.
The watchfull dog to kill, thathe the flocke may (pilljor
(as a fentence) the way a flocke to (pill,is watchfull dogs
to kill,
Sottes ia? marier font fafcheux troupeaux a
garder: Bro. A combrous cattell maidens proue,ywhen
their greene ficknefe growes of loue. :
Troupelet: m. 4 ttle troope,rowt ; flocke beard,
Troupet. 7n “ead of Toupet, €Rab.
Trouppe,& Trouppeau. as Troupe,& Troupeau.
Trouffe: f. .4 Qumer for arrowes ; alfo, a confening
tricke,blart, flampant ; alfo,as Trefle,
Droiét de trouffe. Looke under Droi&.
Trouflé: m.ée: f. Truffed,or tucked vp; twitched ups
alfo, (poyled,caft avway,vndone,ouerthrowne.
_. Sans cela il eftoir trouffé en male, Seeke Male. :
Trouffeau: m.4 Trufell;the upper yroa,or mould,thats
vfed in the [lamping of coyne ; alfo,a (little) truffe, far-
dle,bundle,or bunch; alfo, as Serpaut,
Trouffe-galant :m. Stoope-Gallant ; a kind of plague
wherewith the richeft, and firongeft are the fooneft
infetled, and once infected, dead within two or three
dayes:(This Plague raged in Puy,a partof dt a
about the yeare 1546 ; and (uch another(or at the leaft
one of the name) in England not long agoe.)
Trouflel. 4 Troufeau,
. Troufle-queué: f. 4 docke for a horfes trayne.
Troufler, To truffe,tucke, packe, bind or gird in, plucke
or twitch up ; alfo, to plow ground fleightly a little be-
fore it be fowne,
Troufler leurs quilles, Ils penfoient à trouffer
leurs quilles.7hey thought ofsthey prouided or prepared
sthew departure.
touffer vn verre de Vin, To quaffe, or fetch, off a
glaffe of wine,
Trouffeure: f 2s Troufloire; alfo,a truffe ufed by fuch
as are burft. ‘ ,
Trouffis: m. A tucke,or tucking up,in a garment.
Troufloire: f. A belt,or girdle.
Trouflure:£ as Troufleure.


Trouvage: m, 4 finding; inuenting, deuifing ; lighting


on,
Trouvé: m.ée: f, Found; deuiféd,contriued,inuented ;
bad, gotten, obtained,

il set bien trouvé de la foire. He bath made a good

market, he hath {ped verie well.

Tuas bien trouvé ton homme de 10000 efcus.(Iro-
nically)1 am a like man indeed to haue 10000 crownes,
= §) Tuluyasbien trouvé la veine. Thou baft hit bin
right; thou haft toucht him to the quiche,

: t:m. 4 inuenting ; | on.
er. To find ; inuent, contrine, deuifé ; light on,


| meet with, take inthe manner; alle to ge, obtaine,


Trouver à dire, Yolecke, wan mie he things me
aa ee
| Trouver vneboule. To hit a bowle,

| Trouver la febve au gafteau, Looke Febve,


Go gle


| Truelle: f. 4 | “4


Trouver à tondre fur vn oeuf, Te picke matter out
of a barren fubieét, or meanes out of a bare imploy-
ment, Re
Se trouver à tel lieu, To be,be prefènt,or appeare,at
Sach a place. * 5
Ic ne trouveray rien mauvais de vous, J will take
nothing ill at your bands,
pop: le Hees pres mal trouver. The di-
well were in it if you not be well withall; or.
muft needs pak sabes Ftrow. “Ke or
Tuten trouveras bien, Thos wilt fpeed, or thriue,
well withall,
Qui bien fera bien fe trouvera: Pro. we fay of one
that does a good and charitable deed,He will find it in
another world,
Tout fe trouve au raftelier de cuifine: Prov. Looke
Raftelier, ;
Trouverre: m. Ax ordinarie Poet, Rimer,Verfifier,
Ballade-maker. (vieil mot.)
rouveur: m. À finder, inuenter,contriuer,deuifer.
Fours: Ê An inuentrix; or a woman that findeth
ought.
Tru: m, as Triage; or,as Trew.
Triage: m. A toll,cuflome,tax, impofition, =
Truan. as Truand. :


Truand: m. 4 common beggar,vagabond,togne,a lari
re Prier er 6 Pr rar
let, filthie or lewd fellow,


~ Qui fit Normand il fit truand: Pro. He that a Nor-


mand made a beggar made; (for the Normands haue
beene more fleeced,and barried then any people fubieë
unto the Crowne of France.)


Truand: m.ande: € Beggarlie,ra(callie,roguifh,
Cens truans, Double Cens payed by Purchafers(with-
in the dominion of Sociines, which belongs unto Blois)
for the firft yeare onely in lien of all Lods,and Ventes;
and generally, any dead or bare Cens, which yeeld no
further profit unto the Lords thereof.

Truandaille: £ 4 crue of rafcallie beggars,a vabble of


lewd rogues,
Truande:f, A filthie beggarlie queane ; a Doxit, or
Mort,
Truandeau: m. A young rafeall, rogue,beg car,
Truander. To beg,or mc 3 to se hs 04 ps Give like
a rogue ; to carrie bimfelfe moft bafely, feuruily, vmvor
aie oppre(fe, wrong abufe,
ruandife: f, Beggavie canting begging ; roguerie, kna-
uerie,confening villanie,
Truble: m. 4 little fifh-net for Stues, and finall Ponds ;
ï alfo,the perk cape caked,a Shouelar. ae
tuc: m. A blow,or thacke.@Gale. alfo,t i
fens of the lips , heressel we ufé to cana
orfe. f


Te vous grupperay autruc. 7 {hall take you napping,
or catch you as you goe by. :

Truch : m. A Tracheman,an Interpretor.  ;|

F + To interpret,or play the interpretor,to
Jèrue as an inter pretor unto,to mediate by imterpretors,
or by interpretation,

Truc t. as Trucheman.

Trucheran. The bearbe S.lohns wert,

Trucheter. To fneege.

Truculent: m. ente: f, Truculent,cruell,threatfull of
countenance terribly looking, ;

Truege: f. The Dorce, or Gold-fifh; (Looke Truette;)


Trucie. as Truege.”


me na


“A propos truelle. See Propos,
Truelle: f. Atrowell-füll ; or,a clap,flat,or flamp with
a Trowell, '
Truelleur: m. 4 Troweller ; a Plaiflerer, or any one
that workes with a Trowell,
Truette: f The Dorce, or Gold-fifh ; called thus, or
Truege, becaufe fhe is as greedie, and rauenous as a
Som,


Trufemande: £ Female Sothernwood, mountaine So-
thernwood, great Sothernwood,

Truffaut bourdant, Betweene ieaft and earneft.

Trufte: £. 4 gibe, mocke, flowt, ieaft, gullerie ; alfo, a
Saligot, or water-Nut ; alfo, a moft daintie kind of
round and ruffet root, or rootie excrefcence, which
growes in forefisor dry and fandie erounds,and with-
in the ground, but without any flalke, leafé, or fiber
annexed unto it,

Truffer. To moche,deride, flowt,jeaft or gibe at; alfo, to
nod,or (hake the head,as thofé doe that approue not the
thing they heare.

ae € A gibe,icaft, flowt, mockerie ; alfo, alittle
Truffe,

Truffeur: m. 4 mocker, flowter, giber, ieafter.

Truffler. as Truffer. à

ufle: €. as Truffe (inthe fécond, and third fence.)

Truie. as Truye.

Truine: f. The fifh Tunnie.

Truite: f À Trowr.

Truite franche; &, royale ; &, faulmonniere, The
Salmon Trowt.

Trulle: nx, A part of the Imperiall Palace of Conftanti
nople,wherein matters of State were ordinarily difcuf-
{éd,and difpatched.

Trulle: f. The fowle called a Shouelar.

Trumeau de boeuf. A knuckle bough,or leg,of Beefe.
Trumeau de Veau. as Rouëlle de Veau,

Trupelu. as Trepelu.

Trupet: m. 4 lock,or foretop of haire.

Truquar. ¢Gate, To knocke,or fight. qRab.

ey (An Fateriettion importing indignation.) tufh,tut,

ÿ man,
Trut avant. 4 figs end, no fuch matter, you are much
deceiued ; alfo, on afore for fhame.

Truye: f. A Saw; alfo, a warlike engine vfed in old
time for the beating downe of walls; alfo, a kind of
Game, me à
Truye de mer. The Porpoff, or fea-Hog.

Honteux comme vne truye qui emporte vn le-

vain. Looke Honteux.

Entendre autant en quelque chofe comme fait

truye en efpices, That 15 af nothing. ,
Tourner les truyes au foin. To anfwer from the

matter.

Truye aime mieux bran que rofes: Prov. The Sow

had father lye in dung then on a bed of Rofés.

Truye ne fonge qu’ ordure; &, Toufiours truye

fonge bran: Pro. Bafe minds haue alwayes bafé, and
beafllie thoughts ; their wifhes, proiects, dreames, are

like themfelues. . i

Si truye forfaié les pourceaux le fouftrent: Pro. If
the
and harmeleffe Pigs are punifht for it.

Truyes. as Truyettes,

Tru : À Ayoung,or little Sow,

Truyettes: € The markes of fhin-burning ; the red (cor-
ches,or [pots on burnt (bins. ae

Trycher,& Trycherie. as Tricher,& Tricheric.,

Trye. Looke Trice,


‘Sow doe a fault and men abborre it, her young,


awe .,


Trygonne: £ 4 kind of Scatefifh.

Tu aucem.Vous en fçaurez le tu autem. You fhall know
the point, head, o7 knot of the matter ; orjyou {hall un-
derfland all the ftorie,the whole matter ut felfe, :

Tube: m. 4 Conduit-pipes alfo, the hollow of the back-
bone, or the pipe through which the marrow thereof
doth runne,

Tubercle: m. The fmall rifing or fwelling of a wheale,
pufh, powke, or pimple; aljo,a pufh,or wheale.

Tuberculeux: m. eufe: f. Swelling like axpufh, or |
wheale ; alfa, fill of pufhes, powkes,or wheales, |

Tubereux: m. eufe: £ Swelling, bunchie knobbie.

Tubcrofitez:f.Tuberofities,(wellings bunches, wennes;

obs ; knots.

Tubiluftre: m. 4 day whereon the Trumpets dedicated
vato facrifices were hallowed , and the Trumpetters
with water purged. (Rab. ‘

Tubule: m. 4 little Conduit-pipe,or hollow reed.

Tucquet: m.4 little hillor bullocke,a little afcent or ri-
fig of ground.

Tudey. (Fondly) for Vertu Dieu. @Lotrainois,

Tué: m. ée: f Killed, flaine,murthered,mafacred.

Tue-chien: m. The bearb Dogs-bane ; alfo,medow Saf-
fron,wild Saffron.

Tue-loup:m, The bearbe Wolues-bane.

Tue-loup iaulne, Yellow wolft-bane, plaine wolfe-
bane, Heath Crowfout.

Tuement: m, A killing, flaying, maf[acring,

Tuer. To kill, flay,murther,maf[acre ; alfo, as Turoyer.
Tuer le feu. To quench,or put out,the fire.

Tuer vn mercier pour yn peigne,To do great harme
vpon a finall occafion, FT ,
Il'en tuera dix de la chandelle, &vingr du chande-
lier. He will doe wonders (fronically.)

Tel tue qui ne penfe que blefler ; &, Tel cuide |
frapper qui tue: Prov. The wounding mind hath oft a
murtheriag band; a burt intended with death is ended.

Tuerie: f. A flaughter, killing, occifion, maffacre, mur-
ther. ae i

Tueur: m. 4 killer, flaycr, murtherer,maffacrer.

Tuf: m. A kind of white-fand,or foft and brittle ftone,of-
tenlimes couering or lying in flakes on, good foyle,

Tufeux: m.cufe: f. Couered with,or füll of, Tuf.

Tufte: m, A footman, or fouldior feruing on foot, (vieil


mot.)

Tuffe. Pierre de tuffe. as Tuf,

Tuffeau. as Tuf.

Tuffiere: f. A bed of Tuf; the ground, or Quartie
wherein itis gotten,

Tugnicien: m. Looke Tunicien.

ugure:m, 4 cottage, or countrey houfe, a fhepheards
coat, fhed,or bullie.

Tugurion: m. as (ora little) Tugure.

Tuiau. Looke Tuyau,

Tuile:f. A tile. ;
Sonner la tuile. To ring, or knocke to dinner, by firi-’
king ona fonorous kind of tile ; a phrafe vfed among
the Capucins, onely in fome places; for in others they
haue Bells (as we in our Colledges) or Plates of yron, for
the fame purpofe. Ly

Tuileau: a5 A little tile, or broken tile. 2

Tuilerie: f, À tile-kill, or place wherein tiles be made;
alfo,tiling,or tiles.

Tuileur: m; A tiler,or a tile-maker.

Tuileux: m. eufe: f Full of tiles.

Tuilleau. See Tuileau. à

Tuillette:f. A little tile; alfo,a wedge,or lingot of gold,


or filuer, Kkkk Toile |


= gitized -by Go: gle


nal from


Original fro
THE OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


. + We


Tuillier: m. 4 Tiler.


| alfo,a little tyle.
| Tuition: f. Tuition, protection, defence, gard.
Tulbant: m. as Turbant.
Tuleau, See Tuileau.
Tulcbute: f. The pipe of a fountaine,or gutter.
Tulipan: m, The delicate flower called a Tulipa, Tali-
pit, or Dalmatian Cap;and by fome (though not fo pro-
perly) Lillie Narciffus.
Tulippe. as Tulipan,
Tumbe,& Tumber. Looke Tombe,& Tomber.
Tumbe. The great féa-Dragon, or Quaniner ; alfo, the
Garnard,called fo at Roan. :
Tumbereau: m. 4 Tumbrell.
Tumefié: m. ée: f. Swollen, or made to [well ; puffed


Up.
Tumefier. To make to fiwell,or puffe up.
Tumeur: £, À tumor, felling vifing or puffing vp of the


Cj).

Tes m., A tumult uprore, fedition,broyle ruffling,
flirre,infisrreétion commotion,burlyburly.

Tumultuaire: com.Tumultuarie,rafh,difordered bud-
led up in haft, ruffled or fhuffied vp on a fuddaine, done
with more [peed then heed, more feare then adwife-
ment.

Tumultuairement. Tumultuarily, rafbly,diforderedly,
in haft,on a fuddaine,with much feare,without any ad-
uifement,

Tumultucufement. Tumult uoufly, turbulently, fediti-
oufly, moft troublefomely, ina terrible vprore, with a
great hurrie or flirre.

Tuinultueux: m.eufe: £ Tumultuous, turbulent, (edi-
tious, mutinous,moft troublefome, full of flirre,broyles,
bufiaeffe,all on a hurrie,or in a hurlyburlie.

Tunal: m. The Indian Fig-tree.

Tunicien:m. À Barbarie Faulcon; and particularly,
that Faulcon,which is gotten in the countrey about Tu-


nis.

Tunicis. L’herbe de tunicis. Frothie or fpatling Pop-
pie; alfo,the bearbe that beareth fivect williams,

Tunique:£ A Coat-armor ; and generally, any fleeue-
leffe long Facket, or Coat; alfo, a thinne coat, or skinne
couering the eye,drc. ;
La tunique agnelette. as Agneliere.

Tuph: m, as Tuf; 4/0, rubbifh.

Tupin: m. A pipkin, or earthen pot.
Be bonne terre bon tupin: Pro, Good cloth of good
wooll; good fluffe good garments yeeldeth.

Turaulx: m. Old Mole-hills,or billocks raifed by Moles,
ere, and ouergrowne with grafie. .

Turban: m. A Turbant, a Turkifh hat, of white and
fine linnen wreathed into a rundle ; broad at the bot-
tome toinclofe the bead, and lefening, for ornament,
towards the top.

Turbateur: m. 4 troubler,diflurber,difquieter.

Turbation: £. A trouble, or troubling ; a diflurbance,

_ moleftation,difquieting. ‘

Turbe:£ as Tourbe; alfa, a troope (confifiing at the
leaf) of tenne witneffes; two fuch troopes being requi-
red to the ¢
for the expofition of a written one.

Turbentine: £ Turpentine,

Turbet: m. The name eg a graffe wbere-
of doth fireighten the crooked flocke whereon it is


ft ee sibs’, 24 heal
poemes.


rouement of an unwritten cuflome,and |


‘ wind, or florme. .
Tuilot: m, À tile-fhard,a broken tyle,or peece of a tyle; | Turbiné: m.ée: &£ Fafhioned like a Top, fharpe at the


bottome,and broad at the top.
Turbic: m. Seraphions Turbith, fea Starrewort, blue
Daifie or (amomill, Hogs-beanes.
Tae des Apothicaires. Turbith of the fhops white
Turbith, : :
Turbit baftard, The root of the flinking Carrot, and
of the Spunge Efula; both too often fold, by coufeners,
r the trne Turbith.
urbit blanc. white Turbith,Turbith of the fhops,the
beft Turbith, which is the root of the Syrian, or Antio-
chian Scammonie ; alfo, the reddi(h hearbe Alypum, or
Alypia; talked of, but not otherwife named,by our Eng-
lifh Herbarif.
urbit faux. The root of the deadlie, or ftinking Car-


rot.

Turbit noir. Blacke Turbitb, Duack{aluers Tur bith,
fula maior,

Turbit de la Pouille. as Turbit baftard,

Turbot: m. The Turbot fifh.

Turbulent: m. ente: £ Turbulent, bluflering, flormie,
tempeftuons ; troublefome, vnquiet, contentious, bufie,

Seditions. LT De
inhumé. To blufter, burrie, florme; vex, turmoyle, |
ifquiet.

Turc: m. 4 Turke. ’
Herbeau Turc, ou du grand Turc. Rxpturewort,
Burfiwort.

Turc: m. VE : £ Turkifb, of Turkie; belonging to a
Turke; alfo,Turkeïs-like; whence ;
Couleur Turque. Azure, Sky-coiour, the colour of a |
Turkeis-flone (betweene a blue, and an Azure.)

Turcée de raifins, A clufter of grapes.

Turci: m, A caufey, rampire, or banke fir the keeping
backe,or holding in,of waters.

Turcie: f. as Turci; a/fo,the raifing of a banke,rampier;
or canfey, for the holding in, or keeping backe, of wa-


ters.
Turcot: m. The little afh-coloured, and long-tongued
bird,called a wrynecke.
Tureaux: m, 4s Turaux. ,
iis Sen Mon tur. My pillicocke , my prettie
naue,
Turgent: m. ente: f Swelling, vifing, puffing vp,firon-


ting ont,

Turgon: m. 4 kind of red Beets which haue neither
{ent,nor fauor.
urguet : m, 04 little wimble; alfo, Amelcorne, or
Starchcorne , tearmed particularly, Double .tur-


uet.
Pépin: m. À grub,mufbrome, flart-up, new-nothing, |
man of no value. ;
Turine. as Truffe (in the laft fence.) :
Turonde: f. 4 round pellet,or peece of dough, paie, or
bread, wherewith fowle is crammed ; alfo, a Hawkes


cafling. .
gi A com. Foule, onglie, filtbie, difbenourable, vn-


e
Turpitude: £ Turpitude, filthineffe,or a filthie aët,oug- |
ap leo men rm al P:
Turpot: m. 4 certaine peece of timber (whereof there
be fèure, two in the prow, and two in the poope) of a
Ship, fafened vato the Varengues, and feruing, among
re pr to keepe the artillerie from recopling too
e backe.
uefque: com. Tur kifh,Turke-like,of,or belonging
to,the Tarkes. Pa
_ Reve-


Original from


THE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


I
Fe
f
E


POP eT


rvs


TV RY i


V> AXiCy


Reverence Turquefque. 4 nod withthe head. -

Turquet. as Turguet.

Turquie: f: Turke. à |
Bled de Turquie. Turkie corne, or Turkie wheat; of
diners kinds,and colours,

Turquin.45 CouleurTurque(vnder Turc;)or Couleur
Turquine(vader Couleur; )al/o,a kind of dark-greene
Pumpion.


LA


Turquois: m. oife: £ Turkifh ; whence, Arc Tur |”
Aye The hearbe Time.


quois, The Turkifh Long-bow,

Turquoife: f. A Turquess, or Turkifh-flone.

Turremnent: m. A violent fhocke, ioult,or iurring, as of
an Engine of batterie againfi a wall. i

Turtle, 2s Turcée, à

Turfie. as Turcie.

Turturelle: f.4 Turtledoue, ”

Turumber.4a auncient Arabian word, fignifying the f-
aelt fort of fugar:

Tufé: m.ée: & Pounded, brayed, beaten, or bruifed in a
mortar,

Tute:£ 4 hole,or berric made by a Conie.

Tutelaire: com. Tutelarie, carding, protetling, patro-
aixing defending.

Tutcle: € wardfhip ; gardianfbip,the cuftodie of a child
bai age ; alfo, tuition, defence , protection, (afe-
gard.

Tuteur : m. 4 Tutor,Gardian,Ouerfeer.


| Tuthie: £ Tutie; a medecinable flone,or duft, faid to be


the heauier fèyle of Braffe, cléauing to the.upper fides,


and tops of Braffe-melting houfes : and [uch doe ordi- |


narie Apothecaries pafje away for Tutie, although the
true Tutie be not beanie, but light and white like flocks
of wooll, falling into dujt as foone as it is touched ; this
is bred of the (barkles of brafen furnaces, whereinto
flore of the mineral Calamine, beaten to dufshath been


caf. ON
Tuthie Alexandrine. The beft kind of artificial Ca-
lamine, tearmed by Phifitions, Botryitis.

Tutoyer. To thou one, :

Tutrice: f. Atutrix, or tuterelfe; a deféndreffe,or gar-
dianeffe.

Tutfan: m. Tutfan,Parke-leaues ; (an hearbe.)


‘Tutuyer.as Tutoyer.


Tutye. Looke Tutie. z pV
Tuyau: m. A pipe,quill,cane,reed,canell. rtin V
Tuyau de bled, 4 firaw,or flaulke of corne,
Tuyau de mer. À red féa-worme found among rocks,

: incloféd in a white, round, and (on the outfide) rugged
pipe, or fhell, , L d
Enter en tuyau. # Enter en canon, See Canon.

Tyberiade: € 4 Topographe; the modell or draught of
a place, called o of a booke of that name, compofed by
Bartholus the Lawyer, who was the firft that graced
bis works with fuch figures, À

Tygre. Locke Tigre. .

Tale. A Timbrell ; or, a little brafen drumme to
dauncé by. &Langucd. EST

Tymbon. A kind of brafen drumme. bY

Tymbre,& Tymbré. Looke Timbre,& Timbré, |”

Tymbrée: £."Fifb-Mintywater-Mint,brooke- Mint:

Tympan :m. A Timpanyr Timbrell ; al[o,a Taber;alfo,
the Gable-end of à houfè; alfo, a Printers Timpane;
that whereon be layes the fheet,or leaf thats 16 be
printed ; alfoy the great wheele of a Crane; alfo, a
Mill-sheele that taketh,and yeeldeth water in tur-
ning, =
Tympan d'une campanelle. ‘The broad-end of a

_ Campanell,  * /
©


Digitized. by Go: gle


. :
Tympani dentelée, The cog-wheele of a Mill.
propane, Looke Tympanne, has
SS Sa set To play on a Timpan,Timbvell,or Taber.
15 gua as Tympaner; 40, to defame, flaunder,
raduce, ; 4 Bi


Tympanifte: m. 4 Timpanift ; a player on a Timi an

es alfo,one that batho po. we qRab. : a

tMpanhes m, The panaell or ware onthe top,or
Velo apillar. x ‘ =


pa Looke Tine,

yphaine: f. The Epipbanie, or Twelfib day in Chrifl-
MAS,

Typhe. -water-Torch, Catsitayle, Reed Mace, Ditch
Downe,the marfh beetle or pefile.

Typher. Looke Tiffer.

rf ret . A kind of hard-skinned Blind-worme, or

low-worme which is not verie venomous... hs

Typhones. Great,or violent whirlewindto@ Rab.

Tyran: m. A Tirant; a cruel King,Lord,Ruler; a vio-
lent Gouernor. :

Le in. A pettie Tyrant.
‘yrannie: f. Tyrannie, Lorldlie crueltie, a violent or
bloudie Gouernment.

Tyrdnniquement. Tyrannoufly cruelly, bloudily,

er nizer. To tyrannixe,or play the Tyrant.

Laser Looke Tiraffer.

repet: m, A great farter, (Rab.
er. Looke Tirer.
yromantie: f. Diuination by a Cheefe.

Tyrouér: m. 7s, in a Violin, or fmall Fiddle, the flat
peece behind the bridge whereto the firings be faflened;
alfo,as Tirouér,

Tyrfe. The daÿt,or iauelin of Bacchus. ‘

Tyrfigere: com. Juie-bearing,or decked with Juie.


V e


A. (Is the fecond Perfon of the Fmpcratine Mood
of the Verbe Aller) goe, goe thy wayes, get hence,
get thee gone; alfo (the third Perfon of the Pre-

Sent tenfe of the Indicative Mood; whence, Il Vas) be
goes, wends, walkes on; Tis alfo vfèd fometimes as a
Subflantiuc; whence;

Vn vacy vala. One that is fent vp and downe on er-
rands: | :

- Vn va par tout. The fame ; alfô,a quiche or nimble fel-
low; one that difbatches his worke apace; one that.
foone vids way.

Vacabons:m. Vagabonds, rogues. ‘ P

Vacant: m; The renenue of a Benefice during vacdu- |
cie.

Vacant: m. ante : f. Vacant, emptie, void"; at lei
Lure ; without vfè, or imployment ; without owner ;
whence; ) FAST
Biens vacans. Wayfés, firayes ; a purfe, or treafure
found; am land or thing, which is without owner. ~~

Vacarme:f. 4 battaile,or fight ; and,the rufiling noy/e
made by armor,or armed men, in a battaïle ; alfo,a fud-
daine inuafion or affault, or the boifterous burrie it poes
with; alfo, a tumultuous garboyle, burlyburlie, flurre,

le :


coyle, bs
Vacation: f, A vacation,vacancie, leifure, ceafing from

labor ; alfo,a trade,art handicraft, profeffion, vocation,

calling, ; x


Vache i f, A Cow; alfo, Neats-leatber ; alo, abeape of
new-made falt. Saw icp
Kak ÿ Vache


Ofiginal from


* THE OHIO STATE*UNIVERSITY, «¢°


A eee LC sit 4 , oe


As as


OSORNO Se OS


VAI


RE TR SEER ay ERROR CR oF cis ps


Vache de Beard. A bafè come worth about vj d
Tourn.

Vache de Foix. The name of an auncient coyne,
which bore on it the flampe of a Cow, the armes of the
old Earles of Foix.

Vache de mer. A kid of daintie Thornbacke hauing
a pointed beake.


Il a mangé de la vache enragée. He bath drunke of | V


many waters, pafed many pikes, tryed many experi-
ments; he hath beene well prattifed in, or beaten unto,
the courfe of the world ; alfo,as under Manger.
Le Diable fera bien aux vaches. There will be an
old flirre,burrying,burlyburly,
Vache de Barbarie qui ne recognoift que fes pro-
pres veaux : Pro. Applyable to one that either fimply
hnowes not,or churlifbly cares not for,more thé her oven,
Vache de loing a laiét aflez:Pro, Things farre-fetcht
are held moft fufficient ; the farther a thing is brought,
the better we thinke of it,
Vne vache prend bien vn lievre: Prov, 4 (ow may
catch a Hare (as under Lievre,)
La vache du riche velle fouvent, celle du povre a-
vorte : Prov. The rich mans Cow(well-fed) does often
calfé,the poore mans cafis hers e>thrines worfeby halfe,
Vache ne fgait que vaut fa queué iufques a ée qu’
elle l'ait perdué: Prov. The want, more then the ufé,
indeares the worth of good things; we know our Pre
bel} when we want them mot.
Auffi toft meurt vache comme veau: Pro.Thes iP
ping Calfe, and wanton Lambe, are oes kild be
their damme.
Qui fe mefle d'autruy meftier il trait fa vache en
yn panier:Pro.He that with other mens trades will be
medling, doth moft-an-end loofe the fruit of his pedling.
Qui ne retire de fa vache que la queué ne perd pas
tout: Prov. He loofes not his whole auayle, that of his
Cow faues but thetayle. —

Vachelette: f. 4 verie little Cow.

Vacherie: f. A heard of kyne ; alfo, a Cow-boufe, or fla-
ble for kyne.

Vachette: f. A Gttle Cow; alfo,as Vache de Foix.

Vachier: m. 4 Cow-heard,or Cow-keeper.
Hier vachier huy chevalier: Pro.One thats raifed,on
a fuddaine, from a bafe,to an honorable,call ing,

| Vaciet: m.The blue or purple Jaciathser Hiacinth,tear-
med by fome, Crow-toes,

Vacilé,& Vacilement. as Vacillé,& Vacillation,

Vaciler. See Vaciller.

‘Vacillation: f. A reeling, flaggering, wagging, Stirring,
wauering,an inconflant mouing.

Vacillé. Reeled, faggered,wagged,wanered,

| Vaciller: To reele, totter, flagger, wag, fhake, wauer, be
loofe, ‘ur e,unconflant moue or flirre inconftantly.

Vacuite: f. Vacuitie,voidne[ft,emptine[e,holernefe,

Vade. Paffe (at Primero,érc) ,

Vagabond: m. 4 vagaband,roanier, faitowr,earth-pla-

— net,wandering idlesbie,ranging ov gadding rogue,

| Va nder. To cad,wander, firay,roame,raunge,va-

de, vagabond it; to ane hither and thither, goe from

BF a me tala up and downe. :


ee :f 4 at efeberd eat sin: 3 af, the


angen


> Diditizad.by Gex gle


pe» vague. The fits whereof doe hold anvncertaire
courfe,

aguer.To wander ,vagarie, gad,raumgesroame fire.
y" often from place to place.


Vagnet. Fiitting, preps fill of waues,as a fea,


Vtt m.eufe:f. The fame; or wauie. full of wanes, |
Vaillamment. Valiantly ,valoroufly,conragioufly,

Vaillance: f. Valiancie,valor courage,

Vaillant: m, 4 mans whole eftate,or worth; all his fub-
lance, meanes, fortunes,
Qui plus qu'il n'a vaillant defpend, il fait Ja corde
À quoy fe pend: Pro. He that feares not 10 fbend more |.
We he hath, fets, at the leafi, one foot in th’hangmens
path.

Vaillant: m. ante: f Valiant,bardie,cowragious; alfo,
right haneft of much worth.
Rien ne vaut l'aflaillant s’il n’eft fort, & vaillant:
Pro. Jn vaine men goe d'afayle, when ferce,or courage


fayle.
pores £ Valianinelfe, conragioufnelfe, bardi-
LIT L
Vain:m, aine :f, Vaine ; emptie, voids ; Puffrates fi-
Aolous, idle, trifling, fond, without purpofe; alo, funt,
weake, feeble, forcelepe,
Vaine pafture, Looke Pafture.
Terre vaine. Awa ground; ange ground which hath
neither feed in,nor fruit vpon,it.
— vaine,& plaëe vuide, which hath neither buil.
ding on it,nor ao in it.


Vfagiers vain riers, Looke Pafturier.
Vain. par ae ;) whence, En vain, 1a vaine,idly,to
no purpofe,


Vain pafturer. To tarne cattell into,or let them ruane

«among, fuch grounds as be held Vaine pafture.

Vaincre. To vanquifh,ouercome,{ubdie, foyleonermaif-
ter, furmount;alfo,to conuince,or put downe by reafon,
or in reasoning.

Vaincu: m.ué: £, Vanquifhed,ouercome, fubdued, foy-
led,ouer-maifiered, furmounted ; alfo,conuinced,or put
downe by reafon,tr in reafoning,

Vainement. Vainely, frinoloufly , to no purpofe, idly,
fondly, foolifbly ; alfo, , fainily ,weakely, feebly, :

Vaineté: f. as Vanité, °

Vainquereffe: f.d vanquifbing or viélorious woman,a
conquereffe.

Niger ses m. 4 vanguifter,ouercommer conqueror,
vitor, fübduer.

Vair: m. A rich frre of Ermines powdered thicke with
blue haires ; alfo, the grayifh colour of fome eyes ; alfo,
that which our Blafonners call Very.

Menu Vair. Minewer ; the fürre of Ermines mixed ,or
(potted with the fire of the wee[ell called Gris. .

Vairé: m.ée: f. Verry; diuerfified with argent and
azure,

V airie. as Vayrie.

Vairole. as Verole. ;

Vaiffeau: m. A vefell (of what kind foeuer.)

Vaifféau circulatoire, A Limbecke,or Stillitorie,
aifleau contenant, ou corpulent. The lower

“ rech, that which bolds the [iuffe which is to be

illed.

Vaifleau long. 4 Galley, Foift, or Brigantine, called

Jo to make a difference betweene them, and a Ship x

which is Vaifleau rond,

Vaiffeau d'un navire, The bulke,bellie,or bodie of a


aifleau d'une tiviere. The channell of a riuer.
4 Doub


Original from
¢ FAEOHIO STATE UNIVERSITY --


VAL


VAD


Double vaiffeau. 4 cauldron,or kettle full of bot wa-
ter; or,as Bain de Maric. à

Qui veut tirer quelque chofe de ce vaifTeau il luy
faut donner du vent, He that will get ought from this
cokes mult commend,or collogue with,bim.

En yaiffeau mal lavé ne peut on vin garder: Prov.
Ju viacleane Caske wine will not keepe.

Va mefchant vaiffeau iamais ne tombe de Ja main:
Pro. That oft proues beft which we lone leaf ; a course
glafe neuer falls vato the ground.

Vaiflelle: £ Peffell (of any fort;) alfo, Plate,

Val: m. 4 vale,vaitey,dale.

Du mont yal. From the top to the bottome.

Par monts, & par vaux. Eerie where, in all places
what{deuer.

Promettre monts, & vaux, To promife Gods Cope,
mountaines of gold,impoffibilities.

Valable: com, Valuable,in force,of value.

Valdimonie. 4 day of apparance; or a promife of, or
bond for apparance at a certaine day,

Valéc:f. A valley; avale,or dale; See Vallée,

Valence: € as Vaillant: m.

és Par val. By fits ,by turnes ; but (lowly for-
ward, @Rab. 5

Viens, f. Garden Valerian,Capons-tayle,Setwall,
Valeriane moyenne. Great wild Valerian,
Valeriane petite. Small wild Valerian,

Grande Valeriane. Garden Valerian; alfo, great
wild Valerian.

Valerienne: f. s Valeriane,

Valet: m. (Quafi va-lez fon maiftre;) 4 groome, yeo-
man, or houfebold fèruant of the meaner fort : Fn old
time it was a more honorable title; for all young gentle-
menyontill they came to be eighteene yeres of age, were
(as at this day Batchelers in Britaine are) tearmed fo;
befides, thofe that waited in the K, Chamber (and who
were, for the molt part, Gentlemen) bad no other title
then of Valets de chambre, vatill that Francis the
firft, perceining fuch as attended him to be no better
then Roturiers, brought in, aboue them, another fort,
and caufed them to be fliled, Gentilshommes de fa
chambre: prefently after which the Title of Valet
grew into difelteeme,and is,at the length become oppo-
fîtevnto that ef Gentilhomme; Looke Varlet,

Valet d'Aoult, 4 bind,or bireling,onely for Harueft-
time.

Valet A bras. 4 groome, hind, or feruant in a mecha-
nicall office; a Labourer.

Valet dechambre. 4 chamberlaine; a groome of, or
waiter in,the bed-chamber ; See Valet. -

Valet de Conftantinople. (Jn the Hiftorie of Ville-


hardouin) autant que Prince. | É
Valet de cuifine. An under-Cooke ; a (cullion, or kit-
chin drudge,


Valet du diable (qui fait plus que I’ on luy com-
“mande;) an ouer-officious fernant;one thats more bufie
then he is bidden to be.

Valet d'Efcolier. 4 Subjifor or Seruant (in ordinarie)
unto a Scholier. F :
Valets dela felte. A kind of Morrifdauncers, attired
like Fooles,and hauing, as ours, their legs gartered with


els £ %
Valetd'huis. A log, blôthe, or peife of mettall, crc,
hanging by a rope on one fide of a doore,and feruing to
fm it too presently after {isch as Zoe in,or out,a} it,
alet de Iuftice, À Sergeant, Officer, Catchpole,
Valet de Picques. The knaue of Spades.
Valet wenchant, 4 Caruer.


—


: EE a NT ee a


Vin des valets, Looke Vin. ;

Ce que maiftre donne, & valet pleure ce font lar-

mes perdues: Pro. Why fhould a groome grudge at his

maiflers bountie ?

Cheval faict,& valet à faire:Pro,chufe a horfe made,

a feruant to be made.

Contre difner appert valet: Pro. Wer’t not formeat

1 fhould not fee my maz (ayes the ill-ferued maifter, )

De grand maiftre hardi valet : Prov. A maiflers |
_ Sreatnelfe breedes him hardie feruants ; the might of

Lords addes mettall to their men.

En pont, en planche, & en riviere valet devant,

maiftre derriere: Pro. Looke under Maiftre.

Valetaille: f, A raftallie crue of campe-following boyes,
or drudges ; alfo,a companie of groomes,or meaner [er-
nants.

Valeter. Bafély to obfèrue, attend or wait on, play the
drudge or groome ; to ftoope, crouch, deickt, or fubmit
bimfelfe too much,

Valeton: m. A boy-féruant,a young or little groome.

Valetté: m. ée : f. Made verie common; or fo common,
that meane feruants haue it vp; eroome-ridden, profti-

tuted unto the ufe of groomes. ‘ ù

Valetudinaire: com. Sicklic,queafie crafie, fübieët vn-
10 infirmities.

Valeur: £. 7alue,worth,worthine(fe ; rate, price.

Valeure: € The valure,value,rate,or price,of.

Valeureufement. Valoroufly, valiantly, cour agiou|ly.
aleureux: m.eufe:£ Valorows, valiant, bardie, cou-
ragious.

Validation: £ 4 firengthening, inforcement,con firming,
an eftablifhing a ratifying.

Valide: com.Valide, firong,weightie, forcible,of worth,
er value,that can doe be

Validé: m.ée: £ Strengthened, inforced, confirmed ;
made worthie, or of worth; eftablifhed,authorixed,ra-


tified.
vider. To flrengthen,confirme,inforce make good; ra-
tifie,eftablifh, giue weight,0t authoritie vato.

V ia m. Vn Val. À footman,or feruant, onely for
erranas, k e 4

Validité: f Validitie,weight, frength, force,

Valier. The name of a Saint; whence, Peur S, Valier;
More feare then harme ; or, a falling, by ouermuch
feare, into the mifchiefe, or danger feared ;-as when a
man, thats threatned a hanging, dyes before he be tur-
ned off the ladder; for fo,as the report goes,this Saint:

d este Ss


did, :

Valife: f A Male, Clokebag, Budget; wallet, _

Valitude: £ Health, firength, good liking, welfare,

Vallant: m. as Vaillant: m.

Vallée: £ 4 valley,vale,bottome,dale,
Chevaucher la chevre en la vallée, Looke Chevre,
Apres grande vallée rude montée: Pro. After great
ref} much toyle ; aficr much eafe great paine,

’ Apres grande montée grande vallée: Prov, 7!
that the highef} climbe the lowef fall. :

Vallet : m, 4 groome,erc ; Looke Valet, | -

Vallet a bras, À labourer ; a labouring (éruant ; a
groome.bind,or (eruant in a mechanical office.

Valletaille,& Valleter. See Valetaile, & Valeter.

Valleton: m. as Valeton ; al/o (in fome auncient Au-
thors) a baftard. EEE

Vallidation, & Vallider. as Validation, & Vali-


der. = tr
Vallois: m. À kind of Net, wherewith fifh is (forbidden
to be) caught.
Vallon: m, 4 little valley ; a dale,
Kkk


k iy Va-}


«Original f


HE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


Fom


VAL


Valoir: m. Value,worth ; rate, price.
Non valoir d’eftar. Looke Eftar.
aloir, To be worth ; as much worth,or as wortbie,as;to
counteruaile,counterpeifé,or an(wer in value; to be of
equall efleeme, or goodneffe with ; alfo,to profit, ferue,
be good for ; and to merit,or deferue.
Cela vaut faid,ou Ja chofe vaut faiéte. The matter
is neere an end,or as good as done,

‘ Coufte & vaille. Fall it out how it will, whatfoeuer
come of it ; at what rate,or hazard fècuer; alfo,no mat-
ter what it coft fo as it be good.
l'en vaus bien yn autte. I amas fit for it, or worthie
of it,as another.

Se mettre en rang d’ oignon, & ne valoir vn’ ef-

chalotte, Seeke Oignon. ,
* C'eft argent qu’argent vaut: Pro. As good haue me-

ney-worth as money; that which is worth coyne is as
good as coyne,

Les chofes valent autant qu’ on les fait valoir:

Pro, Things are as they are eftcemed of;or,are efleemed

of as they are fet forth; The like is;

Rien ne yaut Ja chofe finon qu'on la fait valoir :

Prov, A thing is worth no more then it’s fet out for;
things without fhew, out-fetting, praife, or ufe, are no-

thing worth,

Vn homme ne yaut finon qu il fe fait valoir: Pro.

As thou of thine ovonc [elfe doef deeme, fo other men
. will thee efleeme.

Les coufteaux de Iean Colot,!'un vaut l’autre:Pro.

See Color. ÿ

Tant vaut l’homme tant vaut fa terre: Prov, 4
good,or bad man makes good, or bad, the things belong-

ine to him.

Tout bois vaut bufches: Pro, The worft wood's good
Jnongh to make logs of; or,the wort wood yeeldeth fuell

for the fire.

Valois. as Valois,

Valvaffeur, See Vavaffeur. {

Valve: & 4 foulding,or two-leafed doore,or window.

Valuë:£ Value,worth, goodnefle, :

Valvule: f. 4 flap in the infide of the mouth of a veffell,
which keepeth the liquor it containes from running jer--
ting or gu{bing, out.

: Valvules du coeur. Elewen fmall open gates, or en:
tries in the heart,whereby pallage is giuen to the bloud


terses.
Van: m, A P'anne,or winnowing Siue ; (made of Oxier,
and rather like a Scallop fhell then our Sie.)
Vandanger, LookeVendanger. "©".
Vandoise: £ The Dace, or Dare-fifh; alfo, a Witch, or
os, i Ti
Vanerçau:m. 4 young Lapwing.
Vaner,& Vaneur. as Vanner,& Vanneur,
Vanger. Looke Venger. see
Vangeron: m. .4 little ved-finned fifh in the Lake of
Geneud. ln
Vanier. as Vannier, : ;
Scere ee
alfo,emptine(fe. ‘ihe
Vanné née Rens à “is
| ‘anuaffed ; 9, MO OW


d


\ thigh, 10 make the chaffe come aloft of the corn
Sy: MAS


ta
sv + 4
“+ de
Va -2%


and fpitits that come vato it from the veines, and ar


| Ed sponyidden derided
Vane. ni ua mir mon
5 Out, ,


me. ee


VAN


then {weeping fo much of it off with a wing, Gc, as
the wind hath not carried away; ) alfo, to courfé,
chide, canuafe;bayt, fthoole ; orto mocke, flowt, ride,
play upon; or to rake up, {coffingly, the faults or imper-
fections of others.
Vanner fa farine au vent.
Sübflance on toyes,
Vanner fa plume au vent. To play the foole, or loofe
his time,
Vannerie: f. as Veneric ; a bunting,eoc.
Vannet : m. A Lapwing; alfo,as Coquille (in Blafan.)
Vanneur: m. Avanner, or winnower of corne; alfo,a
chider, [chooler,bayter. :
Vanneure:f, À winnowing; af, a chiding,
[chooling ; and,a fcoffing, mocking deriding.
annier: m. A Siue-maker; a Basket-maker.
Vannures: £ Winnowings,or fifiings of corne.
Vanoyer. To vanifb,difappeare,come to nought; alfo,to
be vaine, or play vaine parts.” ;
Vantance: f. A vaunt,brag,boaft; or,as Vanreric.
Se Vanter. To vaunt, brag,boaft, glorie,cracke,
Tel a neceflité qui ne s'en vante pas: Prov, Ne-
ceffitie doth pot them moft, who of their wants doe
fhame to boaft.
Vanterie: f. A vaunting,bragging;boafling.oflentation,
cracking, glorying. ; 1
anterolles. as Venterolles.
anteur: m. A vaunter,bragger,cracher,boafter.
De grands vanteurs petis faifeurs: Prov. Great
beafers Sinall voaflers ; the faireft chimneyes yeeld out !
the leaf fmoake.
Vanteux: m.eufe:f. Vaunting cracking, bragging boa-
fling, full of oftentation, : :
Vapeur: f, 4 vapor, fume, exhalation, hat breath, flea- |
ming, vecking. .
apide: com. Waftie, ov wafied; that fends vp an ill
that yeelds a flinking vapor, =
Vaquane: f. The vacancie of a Benefice,
Vaquant. as Vacant.
Vaquer. To be at leifiore, ceafe from labour, defift from
marking, alfo,to attend, apply,beflow time on, gine the
mind or bend his fludieunto;alfo,to be vacant,emptie,


ag


To {pend bis meanes, or


bayting,


void, without.

Var. as Bar.

Varandé : m, ée: f well dryed,and feafoned, as a Her
ring thats readie to be barrelled.

Varander. To dry,and feafon Herings for the barrell,

Varangues: f The ribs,or flaore-timbers,of afhip.

Varaville: f The nameof a greene fivcet apple which is
fafhioned like an egge.

Varech: m. A (ea-wracke,or wrecke; all that is cafta-
land by chaunce, or tempeft; or that comes fo neeve the
lend, that a man on horfebacke may reach it with his
annce,


Vans À flat valley ; or, a plaine betweene tro
[A


Varengues. as Varangues.

Varenne: £ .4 reddifh earth, whereof the, moulds of
Founders ,and ouens of Potters be ordinarily made;and
hence ; Fay


Varennes. Leane, and dry grounds, fit onely to beare

Oats,and Rye, RC :

Varenneux: m. eufe: f. Sterill,dry, Jeane.

Varefque. as Varech. no

Variable: com. Variable, changeable, mutable, waue-
rings fickle,inconflant, flitting.

Variation: f. ‘variation, change, Mutation, differing


from that it bath beene,
Va-


Original fron
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY _ Ù


vr sienna otis


Ey es


-


£


V A S.


Varice: m.A crooked veine (welling with corrapt blond
in the temples ,bellie,or legs. #702)

Varicqueux : meule : À The ueines of whofe temples,
ec, be [wollen with corrupt bloud ; alfo,fira (tri-
ding,going wide afunder. a

Varier. To varie cbange,alter,difenife ; to fqnare,differ,
difagrec,write,or fbeake diner fly;to diuerfifie;to make
of feuerall fafhions or colours,
Varieren la tefte. To wag,or waggle with the head;
to baue a giddie head.
I varie, He bolds not fleadily ;: bis band fhakes, qua:
uers,or wauers,

Varieté: £ Varietie, change,choice, dinerfitie; fickle-
ne (Je, inconftancie mutabilitie,

Varig :m, Flag,Sword-graffe,Corne-flag,

Varin: m, A woodden Engine confifing of two vices,
and a skrue, and feruing to lift up great peeces of tim-
ber,or of Artillerie,

Varinet : m..A Jittle Varin,

Varioles : £ The finall Pockes.

Variqueux. as Varicqueux.

Varlet : m. 4 Groome, ee; as Valet; alfo, ayounker,
flripling, youth; as in the Prouerb;
Autant fe prife beau varlet que belle fille: Prov.
The fmirking youth as much bimfelfe efleemes, as doth
the Nimph who beautie fairefifeemes.

Varletaille. as Valetaille,

Varleter ; &;V'arleton. as Valerer; &,Valeton,

Varre. A certaine long Ftalian meafure.

Vafche. Looke Vache.

Vafe:m, Aveffell,

Vale: fas Vane; mudsar owxe.


Vafois: m..\4 fhore,or place oft ouerflowed with water,


and thereby full of owze,or mud,
Vafquine:f. 4 Kirtle,or Petticoats alfo,a Spanifvar-


dingale.


nifh vardingales,

Vassal: m. A vaffall, fubieët, tenant ; properly fucb a
one as bolds bis land of another by Knights fernice, or
by homage and fealtie; and is thereby tied to attend
his Lord in perfon to the warre,or to fend one with bim
in bis fiead,or to allow bim money for the hiring of one;
all at bis owne charge: (And therefore in the auncient
Romanes, V allal 4 taken for the contrarieto Soul-
doyer ; (who receined pay) as alfo for any Gentleman

- whatfoeuer ; ) Alfoya flaue,or bondman.

Vn Seigneur de beurre (de feurre; ou de paille)
combat (vainc,ou mange) bien vn vaffal d'acier,
A Pronerbe expreffing the great. adwantage a Lord
hath of his fubieét, or tenants ‘
Tant que le vaffal dort le Seigneur veille, ALord
hauing entred into bis, vaffalls land for want of bo-
mage, or dise Services, bay lav fill enioyit, and the
wbgle.fruitsof it, untill be baue receiued bis due. .

_ Tant que le Seigneur dort, le vaflal veille, Looke


Seigneur.

Vaflaudie:f. as Vaflelage, t

Vaflaufie: € The right which'a Soueraigne or Landlord
pretendeth tobaneouer bis vaffall,or tenant, :

Vaflelage: m, affellage, or fubiection, theduetie, or
eflate of a vaffall:(1n thanncient Romans tu-vfed for
valour, and arvaliant or-worthie deed.) à
Vaffelagea@tif Fealtie, LE à

Vafleur : m. a Vaffal; or a viliein,

Vaftadour :m..4 Pioner, or digger ; alfo, a mender
highwayes. -


ing.


| Vastation +m A mafling, poyling,ranfacking,dtfitoy-


ier :m. A maker of Kirtles,Petticoatss or Spa- |


V A V
Vatte: com. Vaft, buge,wide, broad, large, burlie, fpa-


cious; alfo,defolate defert,uninbabited,wild,
Mufcle vafte, One of the foure ruskles whereby the


vie et
V. ru: « :m.A luske,lubber,loggerbead,loxell hoi-
on,lobcocke. 7.48

Vaftines : £ waft grounds,as deferts,rockes, fands,e>c;

Vv (ax old word.)
aticinateur: m. A Prophet, Soothfayer, Diuiner
foreteller of things to potas + :

Vaticination:£ Aprophecying, diuining, foretelling, |
Sfoothfaying. à

Vaticiner.To prophefie,diuine, footbfay it conieciure at,
foretell of things to come.

Vatton : m. The latch of a doore ; alfo,a leaner.

Vau: m. A vale,or valley; See Val. ;

Vavafleur : m. 4 Valuafor, or Vauafour ; 4 Lord that
held of fome Duke, Marquee, or Earle; and (at leaf
among vs)was in degree inferior to a Baron; a Mefne,
or Mefne Lord ; or as Arrierevafial; alfo,a villeine,

Vavaflorie: f A Valuafferie; th’eftate,land,or territo-
a of a Vauaffor, Mefne Lord, Arricrevaflal ; or vil-

eile

Vavaffourie:f. The fame.

Vauche. The hearbe called Periwincle.

Vaucrer. To raunge,roame,vagaric, wander jdleit up
and downe.

Vaucrer. A ship to float, or wane up and downe, to
bold an uncertaine courfe at fea,to fayle whither wind
and tide will carrie it.

Vauderoute. s’en fuir à vaud. To flie amaine; or to
run headlong along.
pea vauderoute. To put wholly, or viterly to

ight.

Vaudeville: € Acountrey ballade, or fong ; a Rounde-
lay,or Virelay ; fo tearmed of Vaudevire, a Norman
towne ,wherin Olivicr Baflel, the fir/t inuéter of them,
lined ; alfo, a vulgar proucrbe ; a countrey or common


Saying, |
Vaudre, A kind of veffell for Rhenifb wine,
Vauldeville. sce Vaudeville,
Vauldrée: f. 4 maulkin.
Vaulneant :m, 4 good. for-nought ;arakebell,raskall,

fcoundrell,retchleffe or idle companion. ;
Vaultour: m. 4 Vulture,Geire,Gripe,or Grap ; (a ra: |

uenous bird.)

Cataplafme de chair de vaultour avec les vifs. À

plaifler of warme guts.
Vaultrait: m. as Vaultre. * ab
Vaultre:m. 4 mungvell betweene abound, anda maf-

tife; orof'a fixe betweenetbe Allan and great- cour: |
wey curre; fit for the chafe,or bunting of wild Beares,

and Boares.. f
Vaultrer.Tohunt with a Vaultre, _

Vaultrey : m. 4 kennell,or hunt of Vaultres,
Vaultroy: m. A wild Boare; or more properly,es Vaul-
tre; or,a.Lime-bound for the wild Boare, >

Vautour, as Vaultour. SRE
Vayer : m. &, Vayrie:s Voyer; & Voyerie,
Vaze*:m. Avefsell, it:
Vazé:f, Owxe, mud, fofiidürt in the bottome of wa-


ter, à “

Vbiquité:f. An vbiquitie ;a being in euerie place, or
euerie where, ‘3

Vbir. To-eare; to make thrine,or grow,by good vfage,or


good fare. RL

Vce:f. #5 Sourcil, pee O-
Veau: m. A Calfé,or Veale; alfo,a lozellboydon,dunce,
iobbernoll,


>... —
Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


%
o
VEA V. EI
iobbernoll,doddipole; alfo,a baulke vntilled betweene | Vefvage : m. widowbood,tbe fiate of a mic. |
two lands,or furrowes, Vetve:£ 4 widow ; Looke Veufve, /


Veau de difme. A notable fot or blockbead, a notori-
ous lobcock.

Veau marin,ou de mer. The Seale,or fea Calfe,
Fievrede veau. Trembling upon fullneBe ; or, ax in-
difpofition vpon fur feting.

Pied de veau. Calues-foot,Ramp, Aaron ake-Robin,
Starch-wort,Pric(is Pint.

Tefte de veau. Calues-fnowt, Snap-dragon, Lions-
fap.

Fane,ou trouffer le pied de veau. To mate an vn-
towardlie,or clovonifh leg ; 07, clownifhly to lift up the
leg in dauncing,erc,

C'eft vne vache de Barbarie qui ne recognoift que
fon propre veau. Looke Vache.

Cette queué n’eft pas de ce veau. This effect pron
ceeds not from that caufe; or, this is no part of, or de.
pendant on,that thing.

Il Juy a fait manger des pois verds au veau. He bath
cheated bim finely, be bath fo fetched bim ouer that
be cannot perceiue it.

Tu n’as non plus d'arreft qu'un jeune veau. Thou
art as wanton, gidditor vaflaped, as a milch calfe.
Veau mal cuid,& poulets cruds font les cimitieres
boflus: Prov. Young meat raw-drefi makes church-
yards grow bulch-backt.

Aufsitoft meurt vache comme veau : Prov, 45
Soone the young,as old,goes to tbe pot.

Heft bien veau qui veau taille: Prov, See Tailler.
Le Ju emporte le veau du povre : Pro, The Wolfe
makes bis feaft of the poore mans beaf,

Veaurre: f, The fleece of a Ramme, ‘

Veautrant, allowing. .

Veautrement :m. 4 wallowing tumbling, rowling up
and downe in the mire.

se Vcautrer enla bouë,To wallow,tumble,rowle ,turne

“(lying }up and dovone in the mire. |
L’efprit fe veautre.The mind reuolues,cafts abouter
* is diligently imployed.

Veautreur : m. 4 wa/lower,or tumbler inthe mire,

Veautroir: m..4 puddle,or flongh wherin bogs doe ufé
to wallow.

Vedat : m, Bois vedat, Looke Bedat.

Vedeau: m, À Beadle; fxcha one as vfhers with bis
Mace,the Vicechancellor, or principall Officer, of an
Voiuer fitie.

Vedel: m.4Gafc.. A Calfe,a Veale; whence ;

Tefte de vedel. 4 calf blockbead,or fillie fellow,

Vedelle : £ 4 fucking calféya calfe thats fed with milke.
edet : m. A lubber, boydon,lobcocke, loxell, ioulthead,
iobbernoll ,doddipole,

Vedette : f, 4 Sentrie,or Court of gard, placed withont
a fort,or campe; and more generally, any bigh place
eee may fee afarre off.


vedette d'une gallere. The top of the maft; or the
part rs a Gale han whence the firthef difcouerie
% may €. ¥
LM sf The nauell flring of a new-borne infant,


Vée: £. Labour,toyle, paines trauell ; (a old word, ;
Vee: Je À Forbidden, whence, Chole fg
plus defirée: Prov. we couet moff what we are moft
Véeurs: m.Witnefe afifian nts in a view,er fi

? 2 land: @Norm. wt wees
Vef:m. Awidomer, ies

Vef:m, vefve:f. Widow, widow-like, of or belonging
AOE 5 RN iy Se Recah Es


!


ae nn ai


==Digitized:by Go gle


efved’honncur. 4 woman that bath loft Ler goo


name.

Vegade : f A draught ; a turne,er bewt; whence;
Vne vagade. Once,or one time. |

Vege: m. 4 kind ef wateriree,or fhrub.

Vegetable : com.Vegetable, fit or able to line; kaning,
or likelie 10 bawe, fuch lift, or increafe in greweib, as
planis,erc. ;

Vegetal :m. ale: £Vegetell; haning or gining a(plart-
like) life, incr eafe,budding or growing.

Vegetatif: m.iue : fUegetatine ; liuelie,quicke, ficfh,
growing,or giuing lifé,quickhnefle.growetb,increafe.
Vegetation: f. Agining of lifeincreafe,er growth unto;

a quickening; refrefbing , or comforting; a making


ong.
cgeter. To quicken, refrefh, gine life, groweth, or in-
creafe unto; alfo, 10 grow, bud, or put forth,as plants,

Vegettes: f Vegetatine,or growing parts,

Veguade. as Vegäde.

vue as Beguer : (Bearnois.

Vehemence : f.Vebemence eagarneffe,ear nefineffe,vi-
olence, force, fiercenefe.
chement: mente : £Vehement eagar,earneft, fierce,
violent, fharpe, urgent; maine, forcible, firong.

Vehementement, Vebemently,

Fe luge veher. A Judge of meane, or bafe Furif-

, _diélion.

Veherie: f. Meane,or bafe Furifdidiion.

Vchicule :m, 4 carriage; 4 cart,waine, chariot, wa-
gon; any {uch inflrument,or engine of carriage.

Vejetes com. Linelie ollie, frefb, frolicke, full of, ‘pirit,
of mettall,of life.

Vejetter. a Vegerer.

Veillant: m.ante. f. Waking, watching, wakefll,er
watchfull, vigilant beedfill cincum{peéi,carefull,

Veille: f A Vigile,or wake ; the Exe of a boly-day.

Veillement : m. 4 waking,or watching; an beedfill,
or carefull attending,

Veiller. To wake, watch, lie awake, abfaine from fleepe;
to be vigilant, beedfull, diligent, carefull ; fludioufly to
attend.

Aifez veille qui bien fait: Prov. He that does well,
watches ynough.
ami veille pour l'autre: Prov 4 friend à watcb-
ul, aud doth arme bimfelfé 10 keepe bus friend from
‘bavme.  ;

Veillere: £. withivind,bindweed,Hedge-belis,

Veillottes :f. The beft,and fweeteft kind of Acornes, or
mafi,growing on the finall Oke Efculus. >
cine: £. 4 veine in the bodie,a pulfe ; (yet enerie veine
isnot a pulfe,though euerie pulfe bee a veine;) alfo,a
veine of the earib,or of mettall,eoc,in the earth; alfo,
a veine or file of writing ; a veine or conceit in verfi-
fring, oc.

Veinesadipeufes. Jwo veines, aright (fmetimes a
branch of the right kidney veine)and a left cne(euer a
branch of the defcendant trunke of the bollcw veine)
which particularly nonrifh the fat, and skinne thats
about the kidney, and generally breed fat in tbofe parts
which they rxnne by. .
Veine aifcellaire, as Veine axillaire,
Veine Arterieufe, One of the fiure principal veines
of mans bodie, iffuing fiom the right ventricle of the
beartshebloud whereof it carries unio the lungs for
their nourifhment.

- Veine auriculaire, The care veine; Seeke Auricu-
Jaire, Veine


Original from 1


PHEOHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


VE


VEI


Veine axillaire, Looke Axilldire,

Veinc bafilique. (Called by our Anatomifis) the liner
veine; iffues om the Soufclaviere,and is dinided in-
to two branches, a deepe and a fuper ficiall one ; the la.
ter wherof being neere the iaward proceffe of th’arme,
and verte ncere the skinne, is diuided iato other two;
viz.4 le/Je which runnes into the head veine and toge-


paffes along by th'elbow unto the bande there makes
the Salvatelle. }
. Veine borgne. as Coecale,
Veine cave. The hollow veine; a great veine iffuing
from the thickeft part of the liner, > then diuided into
two maine branches,and they into many others.
Veine cephalique.The head veine;or a third branch
of la Soufclavicre; paBes betwrene the muskle Del-
toide,and that ofthe breaft, and goes unto the bought
of the elbow, where it diuides it [elfe into two bräches;
the lower, and lel[e, going along th’inner part of the
aime, toynes with a branch of la bafilique, dnd toge-
ther with 1t makes the Mediane ; the bigher,and grea-
ter, feated in the outfide of the elbow, yeelds on both
Sides many branches the greatefi whereof meets withla
Rafilique,aad together with it makes la Salvatelle.
Veine cervicale. The veine of the braines; a fourth
braxch of Ja Soufclaviere; pafes by the croffé proceffes
of the neck ioynt up tothe filme ov thinne skinne which
& next the braine,and there ends,
Veine coecale. The blind veine; à fecond branch of
la Mefenterique; runnes vito the blind gut and there
ends in many branches,
Veine commune. The common veines or as Medi-
ane,
Veinec oronale. The crowne veine; a branch of the
fpleene veine, fo tearmed becaufe it enuirons tbe beart
in manner of a crowne,
Veinc corporelle. See Corporel,
Veinecrurale, The thigh veine; a great veine which
iGues from the trunke defcendant of the hollow veine.
Veine cyftique, A mall, and fometimes double fome-
time fingle, branch of the Port veine,whence it mounts
wato the necke of the gall,and there dinides it felfe into
two branches, r
Veines diaphragmatiques. The midriffe veines; two
Seuerall branches of the bollow veine, from which they
ruane unto the midriffe, ard theve end,


nales.

Veinesepigaftriques. An outward, and an inward
branch of the flanke veines, both which after diners
pafages, at length ioyne themfelues unto thofe that be-
lon» to the dugs.

Vcine cpiploïque dextre. The fecond branch of the
fpleeneveine; goes wntothe Epiploon, and the gut
. Colon;a/fo,a fourth branch of the fpleene veine which
ending towards the upper part of the Epiploon,is cal.
led Epiploïque, bat with the addition of Pofterieure.
Veine Efpauliere. The fhoulder veine.

Veine frontale, The forbead veine ; % third branch
of the outward throat vcine, whence mounting by the
bottome of the nether iaw, it comes vato the lips and
= the nofé, & from thence afcends by the infide of the eye
vato the middle of the forhead. -

Veine gaftrepiploique. See Gaftrepiploique,
Veine gaftrique. The bellie veine ; a branch of la
Porte, from which it deftends unto the hollow part,
and backefide,of the ventricle; there is alfo another,
called la petite gaftrique ; which is the firft branch


Digitized ‘by Cox gle


ther with it makes the Mediane ; whileft the greater |.


Veines emulgentes. Looke Emulgent; or as Re-


of the (pleene veine, and goes-unto the right fide of the
ventricle, ; ’

Veine hederiforme. Seeke Hederiforme.

Veine hemorrhoïdale, The furft branch of the Me.
fenterique; which runnes unto, and ends at, the Co-
lon & firaight gut ; fometimes it iSues from the fleene
veine,
Veine hepatique. The liner veine, *
Veinchonteule. À fifi branch of the flanke veines ;
befloweth it (elfé among the prinie parts of women
on the outward skinne of the yard, and cods of men.
Veine humerale, The Humerall,or fhoulder veine,
Veine hypogaftrique. The third branch of the flank
veines and is tt felfediuided into diuers branches ; the
Sirf wherof runne vato the yard,bladder and firaigbt


“gut,and thence 10 the bottome of the fundament; o-


thers unto the matrix; and others, after a long courfe,
goe downe almoft unto the bamme. :
Veine jarticre. The garter,or gartering Deima fourth


* branch of the thigh veine, from which it defcends a.


mong the backe muskles of the thigh, wnto the bougbt
of the hamme,where it gets thisname,
Veines Iliaques. Th'Iliacke, ov flanke veines ; two
maine de(cendant branches of the bollew veine,a right
and a left one, from cither of which fine others iffise;
the right one 1s opened againft the dropfe,e other dif
cafes of the liner; the left one for the paffion of the
fpleene. eee.
Veine intercoftale, The fourth branch of the trunke
afcendant of the hollow veine :1t feeds three diflances
berweene th'upper ribs.
Veine inteftinale, A fourth branch of la Porte, from
the pollerior and right part whereof it 1ffues,and com-
municatés it (eife fometimes unto the bungrie gut, and
fonie times to the Douze doigtier.
Veines jugulaires, The two throat,or necke,veines ;
viz, an outmard one (the firft dinifion of la Soufclavi-
er€) which fometimes double, and mounts along the
fides of the necke vnto the bottome of the head, where
it is diuided into fiue branches ; And an inward one
(the fecond branch of la Soufclaviere ) which af.
cends along by the windpipe unto the bottome of the
braine,and is there dinided into two branches,
Veines labieres. The lip veines, whereof there be
two on eachinner fide both of the vpper, and under
lip. | ;
Veinelumbaire. The veine of the loynes ; the fourth
branch of the defcendant trunke of la Cave, dinided
neere vnto it fource into diners parts, all which below
themfèlues among the foure ioynts of the loynes.
Veine mammale, A third branch of la Soufclaviere;
double,an inward,and an outward,one, diftributed a-
mong the parts of the breafts,  :
Veine matricaire. The matrix veine ; or a veine that
runnes along the flonke neere to the reynes.
Veine mediane, The middle,common,or black veine,
compounded of the two lee branches of the liver, and
“head veines,and running along the middle of the arme
almolt unto the wrifl, whereit palfes in the forme of an
¥ into the band; there is ikewife another of this name
under tb'influp. nee
Veines meferaiques. as Mefenteriques,
Veines mefenteriques. Two veines; one,abranch of |:
Ja Porte,eads at the Mefentere ; but is formerly diui-
ded inte three branches whereof th’ other is the third,
and called fo becaufe it likewise ends at the Mefente-


ren fome 14 oF 15 branches, — RAS
Veine mutculeufe. The firft branch of the flanke |
SEE" veines; |
: Es
Original from :


THE. OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


V E I


veines; tearmed thus,becaufe it communicates it [elfe
with diners muskles about the bellie,andloynes.
Veine nafale, The nofè veine, feated betweene the
nofetbrills.
Veine oculairte; ou, ocilliere, Theye veine; that
part of the forbead veine which runnes along by the
infide of the eye.
| Veines orgahiques. as Veines Iliaques.
Veine pericardique. The fecond branch of the Souf-
claviere,whence it runs unto the Pericarde,and there
ends.
Veine popletique, The hamme veine; as larticre,
Veine porte. The port, or carrying veine ; feated in
the liner by diuers rootes,the which,at length, ioyne in
one flocke, or trunke, and fo paffe forth into the ven-
tricle, (pleene, gall, Mefentere, and other parts of the
bodie,
Veine ranulaire. The firft branch of the outward
throat veine;afcends unto the tongue,and parts in two
vader each fide thereof, ;
Veines renales, The kidney veines ; two thicke,and
and jhoït branches of the defcendant trnke of the hol-
low veine ; a right,and a left one, diuided into7 or8
otbers (when they come neere the kidney, into the fub-
. flance whereof they enter; ) there is likcwwife another of
this name feated under th'influp.
Veine facrée. The fecond branch of the flanke veine,
running to the Os facré, and thereupon getting this
mame.
Veincfalvatelle, 1s made of the two bigger branches
of the liner, and bead veines, from which it runnes
through the wrift into the hand, and vnto the root, or
diuifion of the third,and little fingers.
Veine fans pair..4 third branch of the bollow veine,
out of the right fide whercof it runnes to nourifh the
fhaces betweene eight ribs.
Veine faphene. The mother veine; the firft branch of
the thigh veine, confifting of two diuifions ; tbe one in-
ward, which ends among the inner kernells of the
thigh, the other move outward hatb tbree branches,the
fk ends in the skinne of the thigh, the fécond goes but
vato the knees, the third unto tbe muskles of the leg,
whence running along aboue'the inner ankle (where it
us moft opened, and knowne by this name)it comes unto
the fole of the foot and there ends,
Veine fciatique. The Sciaticke veine; a branch of the
thigh veine which defcends downe the leg unto th'out-
~ ward ankle, where it is commonly opened for the Scia-"
tica and thereupon gets this name. : £
Veine feynale. 2s Veine falvatelle,
Veine foufclaviere, One of the twomaine aftendant
= branches of the hollow veine, diuided into fix parts.
= Veine fpermatique. The third branch of the trunke
defcendant of the bollow veine.
\  Veine fplenatique. The ffleene veine ; one of the
_ twomaine branches of la Porte, from which it ruines
unto the fpleene , and there ends diujded into fèure


| Vésnotiqie The flomack veine ; runnes vn-
_ to the hollow part of the ventricle, and there ends in


Chu. te le i ee


Veine furale, One of the two maine branches of the
» thigh veine, moft eminent in the bought of the knee,
_ from ag kad bale, it felfé among'the
muskle s t ‘ e ee
. Veine re. The feced maine endät branch
à € : j


remporale. The veine of the temples; opened


Veinu: m.ué:f
Vejove :m.4 wicked fpirit; a god that can doe burt, &


Veilé


Veller. To vaile, couer,érc ; as Voiler ; a/f,to calue,


VE EL:


fir the Megrum,paine of the eares, and extracrdina-
rie watering of the eyes. Sma
Veine thorachique. The breaft veine; the fixth
branch of Ja Soufclaviere; is diuided into two others,
both which beflow themfelues among the muskles of the
Thorax,

Veine Thymique. The firf branch of Ja Soüfclavi-
cre ; goes unto the fag-pcece,er kernel which is under
the Kannell bone.

Veine torculaire. The fecond branch of the outward
throat veine, from which it afcends by the infide of the
{cull unto the braine, which it moiflens,and feeds.
Veine vmbilicale. That whereby an infant in the
wombe receiueth: nourifkment, and which , it being
borne, doth clofe it felfe,and ferueth as a ligament 10°
Settle the liner vato the nauell.

Laïfler la Jancette dans la yeine, To fil a man with
doubts, and leaue bim vurefolued; to bring him into
trouble, and then to abandon him; or,to begin to veme-
die a mifchiefe,and,prefently, (of malice,or negligence)
to gine ouer fo good a beginning.

lln’a veine qu'y tend, He hath no manner of humor
unto it.

Tu luy as bien trouvé la veine. Thou haf} bit bim
right.


Veiné: m.ée : f. Veined,or full of veines.
Veinelette : f. A verie little veine,
Veinette : f. A little veine.

Veineux : meule: f. Veinie, fullof ve


hig
Artere Met ngs Looke Artere.
cinie ; or as Veineux.


will doe no good,


Veirat : m, The Mackerel fifh.
Vela. as Voilà, à
Velar: m. The hearbe called banke Creffes,and by fome


wild Muflard(but not fo properly ;) oibers improperly
cali the Rape Chadlock,or Charlocke,fo. .


Veleure : f, Shag,bairineffe,nappineffe.
Vecleux:m.eufe: f. Full ofor abounding in,calues,
Velin. as Venin ; alfo,vellam, whence;


Velins. Smooth peeces of fine parchment, or of vel.
lam, : His
:m.ée:f. Calued,


La vache du riche veHle fouvent, celle du povre a-
vorte: Prov. The rich mans cow doth often calfe, the
poore mans oft mifcarries.


Vellication: £ A plucking,pulling, lugging; alfoyacar~


ping at,a depraning er detracting from,


Velocité :f.Velocitie, peed, fwifineffe, fleetnefe,quick-


ne(fenimblene[fe.
Velours:m.Veluet, |
Velours figuré. Branched Veluet.
Velours à fond de fatin pourfilé, Figured Satin.


Velours à long poil. Vrfhorne Veluet,
Tripe de velours. Valure, Mocke-veluet,Fuftian an
Apes. ; t


Ventre dewclours robbe de bureau : Prov, Atuch
bellie-cheere,c> daintie fare, doth make the garments
poore and bare. :
Velous. a Velours. ‘ ; ;
Velouté: mée:f. Velueted, of Veluetclad,or ceuered
with Veluet.
Cuir velouté. Frize leather. °
Taftetas velouté. Tuffe-taffata,
Veloutier :m. 4 maker of Veluet.
Veloux. as Velours.


Original-from


THE OO STATE UNIVERSITY


errs


att


VEN


Velu:m. ué:£. Hairie, fhag,nappie,or of a bigh nap, full
of baire,rough with baie, )
Couverture velué. An Irifh Rug, Mantle,Cadow,
Herbe velué.cudwort ,Cudweed,Cottd weed,Chaffe-
weed,


~ Veluate. as Veluoté.


Veluette:£ Pilofella, Moufe-eare.

Veluoté : m. Speed-well, female Fluellin.

Veluté. as Veloucé.

Venaifon : f Venifin; the flefh of (edible) beafts of
chace ; as the Deere, wild Boare,cxc ; alfo, the fat of
their flefh; whence;

Le fanglier a chargé fa venaifon. The Boare is very
fat: and, Il a trois doigts de venaifon; He # three
inches fat.

Toute chair n’eft pas venaifon: Prov. 48 difhes
ave not dainties ; or as under Chair. | j

Venal: male :f. Vendible,fale, falable, fet or let unto
fale,that may be bived or bad for money; shat will doe
any thing for money.

Venalement. Vendibly, falably, fellably.

Venalité : f. Venalitie,vendibleneffe ; a being falable;

ve letting or fetting unto fale, :
enant. Comming,arriuing ; happening ; growing.

Vendable : com. as Vendible. cr da

Vendange; (or better)Vendenge: f. Vintage, vine-
baruelt, grape-baruelt, grape-gatbering, wine-making;
and the feafon wherein it s made; (in all which fences
this word is, for the moft part,vfed plurally; ) alfo,
grapes,or the fruit of vintage,

. Cuideur de vendenge. as vnderCuideur.

Adicu paniers vendenges font faittes. Farewell
good fellowes, we baue no further need of you, or vfe
for you; our turne’s alreadie ferued ; our bufinefse dome.

Vendengé.: mée:£ Cut, gathered, and made into
wine as grapes.

Vendengeoire: m. The basket , feuttle , or pannier
whereinto grapes are gathered, ©

Vendenger. To cut and gather grapes for wine to make
wine of grapessto per forme or finifh bus vintage,(wher-
of this word comprehends all the parts.)

Vendengeret: m,ette: f Belonging to, or feruing for,
vintage.

Vendengeur: m, 4 Vintager,or vine-reaper 34 cutter
or gatherer of grapes,in vintage. 4

Vendengeufe : f. A woman thats bired,érc,in vintage
time,to cut,or gather grapes,

Venderefle: £ A woman that felleth, .

Vendeur:m. 4 eller.

Vendeufe:f. as Vendereffe, ;

Vendible : com. Vendible, fellable, fale altenable.

Vendiquer. To vendicate ; to claime,or challenge,

Vendition: f A fale or felling.

Droié de venditions, Looke vader Droi&.

Vendoife : £ A Dace,or Dare-fifh.

Vendre. To fell,make fale of, (et to fale ; 10 alien or paffe
away for money, exc: (Vendre en beaucoup des
anciennes ordonnances fignifie, Bailler à ferme,« l
Oifeau.) Ÿ : ,
‘A l'hoftel prifer, & au marché vendre: Prov. Set
prices on thy things at bome, but paffe them away a-


04
Fille qui prend elle fe vend: Prov. maid by taking
fels ber bibertiesor the maid that wooers proffered gifts
doth take, a wanton bargaine will be drawne to make.
Ou pain faut tout eft à vendre: Prov. 4 man will
fell all rather then be flarued.
Pour laver fes mains on n'en vend pas fa terre:


J


HS by Go: gle


VEN


Prov. It is no great coft to be cleanelie,
Toute chofe fe vend au pris de l'oeil de l'homme :
Prov. Mans eye doth rule the price of enerte thing.
Vn quartier fait l'autre vendre : Prov. One peece
doth helpe to paffe away th'other. :
Vendredi : m. Friday,
Vendredi oré; Sain@ ; &, le grand vendredi.
Good Friday. ;
Vendu: m.ué: &So/d,made fale of, fet to fale; aliened,
or pafed away, for money crc."
Chofe qui plaift eft à demi vendué: Prov. Ware
that is pleafing to th’eye is pafed away by and by.
Marchandife offerte eft à demi verrdué : Pro.ware
that is offered yeelds but halfe a price;we fay proffered
ware finkes. :
Venduë :£. as Vente.
Vené. as Veiné,
Vencfique : com, Venomous.poifonous,contagious,
Venelle du liés £. The fpace betweene a bed,and the
wall ; and (when there is (uch a pace) the beds fide
next unto the wall, :
Heft bien apparenté, mais c’ eft au cofté de la vee -
nelle. He is of a good boufe, but yet he came inat the
window. .
Venenofité : f. Venomedneffe;venomoufüele.
Vener. To buat.
Venerable: com. enerable,renerend honourable.
Veneration :f. Veneration, reuerence, awe, worfhip,
bonour.
Venerie: f: 4 bunt,or bunting, alfo, abound-boufe, or
kennell for hounds.
Venerien: m.enne sf. Bélonging to Venus; alfo,addic-
ted,or giuen to venerie; lecherous la/ciuions.
Veneur: m. 4 Hunter, or Huntsman; aljo, à kind of
Spider,tearmed thus becaufe be w ener in chafe of one
prey or other,
Grand Veneur de France. The great Huntsman of
France ; an Officer of the Crowne, whofe Jurifdittion
extends onely tothe ruling of courfes, and indging of
causes, that concerne hunting in forefis ; but in old
time (when bee was called , le grand foreftier de
France) he bad alfo as much authoritie as the Great
Faulconer,and the Maiftre des eaux & forrefts,enioy
at this day. à
C'eft vne chaffe ou le veneur eft prins. Looke
Chañle.
Vengé. Auenged,wreaked,renenged.
Vengeance: f. Vengeance, reuengement; punifhment.
Venger. Towreake,reuenge,anen ge,take vengeance of.
Se venger en vn fief, ou heritage, A purchafer of |
rent iftuing generally out of land in diuers Mannors,or
fiefs,to auow,e> declare, that be will baue it onely out
of one of them : Car lors le Seigneur d'iceluy fief en
a les ventes,ou bien peur vfer de puiflance de fief:
@Ragueau. oe LICE
Tel penfe venger fa honte qui l’accroift: Prov,
Some that doe tbinke to couer their {hame,diftouer it,
fome weening té redeeme their foame,jncreafe it,
Vengerefle: f, A reuengereffc;an auengereffe,
Vengeron: m. 4 Dace,or Dare- Sith.
Vengeur : m, A renenger,anenger punifber of wrongs.
Veniin: m. Venome ; any thing that impoifoneth, or m-
feéteth outwardly by touching.
‘A la quevé gift le venim: Pro, The laft js common-
ly the worfi,par! of a prathife,ec. 19 É
Venimeux:m.euse : f. Venomss, fall of venome.
Venir. To come; arriue,approach, drawneereunto; to
yroceed,iffue,be derined, from; to tite" ;
alfo,)


« Original from


THE OHIO. STATE UNIVERSITY,


al/o,to happen chance,or fall out.

Venir bien. Cela luy vient bien. That fits becomes

or agrees well with, bim: le compte vient bien; The

reckoning falls out right,

Venir a bien, To fücceed or fall out well , to turne

unto good.

Venir entre labourfe, & les deniers. To prevent,
| foreftall, wipe the nofe of, come betweene and bome;

A law-pbrafe,vfed molt when the next kinfma to a fel-

ler of land, redeemes it, and difappoints another that

bad, with the purchafèrs confent, undertaken it, and

made fure account of it.

Venira bout de. To accomplifh, performe, bring to

Pafe, atchieue, compafse,attaine unto; alfa, to rule, or

onerrule,

Venir devant. To present, or forcftall ; to come, or

appeare, before. ‘

Venir au devant. To meet,or come to meet with.

Venir de dire. Ce qui ie viens de dire. That which

1 did but euen now deliuer: Comme ie viens de

dire; As 1/faid verie lately; or, as 1 told you but now.

Venir à fes droits, Looke under (the firf)Droi@.

Venir ala loy. To be receiued, or admitted, unto the

waging of bis Law.

Au mieux venir. At the beft, bow well foeuer it fall

out,come the beft of it that can.


|


Des paroles ils viennent au poil, From words they |


1 fallunto blowes. , ;
Il eut l'allée pour le venir. He bad bis trauell for bis
paines ; he returned as emptie,or poore,as be came.

Bs Il ne demeure pas trop qui vient: Prov, He that

‘ comes at the length flayed not too long,

Quand beau vient fur beau beau perd fa beauté :

Prov. When one faire colour is layed on another their

beautie & utterly confounded.

à Qui vient eft beau,qui apporte encores plus beau:
3 Prov. A mans prefence doth much, but bis purfe doth
more.

Quitoft vient à fon hoftel mieux luy en eft à fon

fouper: Prov. Looke Hoftel; or Souper.

: 2 Tant crie on Noel qu'il vient: Prov, So long is

i Chrifimas called for that st comes ; a conftant importu-
4 nitie at length premailes.

| Tout vient à poinét + peut attendre: Prov, He
that can wait long fhallbaue a good howre,

Venife :f. Cerufe, white lead (wherewith fome women
paint.)

Venitiens: m, Venitians ; the citizens of Venice.
Lefecours des Venitiens (troisiours apres la ba-
taille.) After meat muftard;afier death a potion; after
indgement giuen our Counfell at leafure t@attend our


Weems A fixglesor fall fyfle. .
Venneur: m. A fizxler,or fyfter.

+ Vennier :m, A kind of Pedler, or feller of old yron
Etes len leputfe seu flamme berri
aS :m, ; a blaft,ga ts or berrie,
“| ofivind; alfo, a vent, fell, fent, aire, breath, vapor 3


cc aaa +) à


eae .
a] ue - cts


Biaitized by Go. gle
ea oe oe


» onthe way they fre.) j


3 ind ;
Her


+
:


ealt,crc ; or a quarter wind,at fea, 74
Vent coulis, The wind, or apre that commeth into a
roome by a hole, crannie, er creuice ; beld verie un-
wholefome. }

Vent derriere, A fore-wind at fea.

Vent d'embas; &fucillu, À #eferlié wind; or as
Vent d’aval. ;

Vent de Galerne. À North-wefl wind.

Vent Grec. A North-eaft wind,

Vent hautain, The Southerne wind,

Vent de Levant. The Eafl wind,

on marin ; meridional; ou de midi. A South
wind. :
Vent occidental. The weft wind.

Vent oriental. The Eajt wind,

Vent pluau. À Southerne wind,

Vent de ponent. 4 Weflerne wind.

Vent en pouppe. À fore-wind at fea; and thence,
eafè,profperitre good fuccefe,the world at will,euerie
thing as one would bane it.

Vent à quartier, 4 quarter wind, betweene a fore-
wind,and a fide wind.

Vent feptentrional, The North wind,

Vent folaire. The Eaft wind,

Herbe du vent. The Wind-flower ; fo called becaufe
it neuer opens but when the wind blowes.

Avoir vent. le n’en ay eu vent ne voix, J newer
beard a word,nor had any notice,of it.

Avoir le vent de, Ilenaeulevent. He bath got an
inkling be is come by the knowledze, of it.

Batu de mauvais vent. Creft by a conirarie, or ma-
lignant thwart ; whom fortune breathes malicioufly
upon.

Donner voile à tous vents. Looke under Donner,
Emporté du vent. ll fe laifle cmporter du vent.He
runnes on freely, carried upon the wings of his owne
conceit ; alfo,be xs inconftant,light-headed,vayiable,of
a changeable humor.

Autant en emportele vent, So much breath is waf
ted, fo many (peeches loft; Looke Emporter.

Eftre au deflus du vent. Te flourifh, line in profperi-
Lie, be all aflaunt or aboight.

Eftre au deflus du vent de. To get the wind, aduan-
tage, upper band of ; 10 haue a man vader bis lee; The


8;

Eftre fur vent. To be in the wind, or haue the wind,
of Eftre fous vent; Te be to the leeward, or under
the lee, of.

Faire FE vent. To follow the fafhions, or
{way of the time, bow ofien focuer they alter.

Fendre le vent. To vunne bis countrey,

oe fon vent. To breath bis laf; 10 gine vp the


2 '

Ieéter la plume au vent. To grow careleffe, let the
world runne; weigh not bow matters palft which way
be goes, what courfe be takes, what thing be does ; The
fame #3 La plume jectée au vent; carelefly ,or that
way the flaffe falls; (from thofe which being irrefolute,
or without defigne,calt feathers into the aire, and goe


Mettre {a legitime au vent. Fondly to paffe or make
away with, riotoufly 10 confume or {quander away, bis
whole portion,all that be bath, !


Mettrela plume au vent. as IeGer la plume au
gainfl, the wind; al- |
draw towards by the |


Tenir


vent,
Prendre le vent. To goe vp,or


\ 7


. . Original from
VHE-OFIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


eet — Bons ©


V EN


neere to,a wind.

L’aurcille auvent. Lifleningly,attentiuely.

Tout d'un vent. At one breath, all at once.

Vie foiict,& au vent. Auant dc; as under Foiiet.
Vay veu d'autres vents venter. 1 baue féene better,
Re: : or other dayes ; I haue knowne wher the time, or fate
of things,hath bsene other then it is, \
On a veu d'aufsi grand vent'venter (fans abbatre
les maïfons.)#e baue heard of as many brags made,or
threats -ufed,and yet nothing, or no burt,done,
Qui veut tirer quelque chofe de ce vaiffeau il luy
faut donner du vent. He that will draw ought out
of bis Peece,muft gine bim vent; viz, muft cohaude,or
collogue with,bim. .

Le vent,la tépefte,& l'orage monftrent du nocher


; © lacourage:Pro.Croffes are the touchftones of courage,
Vent au vifage rend l'homme fage: Prov, Adwer-
fities teach a man wit.
Nul vent ne fait pour celuy qui n’a point de port
1 deftiné: Prov, No wind can blow bim to good whom


Deftinie will not harbour.
Les mal-veftusdeversle vent: Pro, He that worft
may the candle boldeth; or as under Mal-veftu.
Qui eftfurla mer ne fait pas des vents ce qu'il
veut: Pro. The Mariner can makeno winds; er, the
Sayler cannot haue what winds be will,
Ventail :m, A childifh toy of a card cut acroffe, like she
h faples of a wind-mill,and put with a pinne vato th'end
of a flicke and fo held into the wind, which makes it to
twirle verie faft about.
Ventaille: £ The breathing part of a belmet ; the fight of
the beauer. ;
Ventailles du ciel. The windowes, or flond-gates, of
beanen,
Ventau : m, a Ventail ; al/o,a Fanne.
Vente :f. 4 fale,or felling; an alienation, or paffing a-
way for money, dc. |
Vente extraordinaire de bois, Afäle of timber, or
of great and high trees : Vente ordinaire de bois ; 4
fale of cop{e-wood under wood,or (mall wood, ;
Ventes. À fine for alienation: viz.(for the mofl part)
20 d. in the pound, or the twelfth part of the price of
land fold,duc fometimes unto the Lord feodal,but more
commonly to Lords Cenfuel, of whomit is beld ; and
paied, in fome places,by the purchafer,in otbers, by the
feller,and in others, betweene them both: The French
Lawes,and cultomes, doe often ioyne with this another
dutie, called Lods,which comes to as much more.
Ventes,& gants; yentes,& honneurs; ventes, &
iflués. Looke under Droit.


Siboutetel feur telle vente. The thing is fold enen’


as it was bought, il goes away as it cate; or, no mat-
| ter,tis well-ynongh,let it be bow it will be.
| Venté. Blowne, puffed,
| Venteler. To breathor blow a foft gale ; alfo,to waue,
bouër waner ; al{0,t0 ayre, in the wind ; alfo,to vanne
or winnow corne; and to toffe or canuaffe to and fro;
to turne out oftone band into another.
Ventelet: m. A little wind; a fall puffe, gentle gale,
coole blaft,of wind. +
Ventelle. as Venraille.
Venter. The wind to bosser pif.
l'ay veu d’autres vents Venter, Looke under Vent.
-On a veu d’aufli grand vent venter. We, bane
hmowne’as great a wind as this without any boufe
blowne downe ; (In anfiver to one that (peakes big
words, but is valiant in nothing but words.)


» Go: gle


Tenir au vent. To beare bard with, or fayle verie


VEN


Tant vente qu'il pleut: &, Tant tonne, & vente
que pluye defcend : Prov. This wind will baue raine;
_bloud-wipes often follow big wards. |
Venter. se Venter. To brag} Looke se Vanter.
Venteroles; or Venterolles. Droiét de vent, 4
certaine fine due to 4 Landiord fr6 the purchafer that
undertakes to difcharge bis [ellmig tenarit of all’ fines;
-* Looke Droid.
Venteux :m. eufe : f. as Vanteux ; al/o, windie, fill of
wind ; as light,or as (wift,as the wind, 4
Ventier. whence, Marchand ventier ; Afgavoir, de
ventes de bois. ~
Ventilation: £ A ventilation breatbing or gentle blow-
ing; al{o,a wauing,or bouering in the ayre; a winnow-
ing,or aning in the wind ; alfo,an eflimation, valuati-
on, prizing, À ;
Ventiler. Te gather wind,c>c; as Venteler; alfo,to efti-
mate,prizevalue, 2} Lx
Ventoir: m. as Ventail.
Ventelin: m. 4 verie/mall wind.
Ventofe :£, A cupping glaffe, ,
Ventofër. To cup,or apphe cupping glaffes.
Ventofté®f, Ventofitie windine(}e. “
Ventouft, as Ventofe ; allo,a vent in caske.
ou m.ce : £. Cupped with a cupping glaffe; alfo,
vented, ee
Ventre: m. The bellie,paunch; wombe.
Ventre debureau. One that feeds groffely, or eates
none but courfe meats,
Veutre goy. (Corrnptly, or clownifhly) for Ventre
ieu,
Ventre inferieur.The belie from the bulke to the pri
wiles.
Ventrt moyen, The butke, breaft, or flomacke; all
that part which the ribs inclofe. se $ ag
Ventre ala poulaine. A gulch, big-bellie, gorbellie,
(wag-paunch,bundle of guts.
‘Ventre fuperficiel. as Epigaftre. :
Ventre fupericur, The bead, fo called by Anatomifis. .
Haut ventre. The flomacke.
Mal de ventre. The wormes; or billie-ache ; a fret: -
ting, wringing or criping in the bellie,
Sur le ventre. Groneling.
Eftreen la pailleiufquesau ventre. To be’ filly ac-
commodated,cojefülly lodgcd,plentifülly fur nifhed,borb
for uft,anddelight. :
Faire bon ventre.To loofé the bellie,to make foluble.
Mettre le coeur‘au ventre.Cela luy mire coeur au
ventre. That beartened, cheered, or comfarted bim;
that made him take heart at graffe, ©
Saulter À deux pied fur le ventre à Looke Saulter.
Ceftle ventre ma mere, J will come no more there,
Iwill doe nomorefo, - "hr
Il y demeura le ventre au foleil. He left bu guts
there be was there knocktin the head, RARE
Ventre affamé n'a point d'oreilles: Prov, Hunger |
no eare to reafon yeeldeth. AL
Ventre de velours robbe de bureau: Prov. Looke
Velours. : : : :
Leventré emporte la tefte : Prov. Th'appetite of
ten ouerrules tbe wit ; or,as Under Emporter. © -
En petit ventre grand cocur: Pro. great flomack
oft lodges ina little one. CY,
I! n’eft horologe plus iufte que le ventre: Prov.
Noclocke more raft; or true, then the bellie;\or, the
bellie is béft dyall to giue all things their trial. a.


La verge ennoblift,8ele ventre affrandhift.(4 Pro-
verbe, or Principle in the French Lawes) Children are
> Lill by

* y

“THE OH E UNIVERSK


eae oO)
eat


a ee ae


dun Bala 6 à DS ‘
porn


da
Sah


VEN


by their father ennobled and by their mother infranchi-
fed; but thus is not alwayes fo.

Ventrée : f. A bellie=full; or,more particularly the bur-

. thenor load of a womans bellie ; the child wherewith
fhe goes ; alfo,the cbolicke bellie-ache,or griping of the
bellie(efpecially in borfes.)
Succeder par ventrées. Tofäcceed by venters ; er
land to be dinided among the ifue a man bath by di.
uers wikes,or Venters,

Ventrelet: m. A little bellie.

Ventrefque : £15,generally,th offalls intralls inwards,
guts,or paunch of an(edible)creature;as a calues pluck,
ahogs haflet,a foeeps gatber,drc ; but particularly, the
bellie(which is the daintiefi)part of a Tunnie,

Ventricule:m. The ventricle ; the place wherein the
meat fent from the flomacke is difgefed; fome callfo
the flomacke it felfe; others expreffe by it th’Epigaftre,
Ventricules du coeur. The ventricles of the beart ;

two large boles,one on the right, th'otber on the left,
fide thereof; that , the greater , and clofed within a
flendèr flefh,containes the naturall bloud,tbis,of a bar
dey fub{tance,containes the bloud wherewith our Are
teries be nourifhed ; and thereupon that is called, the
bloudie this the fpirituall,ventricle,
Ventricule pofterieur du cerveau, The hinder ven-
tricle,or tunnell of the braine ; tbe feat of the memorie.

Ventriere : € 4 bellie-band for a draught berfe.

Ventripotent. Ventripotent, big-paunch, bebie-able,
huge-guts : &Rab

se Ventrouiller. as Se veautrer.
Ventru : m,ué: f. Paunchie, great bellied, gorbellied,
füll-bellied, all-guts, all-bellie,
Venture. as Adventure,
Venu. Come, arrined approached, or dravwne neere un-
to ; proceeded,ifned,or deriued from ; (brung ,prowen,
rowne ; bappened,chanced ,betided .

e dernier venu eft le mieux aimé. Le dernier ve-
nu ferme la porte, &, Les derniers venus fonc les
maiftres : Prov. Looke Dernier. ~

Venué : £ Acomming, arrinall,approach ; a pafage,ac-
celle; increafe,groweth,erowing er comming on;alfe,a
veunie in fencing; alfo,a turne,tricke,iert,or ierke,

La venué des arondelles. The comming in of Swal-
lowes about the 22 0f March.
Attendre la yenué du boiteux. Looke Attendre,
Tout d'une venué. Without any diuifion, all of one
peece; all of one fhape, fixe, making ; alfo, at once, at
a My pas the fame time, by the fame meanes ; while his
band is in, or while he is atit.

Venus : À Venus ; one of the feuen Planets, the day or


_ morning flarre ; alfo,the Godde(fé of lui ; or luftvene- -


rie, wantonnef[e,unchafinefe,lecherie, alfo(among Al-
chymifls)the mettall Copper.
Cheveux de Venus. Venus haire, our Ladies baire,
blacke maiden-baire,true maidens baire (an bearbe).
-| Pour Venus advienne Barbet le chien, Lo/fe, or ill
_ bucke,betide bim : animprecation,or (pightfull wifh,re-
= lay to the play at huckle-bones,wherein be that turns
up V'enus(figured on one fide of the bone) doth winne ;
À = whereas be that turnes vp the dog, doth loofe,
{À Veoir, Ta view, ee, lovke, perceiue, bchold, ouerjee,
= farueys prie, fpie; marke, nate,heed, obfèrue, regard;
«| examine fare it, confer of dei, or find fame


quie ag D ER TR |


nr


pe.


{| Revo pasme re repond at gpd


7 V (By R'


lie anfwer thinke yon ? Teo

Il = à veoir, que. Me thinkes, or it feemes wuto
me, that, " ke
In’a rien que veoir en,oufur,cela. He hath nonght-


to doe with thas is concernes him net,be is not £0 med- ss
dle withaë. ? à
Qui voitenfant,il voit neant: Prov.He that an in- ss
fant feeth, noting feeth. . ‘ = .
QUE la maifon de fon Seigneur, il n’y a proft s1
ny honneur : Prov. Looke Seigneur, ; :
Tourvoir, tout ouvir, &rien dire, merite en tour v4


temps qu'on l'admire: Proy. To beare and fee, and
pi à 10[ay,deferues 10 beare the bell away.
U eft bien povre qui ne voit goutte: Prov, He sbat
wants eyes may well be tearmed poore,
Quand les yeux voyent ce que ne veirent onc-
ques, le coeur penfe'ce qu’il ne penfa oncques:Pro.
New obieéis in the eyes, new thoughts in the beart.
Tels font buy qui demain ne ycrront pas : Pro, 7e
day a man,to morrow none.
Ver : m. A worme.
Ver coquin. A certaine worme bred in amans bead,
and making him cbolericke | bumovous, and fantafti-
call when it biteth ; alfo, the Vine-fretter, or Diuells
Goldring,
Vers courts. dr/e-wormes;little round wormes which
breed in the ends of our guts.
Ver volant. A Ringworme,or Tetter.
Mal de ver. The Farcie ina horfe. -
Mort aux vers. Worme[eed or Wormeftedwort,
re. paca vn ver.We fay bare as a birds arfe;poore.
as Job.
Tirer les vers du nez a. as under Tirer ; or,to creep
into.a mans moft inward conceits; to fetch out of bim
the verie fecrets of his beart,
Tout eftat eft viande aux vers: Pro, Al States are
wormes acates, .
Ver. Menu ver. Looke under Vair. TEES
Veracée:f. The fulaelfe, or full meafure of, a certaine |:
veffel (fomewbat like a Porrenger) wher ein Caillebo-
tes are v/ually put. À
Veraire : m, The bearbe called Hellebore(e(pecially the
blacke one.) :
Veraire blanc, White Hellebore, Lingwort, Neefe-
wort; of whofe root Neefing powder ismade. _-
Veraire noir. Blacke Heilebere, Chrifts wort, Chrifis
root.
Verangenes, Mad apples, raging apples, ,
Verart,& Veratre: m. as Veraire, >
Verbal: male: f, Verball,of words, onely in words,
according to the word,
Appellation verbale. Se plaide verbalement, &
fe peut juger fur le champ en l'audience; à ladiffe.
rence du procez par efcript, qui fe diftribuë, & ju
, en la chambre fur les enqueftes, & produétions a
parties,
rocés verbal. A verbal! anfwer made by a partie be.
fre a ludge;or more generally, verbal report(made
Judge,or partie) of all the parts, and pleadings ofa |
fuit; alfo, the Returne,or anfwer of a Sergcantvpon an
Execution,erc. ;
Veibalement. Verbally,by word of mouth. y
Yeast :m, Mullein, Hi Lip Then HE
Woolblade,Longwort Bullocks Lengwort,
Verbe: m.4 (Grammatical Verbe. |
Verbe: com, Stout,baxtie, fomackfull,
Verbenique ef Veruine Pigeons era{fe, Hols-bearbe,
~ Junoes teares,Mercuries moift-bloud; sal
7 er.


VÉEVR: -


Verberie. The name of 2 Burrough within the Duchie
of Valois, and in the bighway betweene Senlis, and
Compiegne ; whence ; <
Sautereaux , ou tombereaux de Verberie. The
boyes of that Burrougb, tearmed fo becaufe they are
woont, for the fport of paffengers (giuing them fome
finall peece of money)and without any hurt unto them-
felues, totumble from the top to the bottome of a bill
that is there-by.

Vetck. menu verck.ws Menu vair,under Vair.

Verd:m. A greene,or greene colour, a greene bough,
greene Carpet, ereene thing ; alfo,greenenel[e. |
Verd d'afur. A certaine blewifh greene flone, found
in Mines of Copper which be mingled with filuer, and
an excellent purger of melanchole.

Verd de chevre. A kind of fand, whereof Painters
make their greenes,

Verd de flambe.4 greene colour made of the bruifed
leanes of the Flower de luce,

Verd gay. A Popimiay greene.

Verd de glayeul. #s Verd de flambe,

Verd de gris. Verdigreale a Spanifh greene.

Verd d'oye. Gooofe-tird greene ; a greenifh yellow;
or a colour which 1s betweene a greene and ayellow.
Verd de terre: 4 kind of greene mineral! chaulke,or


fand.
Verd de vefsie. Sap-greene ; a greene made of Bucit-
thorne berries.
Employer le verd,& le fec. Looke Sec.
Prendre fans verd. To take napping or vapronided,
Surprife on a fuddenor at unawares; (A phrafe deri-
ued from the (port,or (portfill agreement (vfed in fome
parts of France) which binds bim thats taken witbout
a greene lease about him, to fo feit fomewhat.)
Verd:m.verde:f, Greene; frefh , new; fomifiins,
youthfill , in prime’, linelie, pithie , flurdie, Strong ;
alfa, rawly tart or [harpe , as unripe fruit, or
wine, Cre. : ‘
Cuir verd. Araw bide.
Huis verd. A peece of Tapifirie, or Darnix,banging
before a doore,
Li@ verd. 4 couch,or bed of eafe.
Ocil verd. 4 gray eye. :
Tefte verde. An inconfiderate,unexperienced,ralh,or
bare-braind noddie. :
Donner de verdes. 1] nousadonné de bien ver-
des.He bath gulled vs extrcamely be bath told vs ma-
ny a lowd lye.
Mettre entre deux verdes vne meure. To inmble
good and bad,ripe and raw,together; or for the better
palling away of bad things to put fome few good ones
among them.

Verdales: f. A kind of grapes,

Verdalle:f. 4 Dunneck,or Hedge-fparrow.

Verdaftre :com. Greeni{h,or fomewbat greene,

Verdelet : m. The tender, and delicate peare, called a
Greening.

Verdelet:mette :f Prettie and greene ; onely begin-
ning to be greene, but young, not yet ripe; alfo, alittle
raw,tart, fharpe, «

Verdetnent, Greencly; frefbly, newb; flourifbingly;


‘ fowerly,

Verderest Verdereule:£:The little bird called a Tel.
low-bammcer or Yowlving,

Verderic: f TH Office of aVerderer in a Forefi,

Verderis: m. Verdigrenfe. io 98

Verdet: m. The fame ; called alfo,Spani(h greene,


anzedy GOugle


or


‘Verdun: 1m, The little Rapier, called a Tucke ; alfo, as


Verefque: f. A wrecke of the fea.


youth filly luflily,fir ongly fur dily ; alfo,rawly, fharply,


VER


Verdeur : £ Verdure,greeneneffe; alfo,araw,or natna
rall fowrenefte in wine, fruits,eoc ; Looke Verdure.

ureux :m.eufe: f. Somewhat greene,

Verdier: m.4 Verderer,or Ouerfècr of a forefi;a Judge
or Officer (next in authoritie unto the Maiftre des
Eaux & forefts) who commannds all the Raungers,
Woodwards Forefters coc, and punifhes their e other

mens diforders, in cafes not exceeding the penaltie,
or forfeiture of 60 s.Tourn:Alfo,the little finging bird .
called a Greenefinch ; alo, the little venomuns greene
Toad ; alfo,a Gardener,or Orchard-keeper. À

Verdillon : m. An vnripe,or fowre crape,

Verdir, To fleurifh, or wax greene,

Verdon:m,A Dumneck;Dike-fmowler,Hedge-fparrow

Verdondaine,& Verdondille (frined & find oaths)

Vetdor: m.otte :f.Greenifh,a litsle grecne; yong raw,

y or hu Jet ripe. es
crdoyant : m. ante: f. Flourifhing, full of greene.
neffe 7, liwelie, youthfull, flrong, mee fg

‘Ss oye Te flourifh; to be greene, yoxng,lupié, youth.

8


ffrong.
Verdrier : m,The Go!d-bammer,Tclow-bämer,vowl |


ving. es,
Verducade: £, 4 Clofét ; a hiding bole,or corner.
Verdugalle :f. 4 Vardingall.


Verdrier ; or as Verdon.

Verdure :f Verdure, greeneneffe, or greene things, as
bearbs,greene boughes, rc ; alfo,as Verdeur.
Ouvrage de verdure. Foref} worke; or flourifht
worke,wheria gardes,woods;or férefis be reprefented.

Verdurcr, To make,or become greene.

Verdurier :m.Verdurierc:f. 4a hearb-man, or wo-
man; one that fürnifhes a bonfe with fuch greene things
as bein fèafon.

Vere: as Voire : Norm, qRab.

— :m.de:£, Demure fhamefac'd bafhfull rmo-

P


Veret : m. A little worme; or, a kind of littls worme; |
alfo,as Gueret(in the firf} fence.)

Vereux: m.eule: £ wormie, full of worms; alfo,worm.

© eaté;ey thence ,faultie,fziling,in decay; Look Verreux.

Vergadelle: £ 4 pond-fifh, like vnto,but leffe then, tbe


Saupe, A
Vergaland: m. A luflie ponker. È
Vergay. Brouët vergay d'anguille. Broth made of
Eëles boiled in {mall péeces with Paxfley,softed bread,
Saffron,and Ginger.
Vergaye :f. 4 kind of daunce.
Verge: f, A rod, wand; flicke, final! flaffes a whisker,
fwvitch or feutcher,to ride with; a twig, [prig, fmall or
fingle branch, alfo,a Sergeants verge, or mace; alfo, a
yard ; alfo,tbe fayle-yard of a fhip ; alfo,a plaine boope,
or gimmall,ring; alfo,a rood of land al/o,therod wher-
‘with a Thatcher faflens bis (rave tothe roofe,
Verge à berger. The Taxle, Teaxle, Fullers Thiftle,
Veni balon;alfo,water Plantaine, ny
Verge dorée.The hearbe called Golden rad,
Verges à nettoyer. A br. © 7"
Verge d'or, as Vergce doré ; alfo,a gold ring,
Verge de paftcur,ou paftoral. as Verged berger.
Verge fanguine. The Hounds tree,Dog-berrietree,
Pricke-timber tree. Sia SaaS
Le pouvoir de la verge, & fergenteric. The libertie,
or precinGh,wherein a Sergeant may arrefidre, .
Detelles vergesils font tous batus.Thep are all fick
of that difeafe. Re es
Lilly Met-.


*


EE SEE


I
a


es te en st pte à eS tn dé


V EUR VER


Grande difpute la verité rebute: Pro. wrangling
contention us truthes preuention; The likew; ,
Par trop debatre la verité fe perd : Prov, To. much
debating mates truth to be lof, — s

Verjus : m. Veriuyce ; efpecially that whichis made of
Sovre, and unripe grapes ; alfo,the grapes whereof it 1s
made. ra”
Verjusmicllé. Three parts of grape-veriuyce, and | —
on darfed bonie tr ap cs to- |
gether. \


Mettre la main à la verge. To dipoffefe bimfelfé of
an inheritance in prefence of his Landlord, or of bis
Officer, by the delinerie of arod, or little fiche, to bim
be paffes it to.
La verge ennoblit,& le ventre aftranchit, The gen-
| tleman ennoblés bis child, a free woman enfranchifes
| hers ; Looke Ventre.
à | Vergé: m.ée: f. Made of rods,or twigs; alfo, freaked
with long,and rod-like rayes ; alfo,worme-caten.
Vergée: f. Ayard ofthe length of a yard in; alfo,a yard-


4 Land,or,a rood of land, Eftre mis au verjus. To be trounfl,or court.

4 Verger:m, ,4 Verger; ome that beares a Verge before | Verm:m. A worme: €Auvergnois.

: a Magifirate, ec. Vermeil : m. Vermillion ruddine[[e,a beautifull red,
:


se Verger. To berewed, or flreaked all ouer.

| Vergeteux. as Vergeux.
| Vergette :f. 4 fall rod, or wand ; a twig, or [prig;
| alfo,a boyes play with rods or wands pecked at abeape

of points,
Des vergettes. À brufh.

Vergettons : m. Swall twigs,or fbrigs.

Vergeux: meuf :f Roddie, fall of rods; of arod,

rod-like,

Vergier : m. da Orchard; alfoas Verger,
Veroilies:f, Theftuen farres.

Vergiacer. To freexe upon raine.

Verglas: m. Frofl, or a freezing, prefentl after a mif-
| ng raime, wherby the ground feemes ina manner gla-
ed; alfo,a glazing upon a wall; or a pamting that re-

prefents,and flands forges |

Verglaffant. vent verglas : A harpe freezing or flee-
ting wind. ,

Vergne. Th’ Aller,or Alder tree.

Vergobert :m, A Maior,or Burgomaifler.

Vergongne :£ Shame, bafbfune[fe, blufhing; alfo,the
prisie paris,

Vergongner. To fhame, to make afbamed , to dif
grace, or dafhout of countenance, se Vergongner.
To blufh, ov be afbamed at, to be out of countenance
with.

Vergoneneux: m.eufe : f. Shamefill, fhame-fac'd,
bafh fied, bluffiell, demure snodeft ; alfa, foamele(fe,in-
pudent, brafen-fac’d, paf fhame.

Vergue: f. The fayle-yard of a fhip; whence ; Vergues,

hautes; with boifed failes, or fayle-yar ds (Sayed of a
Ship that bath weighed anchor and wants but wind to


Verineil : m.eille: £ Vermillion,ruddie,reddilhclaret’,
of a cleere or beautifull red.
Soupe vermeille. Looke Soupe,

Verineiller. To root for wormes like a bog, |

Vermeillens mee: 6 Somewhat maddie, prettie and
red,

Vermeilleur : m, À rooter,or digger for wormes..

Vermeillon, & Vermeillonner. 4s Vermillon, &

Vermillonner.

Vermelet : m. 4 verie little worme.

Vermeniers: m, Vermine; or as Verminiere.

Vermerie:£ wermes,

Vermet: m. À little worme.

Vermiculaire: f. wild Prick-madame, great Stone-
crop,Worme-graffe.

ermiforme: com. Fafhioned like a worme,

Vermifonnes. Two worme-refembling parts of the
Cervelet.

Vermiller, To worme,to root for wormes,

Vermillon: m, Vermillion ; aruddie colour made of
Brimflone and Quicksiluer ; alfo,as Chermes ; alfoya
little worme. '

Arbre de vermillon. The Skarlet Oke, or Skarlet
Holme Oke.

Vermmillonné : m.ée : f. Made ruddie,painted red ; of
a Vermillion bue, |

Vermillonner. To paint, or make Vermillion, or of a

ermillion bue ; alfo,to blufh,or wax red.

Vermine: f. Vermine; alfo, little beafis ingendred of \
corruption and filth; as Lice,Fleas, Ticks, Mice, Rats; |
and (moft particularly) wormes, E

Vermineux : m. The name of a certaine Spider whofe


be gone with.) _… bodie ts full of fpots. ;

Veridique : com. Truth-telling, Vermineux: m.eufe : £. wormie,or full of vermine,

Ver-jettons, as Vergettons, Herbe vermineufc. Moath Mulleine,

Verification: € 4 verification,verifying averring,ap- | Verminiere: £ A wormesbil; or a place neere aconn- |
pron ing. ; trey boufe,wherin wormes are,of pur pofe,bred fur pul- |

Verifié: m.ée: £ Verified auerred, appraued, confir- eine.
med made good. Vermiffeau : m, 4 little worme,

Verifier. To verifieauerte,approme,cofirme,prone true, | se Vermoulir. To grow worme-eaten,mouldie,rosten.

: make good. Vermouliflure: f. 4 being worme-eaten, or full of
À Verin:m, as Varin. worme-holes ; rottenneffe; mouldine|fe,


Verincux:m. eufe :f. Full of, troubled with, gnawne
À A byyyormes. My is

ha ear £, Likelihood, poffibilitie, refemblance
4 veatable: com. True, facere, upright, a man of bis
Vettablement eich srs pm ile,

ete Eien rath footb,verie deed. |

- erite :t. Ye Ns, 5

NÉaiceseri caste


Vermoulu:m.uê: fworme-eaten. fill of worme-boles,
votten; mouldie. x

Verne.æ Vergne, ” AT

Vernedé, A certaine charme, or charming prayer , for
the tooth-ache.

Vernicer.as Vernifler: 4

Vernillage. ce n’eft que vernillage. (Gp ‘the
farching of two or three bands at a time) this is bat a


eines LE Niflesiflécbings of notbingor ne vale, z \
Vernis: m. Varnifh ; (made of Linféed oyle and) the |
Gumme of the Jumper tree. | us


Franc; ) wbence; Compa-
oit, vetité fpeciale, A


eM


Original from


ÆTHEOHIO-STATÉ UNIVERSITY.


gere


V ER


Verniffé : m.ée: € Varnifhed; flecked,or glaxed oner,
with Varnifb. ba

bee vy: To varnifh,toflecke, or glaze ouer,with Var-
#1


Verny. as Vernis,

Verole : +. The finall Pockes,
Lagroffe verole. The Neapolitane difeafe, called by
us the French Pockes, though not verie iuftly, the Spa-
niards bauing firft brought it out of the Indies into
Chriflendome, and beflowed it among the French,their
enemies, at the fiege of Naples,in the yeare 1528,

Veroleux: meule :£ Pockie, full of the Pockes.

Verolique : com, Pockie,of or belonging to tbe Pockes.

Veron :m. The little fijh called a Menow.
I faut perdre vn veron pour pefcher yn Saulmon :
Prov. A man mufi loofe a feather to win a Goof; a
fiaall,to come by a great, matter,

Veron. whence; Ocil veron; Looke under Ocil

Veronique: f. The bearbe Fluellin,Speed-well, Pauls
Betonie, Ground-heele ; al{o,a reprefentation, image,
Pillure;counter feit Lhenefle of; alfo,a fheet which,ma-
ny beleeue, a woman of that name brought to wine
Chrift witha when he did fiveat ; which feet u yet
fhewed, as a Relique,at Rome.
Veronique femelle, Fluelin the female ; or Speed.
well bearing a yellowi{h flower.
Veronique mafle. The male Speed-well, or Paules
Betonie (the Author of the Theatre d'Agriculture,

Sayes it beares a reddifb, or purple flower ; Gerar
bath fix kinds thereof; and the firfl, which be caïls Ve-

-ronica vera,& major, comes neerefl unto the French-
mans defcription.)

Verrat: m. 4 tame Boare ; alfo,a Mackerel,
— comme vn verrat, (Said of an extreame le-
cher.)

Verrate: £ 4 Sow,

Verte: m. Glaffe; a drinking glaffe.
Droi& de verre. Leoke under Droi&.

‘A grandhomme grand verre : Prov, .4 great man
cannot vfe a little glafe; men fhould be fitted in things
of much vfe.

Verterie : f. 4 Glaffe-boufe.

Verretre: m. 4 mans yard: (Rab,

Verreux:m. cufe :f. as Vermincux; al/o, worme-ea-
ten,corrupted, putrified ; alfo, hot, cholericke, baftic ;
light-headed, odde-bhumored bare-braind.
Faire le pois verreux. To play the hypocrite; to feeme

fèeme more honell then he is ; (xs many worme-eaten
Peafe doe feeme a great deale founder then they be.)

Verri:m.ie : f. Shining,or tranfparent,like glaffe.
Parchemin verri. Cleere Parchment, virgine Parch-
ment,

Verrier: m. 4 Glazier ; alfo, a Gla(fe-maker; alfo, a
frame to fet glafres iv. ;

Verriere :f. A glaffe-window ; and, a peece of glaffe
wherewith a thing wincompaffed, or conered; alfo,a
Glaffé-boufé;and the furnace wherem gaffe is melted,

Verrin: mine :£.Glaffieor of elalfe; whence; Medica-
ment verrit; à blackifh medecine, or falue, made of
burnt glaffes,and good againf the flone.

Verrine :f. a Verriere.

Verrouil: m, 4 boult for adoore,erc.

Verrouiller. To boult a doore. /

Verrucaire :f The hearbe Wartwort, or Turnefole ;

fome alfo call Gumme fuccorie fo, becaufe the feeds
thercof;in powder ,take away warts,

Verrué:£ 4 wart.

Verrticux: m.eufe: f, Wartie, full of warts,


vies Goal


VER


Cichorée verrüeufe. Yellow Gumme Saccorie,
arm :f as Veriué; al/o,a billocke, or knap of a


Verty:m. A mouldie cheefe when it is greene ov any
Liquid thing which gathers a greene mouidinefe.
Vers:m, Averfe.
CS. Towards,vunto,neere to oy by; at, with; before, or
en rs of; alfo againfi.
Verfälwbence; Lettres verfales; Text lettersor great
letters ; fuch as Rex in a Patent,erc. ;
Verfane :£. Adiuifion, or part of a plowed ground, a-
mounting to fome 200 paces in length,
Verfatil: m. ile :£ Quickly twraing, eafily turned, or
powred out, F
Verfé : m.ée:f, powred, or turned, out ; (ill, or fhed
forth ; ouerturned,onertbrowne,
ie Aquarius ; one of the twelue Signes of tbe Zo-
sacke,
Verfelet : m, A little,or fhort verfe.
Van : m, A pewring out, or upon; a fpilling, or
Ing. .
Verfer, To powre,turne,put,out,or upon; to flied,or [pills
alfo,to conwerfe with, "* L
Verfer aboire À, 70 fill drinke for,
Verfer vn chariot. Towault,ouerturne,or auertbrew
a chariot ; whence the Prouerbe; U n'eût fi bon char-
tier quine vere ; The bet that driues will fometimes
wault,a cart. ‘
Verfer de l'huile fur le feu. Looke Feu,
Verfer par terre. A horfà to throw bis rider,
Verlet:m. A verficleor fhort ver{e.
Verieur : m. 4 powrer; fhéäder, fpiller ; oucrturner,o-


hertbrower,

Verhiieatenns m, A verfificalor, verfifier, maker of |

verllSe . : ,

Verfifier, Te ver fifie,to make verfes.

Verlure: f The taking up of money to pay debts with ;
whence; Faire versure; To make {hift ; or to trouble. |.
one for the fatisfying of another; or (as we fay) to bor-
row of Peter 10 pay Paule, “
Verfures. The vemainder , or leauings of draughts
powred ont of late-drunke-in cups, or glaffes, itp |
Some veffell landing under the cupboord re, for that
purpofe.

Vert: m, as Verd:m, alfo, the apple called a Greening,

Vert :m.verte : f. Greene ; Looke Verd,

Vertaper. To flop with a burg: &Oïrlean. *

Vertau:m. 4 flopple,or bung ; alfo,as Vextoil.

Vert-de-gris: m. Verdigreafe. F'HÈTER

Vertebre: f, A turning ioynt,or ioynt wherein the bones
mect fo as thoy may turne ; as in the buckle-bone, dc.

Vertement. as Verdement, *

Vertemnoulte. Droi& de vert. Looke under Droiét,

Vertevelles: f. The great bindges of a gate.

Vertical: male: f P'erticel ; waucring inconftant,apt
tochange or turne; alfo, landing right ouer the bead.
Cercle vertical. The Verticall circle; a circle of the
Azimuth which comes from the Zenith to the Horizon,
Poin& vertical, The Zenith, or point of the firmamét
which à direéily ouer ones bead, bret

Vertige: fA dixzincBe, giddine[fe,or fwimming in the
bead; a difecfe wherein the patient thinkes that all
things turne round,

Vertigicux :meufe : f Giddie,dizgie,turning round;
or troubled wish the fivimming of the braine,

Vertigineux. # Vertigicux. +24

Vertiginofité: € A giddmefe,dixxincfe,or fimming


Ss .
Lillig “Ver: |)


-


of the bead or braine,


QO je } om :
THE: OFLO*S TATÆE UNIVERSE:


V ER


|
| Vertigné: m.éc : f. Worme-eaten,

Vertiller. To (well, or increafe, as womens breafis doe
when the matricall veins are firetched by the menfiru-
ali blond.

Vertillons: m, The whirling, sound turning,or eddie of

| a waler.

| Vertir en quelque lieu, To baunt, frequent, or be con-

| uerfantim,aplace.
Il n'y fçauroir vertir, He cannot fadge with, he can-
not absde,or frame bumfelfe to.

Vertjus. as Verjus. :

| Vertoeil: m. A kind of greenifh brafe, whereof great
Ordnance u made. ‘

Vertoil : m.The wherue,or whirle of lead belonging to
a fpiadle.


prowefe,manbood; alfo, energie, efficacie, force, pow-
er might; alfo,a good part or propertie,a commendable
qualitie.
Les vertus furmontent les fignes : Pro, Look Signe.
Contre peche eft vertu medecine: Prov.Vertuous
mult he be who of finne cur'd will be; or, let bim, that
of finne would recouer, to vertue recourse.

Vertuéufement. Vertuoufly, bonefily, manfully, wor-
thily, .

Vertuéux: meule: f. Vertuous;boneff, fincere ; man-
full,valiant; worthie; thats furnifhed wub good parts,
and qualities, 1

Vertugadin : m, A little Vardingale.

Vertugalle: f A Vardingale,

Vertugoy. for Vertu dieu,

fecal male :f. Changeable at pleafure, to be al
tered at will,or when one lift,

Vervaine. as Verveine. ;

Verué:£ A brawling, frapling, ianglng, iarring: al/o,
ar odd bumor in a man; a worme in the bead,or brizze
in the taile ; whence ; 3 F
Illuy a pris vne verrué. He à growne verie fantafli-
call, humorous, giddie-braind ; the worme pricks him,
the toy bath taken bim,in the head,

Verveil : m. A Sweepe-net,or Drag-net,
Verveine: £ Verueine,Holie bearbe, Funoes teares,Pi-
geons gralle, Mercuries Moifl-bloud, — ’

Verveine bafle. Holic Verucinecreeping Verncine;
or a Verveine femelle, .
Verveine femelle. Female Verueine, bafe or flat
- Uerneine creeping Verneine,bolie Verueines ——_
Verveine mafle.Male Verueine, firaight or upright
Verueine,common Verueme, re
rerueleux : meule: f. Moodie humorous, fantaflicall,
giddie beaded, bare-braind,
Veraelies :f. Varuells for a Hawke; alfo, as Verte-
velles.
2 ets Tettar
er-v :m. À Fin ,07 Tettar.
Velce :f. The pulfe ‘alle Fitch or Veub.
| Vefce noire, The Taresou bitter Fitch,
Saloetauvace. Strangle-tare, Tine , wild Fitch; or
the (mall wild Vetch,or Fitcbling.


| tie; worth, perfection , defert, merit; alfo, valour,


| VefCeron:m, Strangle-tare,Tine,the wild Fitch,


Velen :
ICT vine, indo Of
Velicaie: Red de Akeni ter der


.
a. + 15


Fiasco gle


| Vertu:f. Vrrtue,coodnefe, honeflie, finceritie, integri~


V:1E,S


Veficatoire: m. A veficatorie; a cupping glaffe, eras
ny fharpe ointment, ee Her, rte
power to draw s outward, exulcerating tbe
skinne,and raifing little blifiers on it, :

Vefler. To calfe; See Veller, 6

Vefner. To fizzle. a ht yp)

Velperies : f. Euening exercifes,or difputations, among |
the Sorbonifis.

Vetperifé: m.ée : £. Chidden, checked, taunted, feboo-
led, reniled, railed on; alfo, mocked, flowted, ieafied
at,tidden,derided,

Vefperifer. To checke,taunt, fchoole, chide, renile; al-
fo,to mocke, flowt,ieall at;ride,er deride.

rtin : ch.ine:f. Of the enening, done in an ene«
ning,

Vespre :m. The enening.

Il n’eft fi grand iour que ne vienne vefpre : Prov,
The longeli day is ended by an euening,
Vefprée :f. The evening tide,or feajon.
Verne :f, Ewen-fong,or Ewening prayer.
cipres Siciliennes : Prov. The Sicilian Euenfong;
mifchiefés done or death inflitied,in a place and time,
of imagined ecuritie ; (from a generall maffacre of the
French, made on a {udden, and throughout Sicilie
(whereof they were ouer-infolent Maifters ) by the in-
cenfed 1flanders on Eafler day(Anno 1282)and about
fiue of the clocke in the afternoone.) à
Veffaille:f, 4 ffling ; or a crue of fyfling flouens, or
us.
cfle: € A fife; alfo,as Velce.
Vefle de loup. The duflie or finoakie Toadfole,called
* hese Pucke-fifee, Bull-Hfte, Puffy, wolues
€, . ,


Panier à vefles. C’eftle cul.
efferon: m, as Vefceron.
Vefleur: m. 4 fyflera linking fellow,
Vefleufe:£. 4 frlting houjewift.
Veflie:f. A bladder; alfo,a blane,or blifier ; alfo,a kind
of brafen Stillitorie the pipe wherof is comeyed through
aveffell of water, and afterwards yeelds the diftilled
liquor into the Recipient.
effies d’orme. Certaine bliflers, or little bladders
(fit of a flimie , or clammie, liquor) in fome Elme
leaues.
Croire que veffies fontlanternes. To beleeue that”
the Moone is made of a greene cheese.
Veffié : mée :£ Bebliflered,or full of blifters.
Veflier: m, A fifier. :
effier. To blifier, L
Vefhere : fa Vefleufe, ;
Veffette:f, 4 little bladder ,or blifier,
Vefiifiant : m. ante :£ Causing one tofyfle.
ifier. To breed a fyfie,to make breake wind, or let a


:m. Windgalls in a borfes legs.
¢, to let a fpfle.
Linerie and feifin made vato a purchafer, in
fome places by the feller but in moft by the Lord Fonci-
er or Cenfier of whom the land is beld,
Droiét de veft. Looke under Droid.
Veftales:f The Veflall virgines, the Nannes of the
Heathenifh Romans, :
ef t:m, À veflment, veflure, weed, garment,
babit , array , attire, apparel , cloathing , fute of


5,
On croit d’un fol bien fouvent qu'il foit clerc pour
fes veftemens: Prov, Difcreet cloathes often pafe
a foole for a wife man. Va


Original.from


THEOHIO STAFE-UNIVERSITY


‘NOE VIA


Vetteure: f. A veflure; or,asVeltement. filly farnifbed, and certaine other houfehels-fiuffe : By

eftiaire: m. The Vefrie ina Church, the cuflomes of Lalleué in Artois sthe furuinor(man or

7 Veltige: m. 4 firp, footflep, tracke, trace marke, figne, | woman)takes by this priuiledge, onely the beft peece of
‘ or token of a footing, euerie kind of a ue y

an Vettir. To clothe array,apparrell, attire, decke,enrobe, | Veuilles: £ The clafping te els,or finall tvoyning fprigs


Suit with, put on a fuit of clothes; allo, to ve, inuef, of a Vine,

= ialeifin, give palf>/fion of, make liderie and feifiaunte. | Veule: com.weake, faint, infirme, vnfound, onertopled

Bs à | Welts, for Va; coe thou. QPic. (Rab. : with heat and labour ; alfo, hollow, loofe,or light about

Veltu: m.ué: £. Clad, clothed, yelad,arrayed,apparrel- a thing.
led,attired, (uited, enrobed, couered ; vefted, inuefted, | Vexateur: m, A vexer,affliéter,tormentor.

infeifiaed, put into poffeffion of - | Vexation: f Vexation, torment, extreame grief, trou-

Long vettu. An auncient peece of coyne,worth about ble,or difquiet,


ins vjd fterling = Vexé: mee: £ Vexed, affliited,tormented,turmoyled,
Velture: f 4 clothing, arrayine, apparrelling, attiring, | __extreamely griewed,or difquieted.
. enrobing, (uiting, couering; alfo,a vefting, inuefling, or | Vexer. To vex,afflictor torment ; extreamely to grieue,
putting into poffeffion of ; alfi,as Veltement.® trouble,difquiet.
Vetade: f. The filetted Cockle; finootb, broad, and ex- | Vezarde: £. A great feare.dread,horror. &Rab.
ceeding hard, fhelled. Vezé.C’eft vn gros vezé. A gulch, gorbellie, fat guts.
-\ Veterinaire: m. Ax old beaten fouldior ; one thathath | Veze: f A Bag-pipe. @Poievin,
(erued long in a place, or office. Iouér de la veze. To play on the Bagpipe ; alfo, to
Vetiller. To ticgle,@re,as Fretiller; alfo,to trifle. fixe.
Vetilles:f. Tarriers to play with; alfo, nifles, trifles, | Vezées. Bille vezées. Looke Bille-vezées,
things of no value. Vezeur: m. 4 Bagpiper, €Poiétevin. :
Vettoine: f. The hearbe Betonie. Vezie: f. A Carbuncle, or blaine-fore.
Veu: m, A vow, a folemne promifé,or proteftation; alfe, | Vezon: m, The arfe,tayle breech, &Norm.
a requefl, prayer,defire. se The name of a Vine. ,
Veu: m. euë:f Viewed, fèene, perceiued, beheld, ouer- i: m, Wine(fo tearmed about Montpellier.)
looked, furueyed ; marked,heeded,obférued,regarded; | Viable: com. Liueable,likelie to line,
examined, fearched into,confidered of, Viage: m. as Viufruiét; alfo,a lining,
Boule veué; &,louér à boule veué. See Boule, ‘A viage. For life,


Ronfle veuë. Vous me remettez à point en ronfle | Viager: m. A tenant for life,
veué. You haute me at a vantage,hold me ata bay, put | Viager:m, ere: f. For lifé,duringlife. _


me to my {hifts, force me to quit,or abandon all, uint viager. See Quint, eu
Avoir veu boire. A ieafling (peech whereby they figni- Rente,ou penfion viagete. A rent-charge,or annui-
fie that aman is drunken. tie bought for money ; called fo, becaufe it may alfo be
Ila veu le loup. His voice is crowne hoarfe,or he hath redeemed,or extinguifhed,by money.

vt loft bis voice,on a fuddaine ; See Loup. Reparations viageres. Ce font menués reparati-


Il eftveu du Roy. Tre King doth grace, or fauour ons, pour l'entretenement de I’heritage, hors les
him, : quatre gros murs,poultres,& entiere couvertures,

Veu. (Adv.) Confidering, feeing, in refbeël of; whence, & voultes,
Veu la facilite qu’eft en luy,veu fon impudence; | Viager.To enioy during life, to bane an eflate for fein, .
&;veu qu’il ne vient point,&c. Viagerement. During life,ouely for life. ‘
eué: f. The fénce,alt,or inflrument of feeime;the eyes, | Viagier. as Viager; or,as Viufruictier,
or their funtion ; the glaunce, or the reach thereof’, a | Viaige: m. A tenant for life.


view, looke, fight, afpett, regard; a profpedt; alo, the | Viaire: m. The face,looke, afbeë, vifa es countenances


furuey of a houft, er peece of ground ; alfo, the vifer


. of a Helmet; alfo, a light, or overture for light;


whence;

Venés mortes, Clofè, or uncafemated windowes,
Droié deveué. Power to get light unto a houfe by a
window,or ouerture,made into a neighbors,

Droid de veués, The fame ; ag al(o,todamme vp thofe
of his that offend me ; or to bn w him to remoue, or
take away that which impeaches mine,

Veuë à veué. Face to face, right oneragainft,


‘A veué de pais, At randon, roaming, at rouers,


alfo,an annuitie, or yearelie penfion, *

Viande: £ Meat, food, fuftenance, viéluals, viands; a-
cates (e(pecially of flefh.) ; ’
La viande creule. wenches,trulls, two-legd beafts.
Viande d’ami eft bien voft prefte: Prov. Meat in
a friends bone is (or thought) foone, readie ; Looke
Ami }


me à 14
La viande femond les gens: Pro.Well-cooked meats
inuite the flomacke. }
De mauvaife viañde on ne fçait faire vn bon po-
tage: Pro. No man can make of ill acates good cale.


\

| at large ; without exabt examination , or certaine Tout eftat eft viaride aux vers: Prov. Wormes prey,

b proofe, by times, on all Eflates. eS

Difcours à perte de veuë. aft,extrauagant,or wan- | Viander.(A word peculiar to réd Deere) to feed; alfè,as |
| dering difcourfes ; tales without order or end. Fianter.
Allerilaveuë, To goe harbour a Stag, or lodge a | Viandier: m, ere: £. Ofoÿ belonging to,meat.

[ Bucke, Viandy: m. The paflure, or ground wherein a Deere

. Veuf: £ Awidow; Looke Vef. feeds; alfo,the meat which he feeds on.

i Veutvage: m. widowhood, i Viateur: m. A rrdieller, palfenger, wayfaring man.

| Veufve: f A widow. u Vibailli:m. À Wice-Baylifé,or under-Steward ; an 0

I Droié de veutve. Awidowes due, or part inmouea- | cer that (in fome Prouinces) examines, and p

| bles (ouer and befides her iointure, or dower ) viz. malefactors. 2e

her befl gowne, her marriage ring and iewels, her bed | Vibrequin: m, A #imble, eS Vj
a 1=


: E 2 Original from:7;
: Digitized by CO gle THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


VIC


Viburne: m. as Viorne ; 07, onely the wayfaring tree.

Vicaïire:m. AWicar, or Vicegerent, alts the Tenant,
or Facumbent, who ithe right of a Corporation, or
Church, is to pay duties, or doe feruices, unto the Lord
of the land,

Grand vicaire. A Vicar general; or an officer whom
‘ ae imployes for the difpofition of fuch Benefices as
_ bein. is gift, F x

Vicairie: f. 4 Vicaredge;or,æs Vicatiat,

Vicariant, Gadding,raunging,roaming,trotting up and
downe the countrey.

Vicariat: m. A Vicarfhip, the place of a Vicar ; alfo, a
Vicegerencie.

Vicarier. To raunge,roame, gad,or trot up and dovne a
conntrey.

Vice:m. Avice, fault, finne, offence villanie,roguerie,
lewdue(Je naughtine/e, corruption, blemi{h,defedt,im-
perfection, default.

Au vis le vice : Prov. Maas face oftentells what vice
in him dwells,

Nul vice fans fon fupplice: Pro. All vices haue their
plagues attending on them.

Tel vice tel fupplice: Pro.Sach as the crime {uch the
correction, |

Vice-admiral: m. 4 Viceadmirall,

Vice-chancelier: m. 4 Vicechancelor,

Vice-conte: m. A Vicount; Looke Vicomte,

Vice-conte: f. 4 Vicountie, a Vicountfoip ; Looke Vi-
comte,

Vice-gerent: m. AVicegerent ; a Deputiesor Liente-
nant, -

Vice-roy: m.A Viceroy,or Deputie unto a King;he that
in his abfence reprefenteth his per(on, and goucrneth
his kingdome.

Vicié: m. ée: f Viciated,mard,corrupted,infelled,de-
filed; blemifhed,imper fet, unfound,

bin To viciate marve,corrupt,infect, (poyle blemifh,

efile. 4

Vicieufement. Viciosfh,lewdh,corrupth, faultily.

Vicieux: m.eufe: f. Vicious, lewd ,bad, wicked, finfull,
naughtie roguifh,vikanous; filthie,corrupt; ezronious,
imperfect,;vnfound.

Vicinité : f Vicinitie neighborhood nighneffe, proximi-
tie,neerencfe.
icomte: m, A Vicount ; was at the firf the Deputie,
or Lientenant,of an Earle, in [ome towne wherein he

. could not refide bimfelfé ; or by the King made gardian
of a Couatie, untill he had fixnifhed it with an Earle:

Theft Vicounts had but la moyenne luftice, la haute
being referued by, or for, the Earles themfelues (and
therefore in moft of the cuftomes of Ja Gaule Belgique
that Furifdiction is bitherunto filed, Vicomtierc;)
howfieuer,they were at firft but Officers; axd,euen at
this day, the Prevofts, or luges of Normand villages

_ are tearmed Vicomtes. Now it is to be prefumed,

that when the Earles of Prouinces,erc,vfurped a pro-

prietie in their charges, the Vicounts, not to be behind
them, did the like in thofe tovenes, and villages which


rs
"


ka d. There beat this day three or foure forts
1 ofthems fir thofe that, holding immediately of the
À Crowne (as the Vicointe de Turenne,and but a fiw


| others) are to be ranked among great, or high Lords
a oa wn i th a ang


page tage reunited (and be


À Ging thereby in the qualitie of Arrierevaflaux de la
| Couronne) are no better then meane Lords, and
pe y 2 29 Pere pu he:
AIMENT La


oh ee ie ate te i!)
:


- trne)inheritance.


Ve i


ferior unto,them in Tenure : Laftly, thofe (ia Picardie,

Flanders , and elfewhere) that hauing not hitherunto |
beene able to compalfe more then a meane Furifdiction, |
and therefore not meriting the place, or efiecme of ab-
Solute Lords, are not qualified Vicomtes, but barely,
and in difference from the reft, Seigneurs Vicomti- |


crs.

Vicomté:£ AV icountie; the dignitie, territorie, or e-

" flate of a Vicount ; alfo,meane Furifdittion.

Vicointier: m. ere: £ Of a Vicount,Vicountlike, alfo,
enioying, or belonging to,meane Furi(dittion.

Chemin Vicorntier. Laoke Chemin.

Vicon. Mon petit vicon. My little pricke, or pilli-
cocre.

Viétimaire: m. One that fold a beafi for facrifice ; or,
rd pve dus the facrificer in the killing, and dref-

fing thereof. ;

Victoire : f. Vidtorie, conqueft, a fubduing,ar vanquifb-
ing,the upper hand of an encmit. +

Viétorial: m, ale: £ vittoriall, of or belonging to vic-
torte, ; 2

Viétoriat: m, The fourteenth part of an ounce,
iétorien: m. 4 conqueror,vanquifber, fubduer,ouer-
commer,

Viétorienne: f. 4 vidloreffe, a viélorious or vanquifh-
ing woman,

Viétorieux: m. cufe: f. Vittorions, triumphant, con.
quering ,vanguifbing.

Viétuailles : £ 7:ftwalls, food, commons dyet, pronifiun
for the bellie, |

Vicugne. 4 borneleffe wild beaft in Peru,of whofe wool
the Indians make excellent (onerlets.

Vidame: m. 4 Vidame ; was originally the Judge of a |
Bifbops temporal lurifdittion, or fitch an Officer to him
as the Vicomte was to the Comte: but in proceffeof
time of an Officer he became a Lord, by altering bis of-
fice into a fief, held of the Bifhopricke he belonged vn-
10 : Sothat,eucn to this day,the eftate of all Vidames
dependeth of fome Bifhopricke, or is annexed vato the
Temporalities thereof; and therefore they be no better
then Seigneurs mediocres, although the firft of that
ranke; and in all other priuiledges and rights cquall to
Vicounts, with fome aduantage of credit in vefpect of
High Iurifditlion, which thofe haue ufurped,by degrees,
upon their Earles, and thefe hadsat the firft,by the gift
of their Bifbops.

Vidimeé: m.ée:f. Confirmed, approued, ratified ; the
goodneffe whereof is,after examination,warranted,

Vidimer.To con firme,approue,or warrant the goodnepe
of a thing, after an examination thereof:

Vidimus de lettre, An examination of a Copie by the o-
riginall, figned by a Secretarie, Regifler, Notarie, or
Clarke, Cs,

Viduité: f widewhood,the eftate of a widow.

Vie: f. A life, or lining; whole age, or time ; alfo, the di-
rect way into ahauen,or barre. .

Arbre de vie, The fiveet tree,called alfa by us ,the tree
of li :


ile de vie. The(moft excellent)oyle of Vitriol.
La vie de dix. As much as would ferue tenne.
Ceft toute ma vie. Tis all I hane to liue on.
De l'une & l'autre vie. Lining both on land, and in
the water.
3 a François pour la vie. He à French to the
leath. . :
lourde ta vie. Nener,not as long as then linef,
Vie n’eft pas feur heritage: Prov. Lift à no fare (ne


"Bonne


Original from


THE OHIO:STATE UNIVERSITY


— iia titént Dai


NULUBy


Bonne vie embellit; & attrait bonne fin: Pro. Good
lifeimbellijhes,and ends in ble. ‘ re
De mefchante vie les bonnesloix font venués:Pro.
11 lines occafioncd good Lawes, pyri
Il n'eft vie que de coquins;&, Il n'eft vie que de co-
quins quand ils ont alemblé leurs bribes: Pro.Our
countrey Fidlers haue a song which begins thus; Of all
Occupations a beggar is the bef, for when he is wearie,
he may lay bim downe and reft ce.

Il n’eft vie que d’eftre bien aife: Pro. All happineffe,
confils in quetnefe,of life.
Il n’eft vie que de faire bonne chere, maisla fin n°
en vaut rien: Prov. (Whether you confider the fiuffe it
turnes into,or the end it brings one to.) i
loyeufe,& riche vie pere,& mere oublie: Pro. Con-
tentment and wealth gotten, makes father, and mother
forgotten, 5 vw
Mefchante vie quiert le coing: Prov. Lewdnefe af-
feleth corners, sir
Tele vie celle fin: Prov, Such as his dealing was his
eath,

Vie vie. (An Aduerbe of incouraging or commaunding;)
012,07 apace, goe on,away, forward, make haft,march
march quickly, {peed it my hearts.

Vie fouét & au vent, Anaunt, packe,be gone.

Viedaze: m. The member of an Affe ; alfo,an old dunce,
doult, blockhead noddie ninnybammer, ss

Viedazerlenez à. To play with the nofe of; ta baffle,
sus flowt,make a foole of; alfo, to trouble,vex,mo~


eft. .

Vieil: m.eille: €. Old,aged,auncicat, fale decrepit, in
Jeares; Looke Vieux.
La vieille guerre. See Guerre. Lx

+ Faiét à la vieille mode. «Aade rudely, of a groffe

forme,of à fafhion thats quite out of fafhion,
Vn vicil chien iamais ne iappe en vain; Pro, 4a old
doz barketh (me fay biteth)fure.
Vieil oïfeau ne fe prend a reths: Pro. The old birds
care auoides the [aare.
Depuis que la brebis eft vicille le loup lamange
bien: Proy. The fheepe is neuer too old for the Walle 3
how tough frexer fhe be he eats her well, }
Il n’eft chafle que de vieux chiens : Pro, There is no
hunter to the old dog ; ne fearcher to experience.
Ti n’eft miracle que de vieux fain&s : Pro, wonders
of old are mofl authenticall.

. [n'y a rien cel qu'un vieil pot à faire la bonne
foupe: Pro. No pot makes fd good pottage as the ol

| ones
On n'aura jabonafne vieil: Prov. An old Affe is
good for nothing,


Oncques vieil fingene fit belle mouë: Pro. Th’ old |


Monkey neuer made well-fanored mowe. $
Vieillard: m. 44 old,or aged,man.
Mieux vaut l'ombre d'un fage vieillard que les


armes d'un icune pe ar Pro, À wife old man may


.doe more with bis fhade, then can a young cokes with
his cliering blade, +
Vicille: £ An old, or aged woman; alfo, as Vielle ia the


later fence; 07,25 Poule de mer.
Peau de vieille. The zame of an Apple.
Chafcune vieille fon dueil plaind: Pro, See Plain-


re. ;

La necefliré fait trotter la vicille: Pro, Need addes
new life, fi-enzth.quicknefe,to old age.

Qui mieux ne peur à fa vicille retourne: Prov, He
that can haue no young, makes much of bis old, fluffe;
old fèrues the tarne where young will not be had.


icillement. Old oazedly gedly aunciently,
Vicillefle: £, Eld,or old age,

Ieuneñe oifeufe vieilleffe difetteufe: Prov. A lazie
Jouth,a we: à age, nt YA
Si icuneffe fçavoit, & vieillefle pouvoir, iamais |

povreté n’auroit: Prov. If youth were cunni ae
age able, pooreneffe would foone be but a fable.

Vieilli: m. ie: £ Become old, growne auncient, flept
fârre into yeares.

Vieillir. To wax old,become aged, growin yeares,

Vicihiflément.æ Vicillement.

Vieillot: m. otte: £ Elderlie, fomewhat old,

ieilly. as Vieilli.

Viellé: f. A rude,or har(h-founding Infirument of Mu-

Jicke,ufually played on by bafe Fidlers,and blind men;
alfo,the fea-Thrufh, or particularly that kind thereaf

which hath a sky-coloured head, greenifh backe ruddie
head,and purple finnes. wa ; ;

Ils a — eae leurs vielles enfemble.
They iumbled their fidles pafing well together;(but this
phrafe bath a further FAN Vas TR * : is
On ne fait pas à grands coups douce vielle: Prov.
Not great, but apt, flroakes make (weet Muficke,

Vielleur: m, One that vfually playcs on,0r gets.arafeal=
ie lining by playing on,a Viclle,and thence,any bafe,or
beggarlie Fidler. ts

Vierge: & Avirgin, maid, maiden; alfo,the figne inthé
Zodiake tearmed Virgo, Q

Vierge: com. Virgin, pure,cleere, prime unbroken,un-
tainted ;vndefiled,vatouched.

Huile vierge. The firfi (and befl) oyle that comes out
of the preffe;or from a fiillitorie.

Miel vierge. Fsrgins honey; the honey which;of it
Self, and without any preffing diflils fromthe combe..
Or vierge. Gold vamelted, or vniryed; Gold that
comes whole from it veine,or mine. Ney
Parchemin vierge. Virgin Parchment ; Parchment
made of an abortine skin. £
Poix vierge. The firft pitch that iffves out of the Pitch-
tree. . .

Terre vierge. Ground that is whole,or vafiyled; good
ground that was neuer plowed,or broken up... ~
Viet-dafe,& Vietz-daze. Looke Viedaze, . _.
Vieuté. as Vileté. ya CASE

Vieux. Old,aged,ancient, flale,decrepit,in yeares (Looke |

Vieil ; to which itis alfo the Plural.) RS
Vieux peché fait nouvelle honte: Prov, Old fiane
begets new fhame. RES
Vin vieux,ami vieux, or vieux, font louezentous *
lieux: Pro. The praife of old wine, friends;and gold,is *
in all places often told, : , DE
C'eft grande peine que d’ eftre vieux, maisilne l:
eft pas qui veut : Pro, 4 noyfome thing itis to be old,
yet no man can be fo that would. Ai, a
En efperance.d’ avoir mieux, tant vit le-loup qu’il
devient vieux : Pro, The Wolfe fo long hopes his ue :
tomend, that (without belpe) his life's erovne neere.
an end. 1%

Vif: m. vive: f. Quicke,lining,aline,in life; alfo,quick,
luelie, (parking parting, lightrinbl, fall 6.

Vive pafture. Looke Paîture. as
Donation entre vifs, A deed of Gift executed in the
donors lifé time, — :. Re NT


Eau vive. Running water, Spring water. ee
Herbage vif. Looke Herbage. A
Pierre vive. Flint. es in OSS
Roche vive. An entire rock; a vocke, without mixture
- of earth, all flone. PGES
: 4 Le
Original from


THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


VIG


Cm of Law;) for which looke Executer, &


ort.

Vif-argent. Qujck-filuer.
VE gene vue LA kind of bafé Quick-filuer made
of dung,and hay. —

de io mine: f. Quick-filuerie, of Quick-


Vif-gage: m. A pawne of land, fir the profits whereof
he unto whom it is pawned is accomptable.

Vif. Les vifs: m. The intraylespr guts; whence,Cata-
plafme de chair de vautour avec les vifs ; Looke un-

{ __ der Cataplafme.

Vighier: rw, The Captaine of a watch;qLangued: or,
© as Viguier. = \
Vigilamment. Vigilanth, wakefully, watchflly, civ-

cum|peétly, charily;warily.

Vigilance:f. Vigulancie,wakefillneffe,watchfullne[fe ;
circum|pettion, warinelfe.

Vigilant. Vigilant, wakefull, watchful ; alfo, warie,
prouident,circum|pedt,that looketh well about him.

Vigile: £ A Vigile; the Ewe of a bolie, or folemne day.

Vigle. See Bigle.

Vignages. Droit de vign. Looke under Droi&.

Vigne: £ A Vine; the plant that beareth Grapes.

Vigne baftarde. The wild (Grape-bearing) Vine.

Vigne blanche. Brionie,white Brionie,Tettar berries

alle brionie of Mexico,or of Peru.

Vione noire. Blacke Brionie, our Ladies Seale, the

wild Vine.

Vigne porrette. The Leeke of Vines, wild Leeke,dogs

Leeke,French Leeke.

Vigne fauvage, 4s Vigne baftarde; al/o, the wild

Vine, called otherwife, blacke Brionie,and our Ladies

Seale.

Se mettre dedans la vigne iufques au pefcher. To

flep ouer head and cares into a Vineyard; to fteepe bis

‘head, or wit in a Wine-tub.

I faut acheter vigne deferte: Prov.Buy an-undref-

fed Vineyard; (fo mayeft thou fafhion it according to

thine owne humor.)

L'efchalas fait tomber la vigne: Prov. (Applyable

when he, that fhould protect or fupport a man, is the

caufe of bis rune.)
Vigneron: m. 4 Vine-dreffer, or dre rag gb pn

Quandis chon pal le pe Vigneron imeurtd

and le chou ele c vigneron meurt de

foif: Pro. Looke Le hé: 7
Vigneronne: £ A woman that workes in à V'ineyard,

or dreffes a Vine. (Le lier,esbourgeonner, & redref-
fer font les façons de la Vigneronne ; duvigneron
letailler,houer,biner,tercer. €Nicot.)
Vignette: f. A little Vine; alfo,as Coulevrée blanche;
dlostebre called me “sis ;

ignettes. Vignets, branches, or branch-like bor-
ders,or flourifhes,in Painting,or Ingrauerie.
Vignettemenit: m. 4 vignetting; a bordering or flou-
ing with ord branches of Vines,or other Plants.
As er.


tte : £, À vignetting; a bordering or flourifhin
with anches, flowers,erc. ; :
| ViBhols md Gd open fel
onol: m,
Vi fi mae Vien po EE


| denses bike


Vignot: m. asVi wad rae


où


~ birth or eftate


VIL


Lemout execute le vif; &, Le mort faific le vif. | Wignottes. as Vignettes.


Vigoureufement. Vigor oufly, lufiily, fir ongh, toughly,


fturdily, forcibly effectually.

Vigoureux: m. eufe: f, Vigorous, luftie,linelie, rong,
tough, flurdie, forcible, effectuall.

Viguerie: f. A Prouofifhip,or Fufticefhip ; the office ofa
Viguier ; or,the Precinct wherein he commaunäs.

Vigueur: £ Vigor, frength, force, toughnelle, courage,
liueline[fe,efficacie.

Viguier: m. The ordinarie Iudge of a countrey Towne;
or fuch a Magiftrat in Languedoc, as the Prevolt is in
the reft of France.

Vil: m. ile: € Vile,abiell,bafe,low,meane,bomelie, fim-
ple, worthleffe;, good cheape ; of finall price, little va-
lue,no accompt.

Vilain: m. Avillaine, flaue, boudman, feruile tenant ;
Ceft l'homme ferf, où qui tient heritage de ferve |
condition,ou mortaillable d’ aucun fcigneur, fayes
Ragueau, (who likewift affirmes, that the Gentlemen
of France tearme vilains all Farmers, Husbandmen,
Plowmen, and generally all yeomen, how free foeuer
their condition, or tenures be: and that countrey Gen-
tlemen tearme fo all Citixens,Burguers, > Inhabitants
of walled Townes:) Hence alfa, a churle, carle, boore,
clowne; and,a mifer micher,pinch-pennie,pennyfather;
and,a knaue,rafcall,varlet, filthie fellow ; any bafe-bu-
mored,ill-borne,and worfe-bred hinde,cullson,or cluf-
ter fifi: alfo,the Cheuin,or Pollard fifh (called fo becaufe
it feedes upon nothing but filth;) alfo,a kind of Hagard
Faulcon. ;

Eftant en fon vilain.Being in the fuds,or füllens, fwel-
ling with his ordmarie dogged,or fisrlie humors.
Vilain affamé demi enragé: Pro, 4 /iarued clowne
is halfe a mad man, when vittualls faile, all temper
failes,bim.

Vilain enrichi ne cognoift parent,ny ami:Pro.The

bafe clowne that hath got a little pelfe, knowes neither.

friend,nor kinfinan,(nor himfelfe.)

Les vilains s’entretiennent, les nobles s’embraf-

fent: Pro. Clownes are but cold,the gentle kind,in mu-

tuall connerfation.

Le vilain ne fçaic qu’ efperons valent: Prov. Bafé

people know not the worth of good things. —

Ce vilain refai& Dieu nous garde. Looke Re-


De grand vilain lourde cheute;&,De grand vilain
and flac: Pro. A great or mightie knane, a migbtie |
U will bane.
Oignez vilain il vous poindra: Prov. The baféun-
thankfill chuffe returnes bad offices fer good,
Priez vilain moins il fera: Pro. The more you pray a
flaue the leffe you preuaile. à
Connin,& vilain avec la main: Pro. See Connin.
Il n’eft danger gue de vilain: Prov. The (incenféd)
churle is a mofi dangerous beaft. us
ÉeChanteau part le vilain: Pro. when villeines by
f who for the moft part ave tenants in
common) doe meane to part their poffeffions, they diuide
alumpe of bread,and gine each to other a peece there-
of; Hence is this es tet lyable to thole bafé fooles, |
that fall out with their bel! friends for trifles, or vittn-


alls.
ui ale vilain il a fa proye: Pro, Looke Proye.
er iftre in vilain baille luy la Ltée:
teen main: Prov, If thou a knaur, or churle wouldft
vhs bewray, giue bim authoritie;let bim beare fivay.
in: m. aine: £ Vilanous,vile bafe, filthie, fordide,
levod bad sumwvor thie churlifb,niggardlieal/o,as vie
, ; l-


iT HE-OHIO- STATE U


VIL


Vilainement.ViLanoufly,vilely,bafelyniggardly chur-

Lifbly, feuruily, filthily.

Vilainer. as Vilener.

Vilané. a Vilené. _

Vilbrequin: m. Awimble. $

Vilein: m. cine: f. Seruile,ba/e,vile drudging,villein.

like,held by villenage; alfo,asVilain. ,

Vilenaille: £. A pack of fcowndrels.vafcals baft abieëts,

{curuie fellowes ; the dregs riffraffeefffcum,of the peo-
ti


ple.

Vilené: m.ée:f. Defiled, foyled,befmeared,begrymed;
alfo,difgraced, dishonored, blemifhed in reputation; al-
fo,berated,reniled,rayled on.

Ils m’euflent vilenez s'ils m’euflent peu idindre.
They had done me fome roguerie er other, if they could
haucraught me. | :

Vilener. To fale defile ,befineare begryme beray;baffie,
abu? ,difgrace,blemifh the reputation ofjal{o,to berate,
reuile,rayle on.

Vilenie: € 7ilanie,vilene(fe, roguerie, knauerie, lewd-
nef; filth, naftinelfe ordure,impuritie, (curuine[fe;mi-
ching, bafenese,niggardlinelfe, couetonfnelfe, churlifh-


nelle.
Laidevilenie.Slauaderous,reproachfill,difgr ace full
defamatorie tearmes ; words which will beare an Ac-
tion. “
Vilenot: m. A little villeine ; or one that is fomewhat
churlifh; alfv,a clowne, peafant,boore, hob, or hinde of
the cauntrey.
Vileté: £ Vileneffe, bafenelfe, worthlefnelfe, paultring,
(curuineffe ; alfo,cheapeneffe.
M lette. br Villette. Pia Hub en
ilipender. To vilipend, [et little by,contemne, defpife,
oder 3 4/0, to defame, flaunder, traduce,
giue an ill report of. \
Village: m. A village ; a countrey towne, confifling of
many boufes ioyned together ; therein to differ
: Hameau (a hamlet) which confifts but of a few, and
thoft either fcattered,er not verie neere together.
Mais fuis-ie pas de mon village ? But am not 1 a
clowne,or a fillie fellow ?

Villageois: m, A countreyman, hushandman, plough-
man, farmer, clovene,hob,binde, fwaine, boore,

Villain. See Vilain.

Villanelle: f. À countrey daunce,round,or fong.

Villanie. as Vilenic.

Viaquene: f, Villanie, roguerie, rafcalitie, skown-

drellifime,

Villatique : com. Countrey-like; of, or belonging to, the

countrey,

Ville: f A Towne ; an incorporate, or inclofed Towne; a
' Cities alfo, the long oagar tearmed by our Coopers,a
Turrell, .’ :

Villes de paix, Looke Paix.

Ville aux Roix.The citie of Blois; tearmed fo,becaufe
the French Kings doe oftentimes foiourne, and their
children be commoniy brought up within it.

Ville & taille, The territorie,or precinéls of atowne.


Vu


Robbe qui fent fa petite ville. Aneai, jp: ace cleane-
brufhed gawne, or garment. yi
A l'entrée de la ville cf le commencement des
maifon$: Pro. Loae Maifon. . ee
Ilne {gait rien qui ne va par villes: Prov, He that
goes not abroad knowes nothing, bye
Le fain& de la ville n’ eft point oré: Prov, The
townes peculiar Saint is not prayed to ; for helpe that
may be had at home we care not.
Selon la ville les bourgeois : Prov.Like to the towne
the townefinen are.
Tant de villes tantde guifes: Pro. 4s many feuerall
cuftomes as countrie townes,
Villebrequin: m. 4 wimble,

Villein. # Villain, |

Villenage: m. villenage; or any bafé, and feruile te-
nure;hence alfo,Socage tenure ; or,as Cenfive. ~

Villenaille. as Vilenaille, 3

Villenot: m. 4 little vilaine, clowne,or firayne; or,as
Vilenot.

Villes de la Vigne: £ The tendrells,or twvyning fprigs,of


aVine,
Villette: £.4 ttle Towne,or Citie ; alfo,a little Turrel,
or Coopers agar,


. Villiere: f. 4s Veilleré,


Villon: m. A coufener, conycatcher, cunning, or wittie
rogue; 4 nimble knaue; a pleafant theefes (for fuch a
one w 1 Francois Villon whofe death a halter fuited
to his lifes) alfo, a kind of weed wherewith bands to tye
Vines aremade.

Villonner. To coufen,cbeat, conycatch, play the cunning
or wittie rogue ; the nimble knane,the pleafanttheefe. |

Villonnerie: £4 couféning,or conycatching; wittie or
cunning roguerie ; nimble knadecie; pleafant or merrie
theeuerie. a

Villote: £4 cocke of hay. ;

Villoter. To ruvine, trot, rogue, roame, raunge ; gad, or |
eoffip it from one towne to another.

Villoteur. as Villotier.

Villotier: m. 4 vagabond, land-loper, earth-planet,
continuall gadder from towne to towne.

Villotier: m.ere: f. Towne-bred,bome-borne; afsor be-
longing to,the towne onely. : ‘

Villotiere: f. A gadding honfwife, wandering fisgig,
raunging flirt; one that does nothing but runne a gof=
fipping from one towne to another ;alfà,a Bawd,

Vilonage. as Villenage. .

Vimnaires: f. Stormes,tempefls any boifterous, and hurt-
fall weather ; inundations,and breaking out of waters;
ruines of buildings, mifchieues done by earthquakes,or

thunderclaps ; any fuch fearcfill, or dommageous acci-

dents which no reafn can fore(ee,no fore fight preuent ;


Lawyers tearme them Vis maior.
Vimeres. 24 Vimaires. |
Viminal:m.ale: f. Apt to wind,or bind, as twigs

ziers ; alfo,belonging thereto.

Saulx vimninale. Lvake Saulx.
Vimpilon: m, 4 holie-water


Or 0-


: fhrinkles

: La ville ft gaignée. (Prouerbially)the vidtorie isgot: | Vin: m. wine, . :

4 ten,our fuit oblained,our cauft woon. : Vin ardant. Aquauite. © Cet et Sey

r Avoir vnoeil au bois Paurre à la ville, To haue an | Vinsde Bourgongne. All wines which grow abone

Pp eye on alt fides of him, to looke verie warily about the bridge of Sens, in Auxerrois, Beaune, and other

| him, countries, whofe commodities are feut downe by the ri-

! Elle a toufours quelque commifion par la ville, | : ver Yonne. te

| _ Sayed ieaflingly, or im difgrace, of a gadding honfe- | Vindesclers. Fees for expedition; fomewhat, aboue

! wife. ; ordinarie fees, for the Clarks to drinke. : $425

1 Qui fent fa bonne ville. 4 courteous, and ciuill per- | Vin de coipeau. New wine quickly made fit t0 be

Jon,or part. tu GR : drunke,by Beechen chips firft boyled then diyedyand =f.)

/ * - berwards}


cd by Go gle |


y


Original.fron .
THE OHIO:STATE-UNI\
Pa


\


/ERSITA


Ae


|


VIN


terwards put into the veffell, :

Vin de commeres. Palate wine, fweet and pleafant
wine,

Vin cui@. wine boyled on the fire to a certaine thick-
ne[Je,and then put into vefells, andreferned for {weet
fawees,

Vin de defpenfe, Small, houfehold, ordinarie, or fer-
wants, wink,

Vins François, The wines which grow,or are made,
below the bridge of Sense

Vin de Lion. Strong,and headie wine ; or, [uch wine
as makes the drinker a fwaggerer.

Vin du marché, The charge which contractors are at
with the witnees,or confirmers of their bargaine.
Vin miellé. Honied wine, baftard,Metheglin, (weet
wine; any drinke thats made of honey,and wine.

Vin mufcat. Mufcadell,or Mufcadin,

Vin noir, Looke Noir.

Vin papier. white wine called fo by {ome Switxers.
Vin de porceau. which makes the drunkard to fleepe,
vomit,and tumble him in his vomit.

Vin de prefloirage. Looke Prefloirages

Vin de regnard, The wine that fharpens, or fets an
edge on,the drunkards fpirit, making him more fubtill,
or cunning,then he is,at any tune, fober.

Vin de finge. wine which makes the drinker(or drun-
hard) pleafant,wanton,or toyifh. :
Vin des valets. Spending pence,extraordinarie vayles
or gifts; odde money beflowed on a mans ordinarie fer-
mants,ouer and aboue the fumme due,or agreed on.


. Droi& devin,ou de vins,&c. Looke Droi&.


Entrée de vin és villes clofes. Looke Entrée.

Potau yin. A mans head,

Pot de vin. À fumme of money; a reward,or gift; al-

fo,the dowrie ginen with a maid in marriage. ,

Souppe en vin. The bearbe Meddicke fodder, Snayle-

Clauer.

Avoir fon vin. ‘A cet’ heure il aura fon vin.He will

now be tickled, or haue bis full payment ; he neuer met

with his match till now : Elles ont eu leur vin. Thofé

wenches haue had it to a haire; viz. a full taft of the

fap which they hold a tele ( for the beflowing of

wine being a principall courtefie in intertainments be-

tweene man and man , is fitteft to expre(fe the other
mer which in courtefie a man gineth a woman.)

Couperle vin. See Couper.

Entrer en vin. To enter into a drunken match,to fall a


drinking.
Eftrefur le vin. To taf,alfo,to lone,wine verie well.


. Faire iambes de vin. To take in flore of liquor before


the undertaking of a iourney ; to fupple his legs, by foa-
king his bead,in wine.
Mertre de l'eau dedans leur vin. Looke under Met-


3 Revels fon vin. To fleepe after a caronfingsto difgeft
bis wine by fleepi


Vin de grain plus doux que n’ eft pas vin de


_ prefle: Pro. willing feruice, though but fmall, is more


orted dutie. f


VII IN


Prov. Looke Souhait,


Vin trouble ne brife dents : Prov. wine thoughit be |


thicke yet breakes it no mans teeth.

Bon vin bon vinaigre: Pro, Good wine is made good
vineger; good things transform'd retaine part of their
worth. : :
Bon vin mauvaife tefte: Pro, Good wine breeds ma-
ny a brable, y
Boy vin en Roy; viz. temperately : Pro.

Apres bon vin bon cheval: Prov. After a man hath
drunke hard he dare any thing.

Quivin ne boit apres falade eft en danger d’eftre
malade: Pro. He that wine drinkes not after a (cold)
ae his bealth indangers (and does wrong to his
palate.)

Qui bon vin boit il fe repofe: Prov. Looke Re-
pofer.

Apres la poire le vin, ou le preftre: Prov. After a
(cold) Peare either drinke wine to concott it,or [end for
the Prieft to confeffe you.

En vaiffeau mal lavé ne peut on vin garder: Prov.
Wine in ill-wafhed Caske will not be kept.

Femme, argent, & vin, ont leur bien, & leur ve-
nin: Prov, Wine, money, and the female brood haue
properties both bad,and good; are(as th’ ave ufed)bad,
or good.

Homme mutin, brufque rouflin, flafcon de vin,
prennent toft fin: Pro. The perfon turbulent,a liuelie
fleed,and cup of wine,come to an end with fpeed.

Il ne faut pas enquerir d’ ou foitle vin, mais qu'il
M bon: Pro. No matter whence wine came fo it be:
good.

Il ne feait que c'eft de vendre vin qui n’ attend de


’ Maylafin: Prov. Againft good husbandrie be bath


gindes, that (ells bis wines before May be fill en-
ded, mR


Le boeuf falé fait trouver le vin fans chandelle :
Prov. The falt-beefé eater needs no candle to light his
drinke the way to his mouth,

On ne cognoift pas le vin aux cercles: Prov. Looke
Cercle.


On ne doit point mentir en vin: Prov. Somewhat
like the Latine In vino veritas; 07 an aduifé to make it
good; and then may be rendered thus; when men are
drunke they {hould not lye,becaufe in wine is veritie,
Pain tant qu'il dure, vin à mefure: Prov. Eat bread
at pleafure, drinke wine by meafure: A ppt ane
the French obferue in the firf{howfoeuer in the fecond)
part; for no people eat more bread, nor haue better
bread to eat,then they. |
a Na & du vin pañlent chemin: Pro. Looke Se-
melle.

Vinade: f. The vf2, and worke of two yoake of Oxen, or

_ of a Cart,all the time of Vintage. A

Vinage: m. A Phificall wine, or a decotion of bearbes

in a as to be drunke for the curing of vlcers, and


wounds. .

Droié de vinage. Looke Droit.
Vinaigre: m. Vineger, PRE :
.Ofafharpe conceit,or fore»


a De doper i a: v3
,0f a quicke a enf{ion ; a meta om Hunt)
us make their dogs quick-fented, rub their no-
fes with né A :
Te “Pagid chier vinaigre. J will make him flarke
maa, *
Vinai : f, Sorrell fawce.


Vinaigrettes. Salles, or faces, which be feafoned |


with much vineger; any hearbs,or fruits in pickle. vi :


=
MÉDHIO STATE UNIVE


PR.


,
‘


Vv { N ne


Vinaigrier: m.A Vineger-man,or Vineger-maker;alfo,
a Vineger glaffe,violl,or bottle, ; :
bir gh m. A Barberrie tree ; or the Barberrie it
felfe.
Vinciboffe : m. woodbind,Caprifolie,Honnyfuckle..
Vincent. Vincent, a mans name; and particularly, the
k name of a Saint, for whom, in fome places, a holyday is
fi made the 22 of fanuarie; whence the Pronerbe ;
| ‘A la 5. Vincent fi l'hyver s’ engrine, fi l’attends.
If the wind blow fbarpe on S. Vincents day, looke for a
cold later part of a Winter.
“Vindicatif: m. iue: f, Vindicatiue,renenging,wreake-
fall auengefill.
Vindice: f. Reaenge, auengement, vengeance, punifh-
ment. *
Vindicte:£ as Vindice.
Vindiquer. To redeeme,deliner exempt, [ane from;alfo,
to reuenge,auenge, wreake.

Vindre. A kind of long Hooke,or Crampiron, fill of not-

ches, |

Viné: m. ée: f. Seafoned with, or for the holding of,

wine; alfo,tunned as wine,
Vinge: f. The fruit, or profit of a vineyard; a crop of
Grapes; whence ; * N
Avoir bonne vinée. To find a good V'intagesto gather
or get in flore of wine.

Vinenotte. as Vivelotte.

Viner. To feafon with,or for the holding of wine; alfo, to

tunne wine.

Vinet : m, Small or thinne wine,bedge wine.
Vinetier: m. as Vinotier; alfo,the Barberrie tree.
Vinette: f. Sorrell,or Sowre-docke ; alfo,the Barberrie,

or Barberrie tree.

Vinetteux: m. 4 Vintner ; but in Rabelais the name

of à Cooke.
Vineux: m. eufe: f Winie,of wine, full of wine,procee-
ding from wine.

Vingeron.«s Vengeron.

Vingt. Twentie ; a skore. 4

Vingtain, & Vingtenier. Looke Vintain, & Vinte-

nier,
' Vinotiefme: m. 4 twentieth, or twentieth part of;

whence Droid de vingtiefine. Looke Droit,

Vingtiefme.The twentieth,

Vinoble. as Vignoble. :

Vinot: m.'#5 Vinets alfo,a kind of little Peare,the Per-
rie whereof doth taft like wine.

Vinotier: m. 4 Vintner ,Tauerner Wine-feller.

Vinotier: m.ere:f. Ofor belonging to, wine;alfo,bring-
ing, or yeelding wine.

Vintain: m. A twentieth; or a twentieth part of.
Vintenier: m. The Corporall to a foot-companie.
Vin-verjus: m, Vérinice , made of wild, or unripe,

Grapes.
Vioge: com. Luflie,linelie,cranke, frolicke, €Norm,
Violable: com: Violable, infringible, breakeable ; de-

flowrable, defilable, pollutable.
Violant. Le gris violant. Mallow-flower colour ; or, a
colour betweene a Grey,and a Violet,
Violat. Of Violets, :
Violateur: m, A violator ; infringer,tranfereffor3a cor
rupter,defiler deflowrer ; wrong-doW, abufer.
Violation: £.A violation,or violating a breaking,tranf-
greffinz infringing ; alfo, a corrupting,defiling,deflow-
ving; wronging mifisfing, :


,abufing.
Viole.as Violle; alfa a Gilliflower; whence ;


Viole iaulne. The Winter Gilloflower , or wall.
flower. : | Fon sf


_————er

v EST x >


Vipere : £ “The Serpent called a Viper. cated “fs À


Violé: m, ée:€ Violated ; broken, tranfgreRed,infrin-
gi ; VS pie ‘iow, wronged, mifufed,
avu|ea. vs

Violement: m, A violating ; or,as Wolation.

Violemment. Violently, impetuoufly, forcibly, compul-
fiuely vebemently, fiercely ,ragingly. ae ve

Violence: £. Violence; impetucufneffe ; vniufl force,or
compulfion ; wrong; rafbneffe,fiercenelfe; vehemencie. |

Violent: m, ente: f. Violent,impetuous vebementsfor-

cible,compulfiue; raging, fierce, r

Violenté: m. ée5 f. Violated, or violented ; vfed or

handled violently; forced. } |

Violentement, as Violemment.

be sc as Violer ; alfo, to force, or breake into by

orce.
Seviolenter foy mefme. To ufé violence againft, lay
violent hands on,himfelfe ; to murther bimfelfe.

Violer. To violate ; infringe, tranfereff? ; to marre, cor-
vupt,defile,deflowre;to wrong burt mifufe,abufe. ~
iolet: m. as Violette; a Violet-colour,

Violet de fel. A certaine ruflie colour brought from
the falt-pits of Germanie,and of a brackifh tait. i

Violet: m. ette: f. 7iolet of colour.

Violette : f.4 Violet ; alfi,a Gill: flower ; alfo,Violet-co-
lour ; alfgues Luctre; whence, Violette abaiflée.The
falling ofothe Vvula:
ee arborée. The upright Paunfie, or Hearts-
eae.

Violette d'Automne. The Paunfie, or Hearts-ea(e ;
alfo,the Calathian Violet, blue haruefl Lillie, Autumne
Bell. flower, Haruelt-bell,
Violette blanche. The white Violet; alfo, the white
porte Gilloflewer ; alfo, the timely-flourifhing Bulbus
tolet,
Violette de carefme. # Violette de Mars.
Violettes de Damas. Damaske Viclersor Gilloflow- |
ers, rogues Gilloflowers, clofe ferences, .
Violettes de Dames. Dames Volets, ec, as Niolet- |
tes de Damas.
Violettes herbués, Pinkes,or {mall Honefiies.
Violette iaulne, The wall-flowershe yellow,or Wine | à
ter Gilloflower. an
Violettes de Marie. Marians Violets , Couentyie
Bells,Couentvie Rapes; of the kind qualitie,and(alaojt)
the forme of Throatworts,or (anterburie bells.
Violette de Mars. The ordinarie Violet, March Vio-
let,Garden Violet, fweet Violet.
Violettes des Matrones. a Violettes de Damas,
Brune violette. A kind of darke Purple'of the colour |
of an Amethift. :
sic violette. A Murrey; or (as fome hold) a light
Red. tn)

Violier: m. A Fidler or common Mufition,that playeson
a Violin; alfo, a Violet root, or plant; alfo, a Flower-
pot; alfo,the crowne of Oxier, ec, which they fet ouer
pots of Gilloflowers,to ftrengthen the flaulkes thercof.
Violier des murailles. The plant that beares the
Wall-flower,or Winter Gilloflower . ake

Violle:f, A (Muficall) Violl,or Violin,

Violon: m. 4 Violin, or little Val, æ

Viorne: f, The Hedge-plant called, the Trauellers joy;
alfo, the Hedge-tree called, theway-faring tree; (both |

* verte common in Kent;) alfo,a fhoot,or (prig putting up
from the root of a tree. n ru Le

Viotrant. a Veaurrant. Rab, : ee fa

Viouche: com. Of long life; or, as Vioge, linelieere, |


{an old word.)


at


Mmmm .Heæbe| ;


VIR |


Herbe aux Viperes. ipers hearbe, Snakes Bugloffe,
Vipers Buglof] Pit Buglofie the leffe.

Vipereau: m. À young,or little Viper.

Viperiere: £ as Herbe aux Viperes.

Viperillon: m. A young,or fmall Viper.

Viperin: m. ine: f. Viperousof a Viper.

Sel viperin. Looke under Sel.

un ae f. as Vicairie ; or,as Viguerie.

Virade : £. A whirling,or fwif? turning about.
Carte,ou Charte virade. The Dutch Card-game cal-
led,Hocke. à

Viraire. Looke Veraire.

Vire: f The arrow called a Quarrell; vfed onely for the
Croffe-bow.

Virebrequin: m. A wimble.

Virecots: m. Little bulles, or packets of grapes made
up in Fig-leaues,and thereby long kept.

À Virelay: m. 4 Virelay, Round, freemans Song. -

Virelis: m. 4 Aggiwinkle; or,as Nerites.

Virement: m. SH veering, whirling, wheeling, round

_ turning, frisking about.

Virer. To veere,turne round,wheele or whirle about.

De quelque cofté que le baft vire. How/oener things
be carried,which way foeuer the world waggeth.

Mau deterre te vire. The foule euill tal or choake,
thee.

Vire-foli. as Herbe au foleil.

Virefon: m. One of the laft,and leaft receptacles for the
(ea-water,whereof falt is made. *

Vireton: m, Alitile Quarrell ; or, a fafhion of arrow-
head,thats turned, or made, like a skrue.

Virevolte. as Virevoulte.

Virevolter. Looke Virevoulter.

Virevoulte: f. 4 veere, whirle, round gamboll, friske,
or turne.

Virevoulter. To veere, whirle,turne or wheele round a-
bout, fetch many a friske about.

Virevoutte. as Virevoulte, +

Vireur:m. 4 veerer,or wbirler,a round turner,or tur-
ner of things often about.

Vireurs d'aumelerces. Pancake-turners,Omelet-ma-
kers ; Looke Aumelette.

Vireux: m. eufe: f. Ranke, flrong-finelling, rammifh of

fauor ; alfo, poyfoncus.

Virgeal. as Virginal.

Virginal: m. ale : € Virgine-like, maidenlie belonging
toa virgin or maid. ;

Huile virginal. irgines oyle ; the ale which of it
felfe,and without any preffing,comes from Olines.
Laiét virginal. See Laiét. :

Virgineux: m. cufe: f. as Virginal.

Virginité. irginitie maidenhead,or maidenhood.

Virgule:£ A litle rod, yard; flreake ; and thence alfoya
comma.

Virgulte:m. 4 bunch of young,and tender fhootes ; a

~ companie of fprigs,or fhrouts growing together.

| Viridique: com. Looke Veridique.

Viril: m. ile: £ Sideways aie e! 8
bold, flout, couragious,valiant ; firong, fubffantiall, pi-


à thie À .
Virilemene. “Aa, moral; bai, fout pb,


LEP tie manie, manfillsefe  frengihs
j rage; alfo,a mans genitalls. ;


about the end of a ftaffe,erc,
 boyes windmill; aos foitle-


‘J Degitized by Go. gle 4


D. Eh La ER ET = 3
~* Rat en ae ene a eS


. = 2


VIS


cocke; alfo, an arraw-head ; alfo, a fword with an in-
dented edge; alfo,a piercer ; alfoya mans yard.
Virobes m.ée:f, Bound about with an yrom riag,or |
00pe. 5
Virollette: f. 4 (word with an indentededge. .
Viron. (VJed in fome parts of France) as Environ.
Vironnant: m.ante:£ Veering,enuironning turning
or winding about.
Vironner.Toveere,enuiron ; turne,goe,or wind about. }-
Virulence : f.Stexch;ranknefe,rammifbnefe; poifon,ve-
nomoufñelle. ;
Vis: m, The vifage,drc, as Vilage. .
Vis à vis. Face to face; direthly oppofite, right ouera-


gainf.
Au vis le vice: Pro, Our faults may be read inowr
ces ; our vifage telleth what our vices be.
bi :£ The vice, or (pindle of aPrefe;alfo, awinding
aire. i r
Vis brifée.A faire which hauing four or fiue fleps up-
right, then tunes, and hath as many pak gab


way,
Vis S.Gilles, À fafhion of winding flaire,thats vaul-
ted Porm ee a pis
Vis diour. Another confiting of many fieps, and yet
fe rt that a man may from the higheft difcerne
the lowelt.

Vifa. A word written by the Lord Chauncelor on thé
back fide of Editts,and Charters to fignifie bis examina-
tion,and approbation of them; tis alfo ufed by the Pa-
trons of Benefices,or by Ordinaries,or Dioce(ans,for the
allowance,or in the bebalfe,of fuch, as come into Spiri-
tuall Cures,erc, by Prouifion.

Visadiniral: m. 4 Viceadmirall.

Vifage: m. The vifage, face, looke, cheere, countenance,
alpedt of a man,

Vifage d'appelant. A fad,beauie, pittifull,or cheere-
lele looke.

Vfage de bois faiét à, À doore fhut againfl.

pigse de preflurier. A muftulent, or maumfie face.

‘Vilage de rebec. 4 fneake-bill, fharp-nofe,chitliface.
Faux vie A Maske, or Vifard. ;
Homme à deux vifages. .4 diffembler , or double-

. dealer ; one that feldome keepes promife, or is neucr as,
good as bis word ; whence the Prouerbe; ay

- Homme à deux vifages n’agrée en villes,ne villa-
ges. À manthat hath a double vifage is neither lou'd in
towne,nor village; diffembling is a batefill finne.

Mot à deux visages. 4 word of a doubt full fence, or

double underflanding ; an equiuocation,

Pois à vifage. Leoke Pois.

a au visage: Pro, Aduerfitie,croffes; Looke vader
ent, |

Couché fur fon vifage. Layed groueling. |

Rouge vifage,& groflepance,ne fontfignesde pe |

nitence: Prov. He that a red face hath, and fwollen

guts,bis bodie unto pennance little puts.

Visant. Ayming,leuelling at.

Vilc:m. Mifel, Mifeltoe, Mifeldine; «lo, Birdlime
(which is commonly made of Miffeltoe.) ==

Vifceral : m.ale : f. Iaward, of or from the bowels.

Vitcide : com. Clammie,cleauing, Birdlime-like.

Vifcidité: £. PMfiditic ; or,as Vifcofité.

Vifcofité: £ Viftofitie; a Birdlime-like fyminefe,clam-
minefse,or cleaurng. rf

Vifduché:f 4 Vice-Duchie,or Vice-Dukedome,

Vilée: £, À lenelling, or ayming at with the ge; alfè, 4
leuell,or ayme taken.

- Une tiroit iamais fans vifée.He newer {hot acca.
our


5 Original from
: pbHE ORIO STATE UNIVERSITY


nn?


Vi tas


i


Pour bien tirer il faut prendre vifée: Prov. Take
aymg with thy fizbt .f thou meane to {hoot right ; ere
thou thy arrow doe let fly, let th’ hand be guided by thy
eye; be that will preuayle mufl proceed by aduife,
Vifenefchal. as Vibailli; or,an under fleward.


Ver. To ayme, or leueil at with the eye; alfo, to regard,


or heed. e

Qui vife loing, iamais nerend fon coup heureux :
Pro. as under Coup. ‘

Toufiours ne frappe l'on pasce à quoy l'on vife:
Pro. One alwayes gets not that beafpires vato,


| Vifeur: m. 44 aymer,or leucller,


Vifible: com. file, difcernable, euident, apparant.

Vifblement. 7ifibly,difeernably,euidently,

Vificre: £, Th: vifer,or fight of an helmet.
Vificre meurtiicre, .4 Port-bole for a murthering
Peece inthe forecallle of a fhip.

Vifion: f. 4 vifion, fight, apparition, fantafie ; alfo, a
viewinz,or perufing.

Vifitation: f 4 vifitation,uifitine ; view, farucy, oner-
Seeing.
Lavifitation de noftre Dame, The feafl of the Vifi-
tation of our Ladie, celebrated, among the Papifis, on
the fecond of Faly, © 5

Vifité: £ as Vifitation.

Viliter, To uifit,or gae 10 fee ; to view, furney,ouerlooke,
ouerfee,


| Vifiteur: m. A vifttor, fearcher jouerfeer.


Le grand vificeur de France. The great Vifitor of
France: is no Officer of the Crowne,nor (how great fo-

uerhis Tule be) more then a bave minifier of Juftice;

being fubieét unto the ordinarie Fudge of the place

wherein he vifits,and of himfelfe determining nothing;
Inold time he was called Le Roy des Merciers, which
Title the lafi King changed iatothis,Anno 1597.


| Vifine: m. A villow,or Wicker twig,


Vifqueux: m.cufe: £ Uifcous,clammie cleaning bird-
” Dyme-like.
Efprit vilqueuxe À captions wit.
Vifte: com. Swift,quicke, flightie, [peedie,nimble, fud-
_ daineshaflie. AR eal
Vifte en befongne. Readie, or quicke, at worke; fit,
or apt for a fuddaine difpatch ; alfo,craftie, fubtill, fly,
wirie.
Plus vifte que le mot. Faleffe time done then fpoken
of; done befère one pret fon this. fe


| Vifte-courant. Swift, or light of foot ; that feemes to


flv as be runnes.
Viftement, Quickly, fpeedily, readily, Gvift!y, nimbly ;
haftily, fieddainely, immediately incontinently,
Viftempenard : m. A Dufler made of 4 Fox-taile fafle-
ned untoa flaffe.


| Viltempenardé: m, éc: € Dufed, or flapped witha


Fox-tayle; aWo, vaggedly,vilely,or bafely attired.


À Viltefe : f.smiftne(ie quicknelfe,lighineffe,nimblenefe,


(peed haft, fuddaineffe.
Vifüal: m. ale: f Vifuall of or belonging to the fightyal-
fo, carried by the fight, or extending as farre as the eye


can carrie it,


} Vifuel: m, elle: f. Gining, or canfing fight ; alfo, as Vi-


fual (in the later fence.)

Viftin vifü. @Rab. as Vis à vis,

Vifure: f. The fide betweene the upper leather, and the
fole of a corked fhove ; the rand of a fhooc.


Vit: m, 4 mans yard; a beafts pizle. Vituperation: f A vituperation,or difpraifing.
Vitde caille. A Kay. Virus: m. Dire Jditommendation, difparage-
Vit de chien. as Vit de preftre, ment ; reprehenfion, blame, gh EE
Vit de coq. À Woodcocke, Vituperé : m.ée: f Vanes ete ;
| m ‘
Digitlzed (CO: gle ee EEA a ak


A NT, Tea}
TT aes


RD ee


Vi TL


Vits de gouvernail. The Pintles,or yron hooks where~
by the flerne of a {hip doth hang.
Vit de mer. An ouglie creature,or excrefcence, like
ve end of a mans yard. ,
itde ages Priefis»Pintle, hearbe Aaron,C
Pintle, Wake-Robin,Rampe.
Vit volant. as Pentel mer. ;
Vitailler, To bandle,dallic or play with,aP. é
Vital: m. ale:f Vital, liuelie, likelie to line ; af,
bringing breeding,maintaining,or preferuing,lift.
Vitault: m. A great toole, or, one that bath a good toole;
alfo,a flattering word for a young boy, like our,my pret-
tie pillicocke ; whencc, Mon vitault, ~

Vite: f. A womans &c,

Vitellin: m. ine : £ Of or befonging to the yolke of an

egge, ‘ À

Cholere vitelline. 4 kind of choller bred by a rotten

or vnnatwrall heat, and refembling, both in colour and

confiftence,the yolkes of egges. ë

Saulx vitelline. Looke Saulx.

Vitette: f. A verie little pricke,bable.member. ÿ

Vitez. The forub Agnus caflus, Abrabams Balme, Chaft-
tree,Hemp-tree. Rab.

Vitier: Looke Vicier.

yaa as Vicieux. LR ji
itrave: m, GlajJe,Gla[fe-worke or Glafing worke.

Vice f A a Glafe-window. dit

Vitres. The fquaves, or mafbes of 2 racket ; (from the

refémblance they haue with quarries of Glaffe.)

Vitré : m. ée: f Glafed; couered or done ouer with
glaffe; alfa, glazed , or varnifhed as the infide of an

* earthen vefell, "A

Vitreau: m. 4 Glaffe-window, :

Vitrée: & The bird called a whittayle, x

Vitreole: £ Small withywind,Hedgebells Bindweed,al-
fo, the blacke purging Bindweed, :

Vitrer. To glafe ; to flop, coner, or doe ouer, with
glalfePalfo, 10 varnifh the infide of a vefsell of earth,


Oe"
Vitrerie: f. A glafing,or Glalfe-making. oa) ;
Vitreux: m. eufe : f. Glafie, of Glalfe, full of Glaffe ; À
cleere,tran{parent,or brittle as Glaffe. 2!
Humeur vitreufe. The glaffie bumor in the (binder
part of) the eye. kad À
Vitrice: m. À flepfather,or father in law. Rab.
Vitrier: m. A Glafier, or worker in Glaffe.
Vitrification: £. Glafinelfe, or the making of Glaffe.
Vitrifier. To turne,or make into Glaffe.
Vitriol: m, Vitrioll, Copperofe; alfo, Pellitorie of the
_ wall,- 3
Vitriold' Allemagne. German Vitrioll ; worfe then
the Roman,as hauing fomewhat of yron in it.
Vitriol d'Hongrie, Hungarie Vitrioll; natural! (and
thereby the beft) Capperofe. ke ee
Vitriol Romain. Roman Vitrioll ; Copper ofe; made
of fuch like fluffe as glafie is. te
Vitriole- as Vitreole.
Vitriolique: com. Like Vitrioll, of Copperoft.
Vitte : f A womans oe. | 27
Vitulos. The lafi word of a Latine Pfalme of Mercie,
which beginning with the word Miferere , hath bred
the phrase, Tu auras du miferere iufques à vitulos,
for one thats to be whipped extreamely, or a long time.
Vituperable: com. Vuuperable, =


rs SE


Vitupercr. To vituperate, difpraife, diftommend ; re-

orn difparage, disbonour, blame, reprehend, find
wl with.

Vitupereur: m.A difpraifer ,difcommender difparager,
disgracer; blamer, fault-finder .

Vitus. whence,Mal S.Vitus, Looke Mal, —

Vivace: com. Liuelie, luftie, firong, vigorous ; nimble,
attine guicke ; full of life, mettall, fpirit ; alfo, of long
l


Vivacité:fViuacitie liueline(fe,!uflinefe,vigor firength;

(irit,mettall ; attinitie quickne(se,numblene(fe;iollitie,
ayneffe of humor.

Vivacns d'efprit. Wittinel[e,quickneffe of apprehen-
fion, foarpneffe of conceit.

Vivandier: m. 4 vidtualler,Suttle,Prouaunt-men,

Vivant: m. whence, Defon vivant. Jn his life-time,
while he lined.

Vivant: m, ante: f. Living breathing,aline,in life.
Homme vivant mourant, Looke Homme.

Vive: f. The Quaniuer,or féa-Dragon.

Vivelle: f. 4 buce kind of Whall in the Indian feas,

Vivelote, ou Vivelotte; whence, Droit dey. The
dower which is due to the widow of a Cottier, or te-
nant of Mainferme,

er Linelily, quickly, lightly, (prightfilly, vigo-
roufly.

Vivenote,ou Vivenotte. as Vivelore,&c.

Vivifiant: m. ante: £ Quickning life-gining.

Vivifier. To quicken,or give life unto.

Vivifique: com. which quickeneth,or giueth Bf.

Vivoter. To line poorely barely needily or but from hand
to mouth, to make hard fbift for a lining; to keepe the
wolfe from the dore. d

Vivre: m. A living, meanes, maintenance ; meat, food,
fuflenance; any thing whereon we feed,or line.
Vivres. /iAualls + acates.
Quint de vivre naturel. See Quint.

Les vivres fuivent l'hoft: Prov. Vidtualls Row the
Campe; where flore of companie is vitlaalls will be.
Vivré:m. ée: f. (in Blafôn:) 1 fortoit d’or à la bande

vivrée d'argent, A bend Viurie.
Vivre. To liuc,bane lifé,be aline; to lead,or (pend a life ;
to breath.
_ Vivre en befte. (In the Prouerbe, Tenez chaud le
pied & la tefte,au refte vivez en befte;)to eat made-
. rately,or no more then will ferue the turne.
Vivre à la Carlonne. To vfe a homelie, rude , or
plaine courfe of proceeding; to lime groffely or plainly,to
deale open-heartedly.
| “Vivre a difcretion. To line at what rate they lift, to
pay for their dyet what they if,
: Vivre par eftapes, Looke Eftape.
Vivre à fes heures. To line regularly;to keepe a tempe-
… rate, or fet dyet ; to prefcribe to bimfélfe a certaine
” formeofor time for jus ordinarie feedmg.
Se vivre. In flead of, fe paiftre. To feed, or vidiuall,
elfe. : ;
zicune qui povrement vit: Pro.Enowgh he fafts


> that barely feeds.
É “Celaya aflez qui vit bien: Prov. He that lines
4 ere amy enough ;


© that €: ener is an Affe. ;


another. __ |
il vit à honte: Pro.See C.


“Hagen ty ae


ib mes = — > — ed


-


cuide toufiours vivre: Prov. He
dont l'autre vit: Prov, That which pre-


UT


Ry « « 4 oh ek A
rm igs, 4


y CMIBEF: sae


: nable bafbfullnelfe, and not much vnlike our, Spare to
ake and fpare to fpecd. à . ae
ui bien veut mourir bien vive: Prov. He that de.
fires to dye,let him liue well, : +
Qui plus vit plus a à fouffrit: Pro. The longer lift ghe
reater i ;
Viz: f. as Vi i
Viceraire: £ Crowfoot; al/o,Horebound; (bear bes.)
Viceratif: m. iue : £. Vicevatine, vlccrating, vlcer-
breeding. ù ET
Viceration: £. Atvlceration; a making or growing ul.
cerous, a drawing to an vlcer. .
Vicere: m. An ulcer; arav [cab ; a rumningor matta-
rie fore.
Vicere ambulatif, Seeke Ambulatif. i
Vicerer. To vicerate, exulcerate; exafperate ;raifea | —
blifler ; make a raw fcab, draw to a runæing fore.
Vligineux: m. eufe: f. wet, plafbie, fobbie, full of wa-
ter ; full foaked, or grovene foft, by along abode in wa-
ter, :


Vitneau: m. 4 young Elme.

Vine: f. An Ellor fadome ; alfo,a cubit.

Viophone. A venomows gluesor clammie fubfiance,
made of Miffeltoe berries:{ome call fo the blacke Came-
leon thiftle, whofe root is alfo venomous. ‘
pic: m, Great,or wild Garlick,

Vitime: ne Lafl,lag, finallextreame ; the farthefl, or

thermofl.

Vicion:f. A reuenging anenging, taking vengcance of;
a punifbing.

Vlulement: m. 4 bowling,or yelling.

Vinbelle de fenouil. The vmble, or the round tuft, or

+ bexd wherein the feed thereof growes.

Vmbilic: m. The mauell,or midale,of.

Vinbilical: m, ale: f. Vmbilicall, belonging to the na-
uell ; whence Veine vmbilicale. Seeke Veine.

Vinble: m. The Geneua Trout,or Salmon ; found in the
Lakes of Sauoy. j :
Vunble chevalier. 4 kiad of fPefh-water Trout, or |
Salmon, bigger then the ordinarie Vmble.

Vimbragé, & Vmbrager. Looke Ombragé,& Om-


brager,
Vimbre: f. as Ombre; alfo, an Omber, or Grayling ; a
fil (not much valike the Maigre,)
re de riviere. À big-bellied, fharp-nofed, tooth-
leffe,delicate,and wholefome Trout, found in the lakes, |
and riuers of Auvergne, and Savoy,
Vinbrette: f, A little Omber,or Grayling fifth.
Vinbrine:£ A great-eyed,round-tongued,(mall-toothed,
and holefome [ea-fifh,which hath certaine barves ouer-
croffe her backe; and growing often to the bigneffe of a
Maigre, is fometimes taken for it. iene
Vmbroyer. To be im the fhadow; alfo, to caftoryeelda


Vn: m.yne: f One,a; Inthe plurall fometimes vfed for
Some; whence,Les yns; fome of them; and,ynes ver-
es; fome rodds.
eux pour wn. The Snyfe-knaue ; tearmed fo, becanfe |
two of them ave worth but one good Snyte, ;
~ Enavoird'une. To be exlled,or to fallow a gudgeon.
Donner dunce. To tell a lye; to gine a lurch, or dry
lift; to gull,or make a foole of. _
Lun portant l'autre. One with,or for another; good
and bad together. £
Commun n'eft pas yn: Pro. See Commun,
n’enaqu’un, n’en a point: Prov. ( Meant of
Cocks, Bulls,erc , and fometimes alledged by | jatons
women) as good haue none as bane no more es
‘ : : n-


riginal from 4


FHEOHIO-STATEWNIVERSIFY


V NI


V'nanime: com. Of one mind, heart, will, confent, ac
cord; agreeing fully together. Wes

Vnanimement. with one mind coc; with full confent,
or agreement. “

Vnde. Looke Onde. |

Vhdé. as Ondé ; alfo,in Blafon,undie,or wanie.

Vndecimeftre. Of eleuen moneths.

Vadiculation: £ A wauing, or water-worke, in Fma-
gevie, or caruing.

Vndimie: f. as Oedeme.

Vnguent. Looke Onguent.

Vnguenteux: m. eufe: f Full of oyntments,or falues ;
oylie, greafie, fattie.

Vni: m. ie: € 1uf,euen, equal, plaine ; fmooth; alfo,v-
nited, or ioyned together.
Vaicorne: f. An Vnicorne.
Vniemént: m. 47 evenning, equalling, planing ; a ma-

king iuft,or Lewell,with another.
Vniément. Equally, euenly, plainely, finootbly, iufl one
with another.
Vniefine: com. The firft ; the one, or onth.
Vnitorme: com. Pniforme ; of one forme, proportion,
fhape, or fafbion,
Vniformement. Vaiformely, with one order, in one


manner.

Vniformité: f Vaiformitie; agreement in forme, pro-
portion, fhape, fafbien,manner, order.

Vniment: m. Az uniting,joyning,or knitting together,

À Vniment. with one accord.
Vnion : £, An union,or vnitie ; a league, peace, confent,

_ agreement,attonement.
Vaipare: com. Breeding, or bringing forth, but one at


once.

Vnique à com, Single, fingular, one,onelic alone; entire;
e[pecia

Vniquement. singly, fingularly entirely 5 chiefely,e(pe-

cially ; onely,alone. .

Vnir. To vaite,ioyne annex or knit unto, make one of.

Vnifonnant: m. ante: &£ Sounding alike, according,

__ or agrecing in found, of one and the fame found,

Vnifonnement. 44 with one found, voice, accord; in
good harmonie.

Vniffon: f. Anvnifon; an one; an Doynesfe, or lonely-
nelfe; a fingle,or finglenefe.

Vnité: £. Anvnitie, fmglene[fe, concord, agreement, at-
tonement ; an union, uniting,or ioyning of things toge-
ther.

Vnivers. L’vn. The univer(é,or vniuer[all world.

Vniverfel: m. elle: & Vniuer{all common, general ,be-


longing toall,
Vaivedetonent. Vuiner{ally, generally, wholly alto-
gether.


Vniverfité : € Vniner fitie suniner[alitie, generallneffe;
alfo,an Uniuer fitie. oo et
Vnivoque: com. Simple, of one onely fence,or fienifi-


cation, 4
Vaziefine: m. An eleuenth; a rate,or proportion of e-
leuen.
Vuziefine: com. L'vn. The elenenth in number.
Voarre: m. 4 glaffe; or glafe.
Voarrerie: f. 4 Glafe-houfe.
Voarrier:m. A Glafier ; or Glafe-maker.
Voarriere: f. À Glaffe-window, alfo,as Voarrerie.
Vocable:m. Awordatearme,
Vocabulaire: m. 4 Vocabularie,Diétionarie;world of


words.
Vocal: male: f Vocal ; belonging to, or confifiing in,
1 - the voice;alfo well-tuned,that maketh a diflinét found;


a Go: gle |


Vocalizé: m.ée:f. Vowelled made a vowell:


Vol =
and,refounding,or that bath a lowd voice:


Oifeau vocale. A bird which may be taught to fpeake:
Vocale: £ 4 vowell, af _ Beck


Ocation: f. À vocation,a calling.

Vociferation: f, 4 vocifération,exclamation, braying,
lowd crying.

Vociferer. To exclaime,bray,cry ont, cry alowd.

Vocitér. Tocall often, ~ :

Voeu: m. A vom, religious promife,deepe or deuout pro~
teflation. ;

Vogue: f. Vogue, fivay, fwindge; authoritie, power; a
cleere pafage,as of a {hip in a broad fea.

Vne vogue de faveur de peu de durée. LA geere of
fauor, momentarie grace,

Voguement: m. A fayling forth,or forward; a parting
or paffing along under fayle. :

Voguer. To fayle forth, or forward; ta fet [ayle, hoyfe up
pi = forth unto the fea; to part or paffe along vn-

er fayle. Cae
Vogue avant. On a Gods name,on forward,on afore.
Vogue la gallere, See Gallere. ;

Voici. See here,looke here,behold here.

Voicture, & Voicturier. See Voicure, & Voiturier.

Voie. See Voye.

Voier. Looke Voyer.

Voilà. Looke, fée,loe,bebold,there.
Voilà ce queie demande. why thats the thing 1 aske.
= ye que voilà le plus propre. This is,as I thinke,
the fitteft.

Voile: m. 4 Vayle; (ufed by Nunnes, widowes,or chur-

_ched women;) alfo,a curtaine or other cloth to coer ,or
lay ouer,a thing, sie Rain

Voile: £ The fayle of a fhip ; alfo,a fayle,or fhip;whence,

_200 voiles; 200 fhips,or fayleo fips.
‘A voile defployée. with fayles difplayed; hafily, [pee-
dily, farioufly; with might and maine, as faft and as
muchasonecan. . ; oh
‘A voile rancade. See Rancade.
Friand à la voile, Navire friand à la voile. A fbip
that goes exceeding well and fwiftly, an excellent
fayler. erg esc
Donner (ou faive) voile à rous vents. To fayle with,
or be carried by, euerie wind ; to doe alwayes as others
doe; alfo, tobe tran(ported by euerie windie motion of
his owne vaine thoughts.
Faire voile. To fet fayle,to make out to fea,erc.

Voilé: m.ée:& Vayled; attired in, or couered with,a
vayle; alfo, profeffed, as a Nunne; alfo, furnified with
fayles. | : : ©

Voiler. Tovayle; to couer with,or attire in,a vayle; alfô,
to make a Nunne of; alfo, to excufe, ouerfhadow, hide, |
conceale. « LAS

Voilier :m. ere: £. Of 4 fayle, hauing fayles. 3

Voir: m.Truth,a true tale or matter, footh.(v.m-)

Voir. To fee; Looke Veoir. rd epee es

Voire. But, yea but ; furely, certainely, verily, indeed;
ferfooth; alfo, Te
Voire Dea. (Ironically) yes forfooth, peayis, much,
as though,in my tother hofe. : PSC)

Voire voirement s'il n’eftoit point ainf.45 though
forfooth it were not fo; or by your fauor fir it was euen


eee all 4


diamant > 52.


~


x PME rh Fee:
ony


0,
f s’eft mocqué de moy,voire il m'a batu. He #06
‘ked me; yea and beat me to; or, hegaue me both quips |
and cuts,both mockes and firoakes,toboot. =
Voirement. Surely, certainely, verily; forfooth"; 58-


deed. :
Mmm ÿ  Voi-|


V OI


Voirie: € Jurifdiction,erc; as luftice; whence ;
Grande voirie. Meane luri(dittion ; or as, La moy-
enne luttice ; &, fimple voirie. Baft,or law Furifdic-
ton.

Voirie: £. 4 way, path, road, or fireet ; alfa, the layftall

» of a towne; the place whereon all the dung,and filth of
a towne is layed, or vuloaden ; (Fa which fence it is
much ufed plurally.)

, = de voirie. Scauingers, dung-farmers, gold-

nets.

Voiriefier. Allez yoiriefier.4 Par fien equinocation
upar Allez vous y fier; 41? ta it if pou lift ; andufed
in deteflation of a filthic,or dunghillike thing.

Voirre : m. Glafe.

Voirre dormant. Looke vader Dormant.

Vouré: m. €e:£ Glaffiesof glaffe.

Voïcrier: m. 4 Glafier.

Voirriere: € 4 glafe-windew ; glaffe sworke.

Voirtin: m. ine: £ Glaffie,of glafe;alfà,tranfparent.

Voirrine: £ as Voiriiere.


Voirrinier: m. A Glafier ; a Glafie-maker ;a worker in
g'afte. ei :
Voift,voifent. Qu'il s'en voile ; qu'lss’en voifent.
ae.


Let him,or them, ¢

Voifin: m. A neighbor. à
Bienaen fa maïfon qui de fes voifins cit aimé:
Pro. He that hath mez loue lives well at bome.
Bon advocat mauvais Voifin : Pro, The beft Lawyer
yn aa thofé that Gao moft are worft to

ell by.

Qui a bon voifin abon matin : Pro. He that hath a
goad neighbor gets goad words.

Tenir ne faut pour bon voifin vn ami derable, &
de vin: Pro. Treacher fiends are feldome ood neigh.
bors ; they will feaft st, but not fifi it with you ; or
when your proxifat fayles them, their companie fayles
you.

Voifin: mine :£ Neighbouring, or neere vate; bard
Velen farre off ; alfa veri Like sleek ;
oi : m, Ne£ i es weerene(fe,
En Fe A voifinape fe loge on: Prov, Tope.
reff fwsd affeords a pad; ill neighbours may be lodg'4

among.

Voifinal : m. ale:£ Neighbouring or weighbourlie.
Chemin voifinal. 2s vader cen
Tefmoings voifinaux. Which dwell neere the Land,
cie controner fie,

Voiïfnance: f. D gs gb

Voifiné: m. Ceux du voifiné. The seighbers,or thofe
that dwell thereabouts.

Voifine: £4 fle neighbour; whence the Prouerb; Pour


-grafle que fix lageline, elle abefoi@Ue fa voifi-
ne The ie bene win the coope, without good
wi


Voisiner. Te beneighbour,nigh,necre,or adioyning,vn-
ta ; alfô,to goffip ter goe to vifit neighbours. É
| Voi Looke Veaucrer,


| Voiture :£. carriage, portage, aight nading alfa


4 ve oiture AREA EE


| Voiturer. Te carrie by Cart,waine pagode.
ee EE So
Voleiec: = corre (thecal haine, ne wae


“pein Fo Dre ver sains


VOL
Avoir voix en chapitre. To be heard attentinely end
with refbeët ; to be of authoritieor beare fome fivay in
apublike affemblie. | |
. Le n'en aÿ cu vent,ny voix. 7 seuer heard the leaft
it


v ne of ‘i A bé

ol: m. A flight,or flying; a quic ij ~

Sage, haftie courfe; ‘ie, a rong, of UE ste
high-way fide; alfo,a Lure,in Blafon. £
Le vol du chapon. 1s by the cuftomes of Clermont,
Orleans, Berri,le Perche, Blois, Romorantin, Leu-
roux,& Trembleui,an Arpent; by thofe of Chafteau-
neuf, an Arpent and a halfe; 5 thofe of S. Aignan,
Chabris,& Auvergne, a fefterée; and by thofe of An-
jou,azd le Maine 320 fingle | ses of the ground lying
next vato, or about, a Gentlemans Manuor bo e, or
principal me([uage ; with which (in default of a cone |
pen garden) it ewer falls vnto the fbare of the eldefl

eire.

Volage: com. Light, giddie, fbittle-beaded; inconflant,
a Vu a
fa).


pelvolage. Looke Appel.
Rene volage. Arent raped of, or pur chaf ed firymo-


ney.

M Lightly, giddily, inconflantly, fickly; bu-
moroufly;vafbly. !

Volageté: £ Lightneffe, giddineffe; bumoroufnelfe, in-
conflancie, fcklene e; Weasfdeciice, rafhne à

Volant: m, The fea-Bat, or Reremoufe of the [ea ; a fly=
ing fpalfo,the fayle of a Windmill Calfo,a clake ;and
4 Capon, or other peece of Pullein ; in the language of
Rogues; alfo,a Shittlecocke.)

Volant: m. ante: f. Fhing, iviftly-paffing, faft run-
ning; momentarie, flitting ; [ubieci to remoue often, or
to frequent remoues.

Camp volant. 4 flying campe, a campe of bght-borfé-


men for ordinarie roades.
Pont volant. The ladder of a fhip.
Rente volant,ou volante. 4 Rent-feckrent-charge;
or any rent thats raifed of,or bought for,mone y.
Volante: £ A looft lerkin,or Caffock, a Standilion
Volatil: m. ile: £ Flying ; fleeting,or flitting.
Volatilifer. Tofly, flicker, flit, wauer.
Vole: £ The palme,or ep à of an halfe-open hand;
the iaint,or mufile under the thumbe.
Volé: m.ée: £ Fled; alfsrobbed, pilled, (poyled. <
Voiée: f A flight,or flying;alfa,amhole flight, flocke, or
companie of birds, and,a brood of fowle of one feafan.
“Alavolée. Rafbly, vaduife inconfiderately ; at
randome,at rouers,at all adueittuy'es, euen as it chaun- |
ces, falls out, happens. :
Perdre la volée pour le bona. To loofé,or let flip, an
oportunitie,in hope that it will returne. :
Que de bond que de volée. More by meere hap then
- any good cunning ; or,by ane courfe or anotber what by
one meanes and another. a
Mefchante parole ieftée va par rout à la volée :
Pro. See Parole.
Volement: m. A flying; fleeting, fitting ; peedie run-
ning, (wift paffing. ji Là
Le Voler A certaine Ca ved in fe fir the draw.
inking mony from new-come guefis.
Voler. To flye s take a flight, be tn runne fwifily,
paffe away gut ; et or flit fpeedily ; alfo, to rob,


oler à faulte. À to looft,or miffe ber flight.


Te


Original from
THE-OHIO-STATE UNIVERSITY


Le ES


VoL


le ne vole point fur lagorge. 1 v/e aot to exercife
prefently after meat. F À

Faire bourre voler. To play utb at Tennis; alfo, to
vfe much any og game,ot pafliine.

Fel penfe voler qui ne fçauroir bougét : Prov.
Looke Bouger. rs ;

Volerie :£. A robberie; robbing, ranfacking , à violent
road wherein all goes te wracke; alfo,aplace ontva
faze which we call the Heanen. À

Volet: m. A cloth (bread on the ground for the picking
of corne ; alfa,a fhut,or woodden window to fhut ouer,
aglaffe one(as Contre-feneftre ;) alfo, a flight, or
Light fhaft ; alfo,a foittle-cocke, alfo,a boord,or planke.
Efleus,& choifis comme beaux pois fur le Volet:

&, Triez fur le volet. Choice perces,picked fluffe.

Voleter. To flicker, or flutter; to flie thicke, mone the
wings often, wauer witb the wings.

Voleur : m. 4 fier ; a!fo,a robber,or highway theefe ; &
an inroder,ov à voad-maker,

Voleufe : & A woman that flies;orrobbes,

Volier:m. A great cage, or coope wherein birds bane

" roome ynough to flutter,

Volicre : f. 2s Volier ; or(more generally)a cage,or coop
for fowle ; ad a Doue-coat flanding on pillers; there-
in differing from Colombier à pied ; and of a meaner
qualitie (or for meaner perfons) then it.

Vollatilifer. See Volatilifer.

Voller. To get newer a tricke,at cards : (Rab,


| Volliere. as Voliere,


Volontairé tom. A voluntarie; one that ferues, or
does any thing, without payor compulfion.

Volontaire: com. Voluntatie, willing, fre, of it elf,
of bis owne accord ; alfo, prone, veadic, forward, apt
to thinke, or execute a thing put into bis bead; alfo,
wilfull, that does what likes bim bref}, or whatfoener
comes in bis head,


| Volontairement./olantarily willingly, promptly,rea~


dily, freely, without procurement or compulfion, of bis
owne accord,
Volonté : £. The will, mind, lipheart, confent, meaning,
affeétion,humor,defire.
Bonne volonté. Willingneffe, freenelfe, readinefe,
owne accord or good will; alfo,abfolat e will and pleas
fire whence, Ie me rends, faites de moy voftre
bonne volonté : viz. #hatfèeuer you thinite good,
‘A la mienne volonté,que.J would te God,or 1 pray
God, that.
Volonteux : m.eufe: f wilfull, (elfewillie, wedded to
bis will,fwaied by the throng,or caried by tbe fireame,
"of bis ovone (intemperate)bumors. À
Volontiers wilingh readily frethsgladiet eafè,with
eligbt. 13
Voltant:m.ante: £ Bounding, curuetting; alfo, tur-
ning,
Volte :€ Around; or turme; and thence, the bounding
- turne which cunning riders teach their horfes ; alfo,a
‘Tumblers gamboli,or turne; whence;
Volte en arriere. A backe turne; a ierting,or whee~
"ling backward, lighting againe on the feet, and,Vol-
teen avant; (the contrarie)a turning ouer forward.
Prendre la volte de Londres, &c. To goe 10 London.
wards,or towards London, ;
Volter. To vault,or tumble; alo, to bound, or cutuet ;
alfo,to turne or make turne. :
Voltigeant:m.ante:f. Vaulting, or tumbling ; alfo,
curnetting or managing in a (narrow)circle.
Voltigement : m, A-vaulting,or tumbling ; alfo,a eur.
uetting,or managing in round,


= = /Govgle


NO VLA


Fb uk
Voltiger. To vault,or tumble; alfo,to curuet or manage
in a (narrow)circle, ie ea
Voltolines f, The name of avine,
Volubilité : f. Volubilitie ; an eafie rolling, or glib tar
ning; and tbence,unficadinef[e, or an inconflant mo-


wing.

Voluble sf. withiwind,Bindweed,Roapweed. __

Voluble : com. Voluble; eafily rolled, turned, or ‘tum-
bled; Hence, fickle inconftant, variable, wauering of
ten flitting or changing; and,glb,nimble, rolling, al.
wayes running cuer turning,

Volume: m. 4 voluime,tome, booke,or feuerall part of a
px ; alfo,the bulke, fixe, quantitie,or largenele of a
thi À ‘


72, we
Voluncaire, & Voluntairement.See Volontaire,&
Volontairement, ;
va unté :f. # Volonté,
olupté: f, Pleafure , vol ele, fenfualitie
midi nar: d pr Cr ps
oluptucufement. Voluptuoufly,fenfiually.
Volupruéus :m,cule: Cat cee eae fenfuall,
carnall, wholly deuoted to worldlie delights. à:
Volute :f The rolling fhell of a Snayle ; aifo, the wri-
then circle,or curle inf that hangs ouer,or {ticks out of
the chapter of a piller, &c and is tearmed by our
workmen a Rowle, Cartridge, or Carthoufe.
Vomique: f. la vom. A fecret, and daungeroxs impof-
tumation fill of matter.
Vomique : com. Vomiting; whence. Noix yomique;
the vomiting nut,or uit ; Ste Noix,
Vi Omir. To vomit, [puc,caft parbrecke.
Voiniflement :m, 4 vemiting,or [Puing,
Voinitif: m, 4 Vomitine,or Vomitorie ; any thing that
prouokes vomiting, i .
Voinitoire: m, #5 Vomitif.
Vorace :com. Rauenows,deuouring, fiwallowwing, glut-
tonous, confuming. j
Voracité : £ Voracitie,ranening, gluttonie, deuouring,
{wallowing ,exceffine ov greedie Reding,
Vorage:m.A gulfe,whirlepoole,quagmire;a (wallowing
or unfaciable depth. .
Vortillement des fleuves, 2s Vortillons.
Vortillons; m.The eddie, whirling,round turnings in a
Rreame. ie :
Vos. the plurall to Voftre.
Voftre: com, Your, yours,belonging to yon.
Vote :m. Aww, sé 3
Vou:f. A daughter in law,a fonnes wife : {Gale
Vouiade. as Bouade. Rs wai
Vouchement: m, 4 vouchingin law,
Voucher. Te vouch ; to cite, prayin aid, of call unto
aid, inafuit : (Norm, . ae
Voüé: m. ée: £ Vowed ; veligion/ly promiféd, ov pro-
tefled yalfo, ginen, bequeathed, beraken, or denoted,
unto, |
Voüet. To vow; promife or protefl; alfo, to gine, be-
queath, betake, or denote vnto; whence, Voter au
Diable,&e. A —
Voiier arbre à arbre. Toidyie, or Glue tree ta tree,
boord unto boord,érc.
Voiierie:f. as Voirie; Furifdiftion. FE
Voiieur : m, 4 wooer,or futer unto a woman,
Vouge : m. À Hunting, or Hunters, flaffe; a Boore


are. + >
vbulane: Bien vo. well-willing, friendllie oF affellid- }


nateunta, Ne aay ns |
Voulceure: £4 vaulting, arching bowing cooking: or,
avanlt,arch bought. 4 Vv >

: ‘ou-


uN


EN UO


Voulenteux. as Volenteux.

Vouloir : m. 4 will,mind,fancie, affection bumor swifh,
défire ; meaning,purpofe,imtent.

Vouloir. To will ; couet wifh,defire ; meane,mind,pur-
pofe,intend,
En vouloir. whence; ‘A qui en voulez vous ?Wbat
ayles you ? who burts you ? or whom doe you flomacke?
who baue you a quarell to ? with whom doe you meane™
to brabble ? Sometimes alfo the contrarie ; as, Yheur
vous en veut ; fortune fauours you; (but inthis fence
it is not ofienv{ed.)
Dieu le yueille.God grant,God fend itor 1 pray God
it fall out fo.
Tele veux bien.with all my heart; 1 am well content,
or pleafed withalt, j
Il ne nous donne qui ne veut. No man is con-
firained to gine vs; any man may chufe whether he will
gine vs or no ; The like is; Il y va veoir qui veut; He
that will, be that bath a mind to it, any one, may goe
and fee it.
Si les dez ne vous veulent, If the dice runne not to
Jour mind,on your fide ; or as you would haue them.
Que veut le Roy ce veut la Loy: Prov. The Law
makes good ber Princes expofitions.
Qui quand il peut ne veut, quand il veut il ne
peut : Prov, Looke Pouvoir.
Qui tard veut ne veut : Prov,A delay imports a de-
niall ; and he that driues one off with words, doth
meane to let him haue nought but words.

Voulrie:f, Th'authoritie which a father and mother
fb oner their child ; alo, the boufe, or dwelling of a

ther,
Voulfure : f. 4 Voulceure.
Voulte :f. A vault,or arch; alfo,a vaulted,or embowed


rooje.

vou :m.ée: f, Vaulted,arched ; bowed, or bending
me all ie downeward ; alfo, crooke-backed,or bulch-

acked,

Voulter.To vault,arch,bow;crooke,or bend(on all fides)
downeward, ae aes

Voulteur: m. A maker of vaults,or of arches,

Voultis: m. The feeling of a roome.

Voulture : f A vaulting or arching.

Voulu. willed, wifhed ; coueted, fancied defired, affece
ted; meant,intended,purpofed, —

Vous. You, , ic

Vouffé : m.ée: £ Vaulted arched,

Voufüre :f. #5 Voulture,

Voute. as Voulte.

. Voutoy€ :m.ée : f /anlted,arched bowed.

Voutrér. Looke Veautrer.

Vouture : f as Voultute, S

Voyable : com, Vifible, perceiuable, feeable, fubieël

vatotheview, Fo

Voyage: m. A voyage , iontney, peregrination; alfo,

(among Diers}a heating,or copper-fiull of liquer.

| Voy ent :m. .4 voyaging,trauelling, iourneying.
Voyager. Totrauel sourney,goe a voyage,

Voyag ren Cornoüaiïlle, To be a cuckold;or tohaue

ey a le home while bis feet are plod-

_Voyagere :f. A trauelling or way-faring woman,

Voyageur: m. À travellersa way-faring man.

- Vv. J 1 t. ceiing. ge s

et canfty ; properly fuch a one


SY is £5 oI OSes


om
FL


4 vey rm. 4 truth; whence ; :


V.100 #7


tage of a thing; alfo,a load,or cart-fill of; and.in the
plurall(Voyes)the view,or fe pr a Steg;mlence;
Courir vp Cerf fur les voyes; Dogs to bunt, or pure
fie a Stag, with nofes to ground, ,
Par yoye. a4 clere-voyes; or fo farre fet afunder
that one may eafily looke beiweene them,

Par voye de faict. Looke Faia,

Tout d'une voye. Al at oñce ; or,all under one. ©
Accueillir fa vOye vers. To trauell, wend, or goe,to-
wards,

Mettre en voye. To fet packing, going, or agate; to
put forward,or into the way.

Ine va pas du tout à honte qui de demye voyere-
tourne : Prov, Himfelfé with fhame be will not laine
to goe,that bath turn’d back againe; be that bath once
a courfe abandond bath wet the face againe 10 fland
on't


.


Voyelle :£, 4 vowell.

Voyer:m. 4 Surueyer,or Ouerfeer of bighwayes, (and
punifher of the offences committed therein; ) alfo, the
Surueyor of the publicke workes, and buildings belong-
ing to a towne, who, in fome places, likewifé appoints
mecres and bounds unto berdering lands ; and
orders the lights, gutters, and finkes of neighbouring
houfes; and limits unte thofe that build in a firect,
their ground and fcope of iutiying and lookes that
the flreets,and bighwayes be not firaitned,or incombe-
red by flalls, feats, flayres , boring of houfés,erc ; and
laflly, Scauinger-like, gines order that they be made
cleane: Alfo,a Gentleman that hath fome Furi(ditti-
on (though not altogether fo much as tbe Jufticier)
within bis territorie; whence;

Gros voyer.as Moyen Jufticier ; &,Simple voyer,

as Le bas Jufticier,

Le grand Voyer de France. The great Surueyor of
France; 1 but a meane Officer, bow great foeuer this

__title,or the perfon that holds it,be.

Voyeric:f. furifdittion, whence, Grande Voyerie ;
æ La moyenne luftice; (under Juice; ) &,Simple
voyerie; Bafe,or low Furifdiction, 4

Voyes d'un cerf, Looke Voye.

Voy-là. See,looke,bebeld,tbere. |

Voyrement. Surely,verily,indeed, forfèeth.

Voyrie. as Voyerie,

Voyture,& Voyturier. 4 Voiture,& Voiturier.

Vpe:f. The bird called awhoope,or dungbill Cocke. —

Ve Hareng vrac. À Herring well feafoned, and fea-
fonably imbarrelled, +»

Vranopetes. Goers to beauen : Rab,

Vraque. The pipe, or pafage whereby a wombe-infants
urine is carried from it,

sper ‘The name of certaine ropes,or tackling which
belong unto fayles,


vray dire perd on le ieu: Prov, The fairef! game. ,
fier alvayes losfeth mot : be that to Truth bimfelfe a |.
sone ties will [peed worfe then the knane that v-

eth lyes. : <r
Bean fervice fi ae vra i dire ane Proy.
Faire feruice friends, true plaïnenefe foes, procures,
_ Tout vray n’eft pas bon à dire: Proy, All thatis |
ï or lpdeshiraee . dsfothyiuft right, VS
Vray :m,vraye:f.True, unfai iu fl right; fire, |
cated À Vishedd sv j me taal, oe
it, ak ) tr 4 of à ON
font] es pires bourdes que les yrayes:Prov.The |
true ms lan na bitterefiieahs. :
Vraybis;& Vraybot. for Vrayement. va


Original from


FHE-OHIO STATE UNIVERSIZY


ai bel


M dE à.


Vrayement.Truely,in truth, in footh , indeed > verily,
Fr > Jurely, infily , rightly, unfainedly, in good
ith,


Celt vrayement bien di& toy. Thou baft bit the
naile on the head; thou bal! now flrucken it dead; (iro-
nically.) ‘.
Ouy vrayement. Yeafure, true Roger, wifely bro-
ther Timotbie ; (Ironically ; yet is it ufed fometumes o-
therwife as in)Quy veayement ie le nie ; Yea tra
ly,or, for my part, I denie it utrerly. :

Vrayfemblable : com. Probable, likelie like or feeming
to be true.

Vrayfemblance : f. Probableneffe,or likenefe of | truth,

Vrbain: m, Vrban; a proper name for a man.

Vrbanic:f. as Vrbanité,,

Vrbanité:f. Vibanitie, cuilitie, courtefie, affabilitie,
gentleneffe; good behauiour, feemelie caïtiage,a band-
fome fifbion, a comelie grace, a prettie and pleafant
manner of ordinarie diftourfe.

Vebec:m. The Vine-fretter, or Diuells Gold-ring ; a
worme, ;

Vrderis. as Verdegris.

Vre: m. The fap odd, hulch-backed, (hort. borned,
and red-eyed wild Oxe , called the Vre-oxe,

Vreder. Torunne bafily.

Vrelepingue: m. .4 drinte-fpiller : qRab.

Vreniiler. To piffe,or void urine : (Rab,

Vige. in (lead of Vine: Rab. .

Vréent: m. cnte:£, Pgent,vrging ; bard or fore pref-

fing, flraining, forcing importunate,earnelt.

Ville: € <A Gimlet,or Piercer,

Vrilles: ££ Hooke-like edges,or ends of leawes (called by
fome of our workemen Scrolls,and) [licking out in the
upper parts of pillers,and of other peeces of Architec-
ture.

Vrillonner vne cable. To coyle a cable, to wind or lay
it vpround,or in a ring. ; ER

Vrinaire :com. Of,or belonging to,vrine ; alfo,vrinall.


like.
Vrinal:m. 4n Vrinall; alfo,a Jordan, or Chamber-


ot.

Vinal :m.ale : € Of urine.

Vrine : €. Vine lant, Pale chamber-lye, piffe.
Je voudrois bien voir de leur vrine. 1 would gladly
fee what there is inthem, what fluffe they be made of

or what they are able to doe,

Vriner. To vrine,piffe,make water, fale.
Vriner vne cable, To coyle acable.

Vrineux : m. cufe:£. Fall of vrine ; fanoring, or finel-
ling of urine.


uell,and carrying away the vrine of an infant while it
is in the wombe. .
Vris: m, A rime,or white froft upan trees. :
Vine: £, Anarrow-necked pot, or pitcher of earth, to
fiteb,or keepe water in; alfe, a veffell wherinto the
Roman Pretor did pat the names of {uch as were to be
eledted,or tried, by (ot ; alfo,a coffin,or veffell wherein
the afhes of thedead were preferued, |
| Vroesne. The bearbe woodbind. .
Vefin zm. The fea Vrchin; fo called about Marfeille.
JYVrfin: m.ine:f ee a of a mee
age :m. Vfage; vie, wearing, imployment, occupati-
ne Fit, profits pokefian ;al/o, woont, cuftome, guise,
manner, fafbion;  practife,exercife experience ba-
bit,enurements, acquaintance, familiaritie,conuerfati-
on with, alfo,intereft,or vfurie; alfo,a right of Pafture,
and Pawnage, r of taking wood for necefJarie vfes,in


Se Go gle


he 4


Viiniet: m. 4 conduit paffing to the middle of the na-


“Virpation : f. 4m ofierpation, or uftaping jan vniuft,


vs vy


Lee ee


a foreft belonging to the King,or fome other Lard, This
Right is enioyed by diuers,and in diners manners; for
fome may take timber for their building; others bane
onely fire-boot, and bedze-boot ; fome take it through-
out the forefts,and as much as they need; others are li-
mited both place and quantitie : Some bold it as a fief,
others by rent,or Cens; laftly, [eme baue it onely for
their lines ; and others but for yeares; Howfoeuer they
can neither pre fèrre, nor paffe ouer, in any
manner, that whith they baue. ‘

Vfages, Common paflures, woods, or underwoods ;
tr ufes (or bis Printer mifufes) this word for

es,

Viager: m. as Vfagier.

Viager: m. ere: £ Common, for enerie bodies vfe ;
whence; — ; :

Femme vfagere. À common whoore,

Viagier : m. A cuflomarie tenant, —

Viagier de bois, One that bath common of Paflure,
Pawaage, or wood for his necelfarie ufes, in another
mans wood ; as in V{age. ge

Viance:f. Vance oft, vufage.

VIE: m.ée : f. Vféd; occupied worne,implayed ; poffe/-
a gly wafted,confianed ; accuflomed, prachifed,
enured. ‘ *

Viement: m. 4 ufé,ufing, vfuge,guife, cuflome; alfo, a
wearing, poffeffing,wafiing,confiming.

Vier. To ufé; toweare, occupie, impluy ; wall, confume,
fpend ; accuftome, prattife, exercife, enure vaio; pof-
Selfesenioy,take the vfe,reape the profit,of.

fer de force. To deale by force,te take by violence,
Men de rediétes, To repeate or iterage the fame things
often. : *

_ Vous n’en deufsiez vfer ainf en mon endroit, You ©
fhould not bandle,or deale with,me fo ; yawfhould not
beare your [elfe towards me in that manner.

Viité :m.ée : f U/uall, cuflomable common,ordinarie;
ufed,wonted,accuflomed, prathifed,exercifed skilful,
cunning,expevienced in. EE 2

Vitter. To w/e, prattife, accuflome, enure, exercife,
trade in. > Rr LE

Vsucaption : £ Three eares pole fion in a Moueable
(which in Law counteruaples a prefeription ; ) or more \
generally , any prefcription, or long poffeffion; or the
winning of a thing thereby. yf

Viuelles : ÉPaflures,and wooddie grounds belonging in |


common unto divers towne|bips.
Viufruétuaire.æ Viafuidier. su
Viüfui@: m. The ufe,and profit(but not the property) À -
of goods withæb'oveners confent. ni ay
Viufruiétier :m. One that bath the uf, andveapes the |
profit, of a thing, whereof ibe propertie refleth inane °
other, tse se ae
Viuraire : com, vfirions ; taken, or giuen for intereft or !


fe. ; f

Vfüre : € The wearing or occupation of a thingsalfor/u-
rie,ufeinteref a | .

Vfürier :m. An Tfurer.


Vurpateur : m. An-ufarper of, an incroacher on , ano-
« ther mans right. ; :


or oftenvfing. . ,
Vfürpatrice.4n ufurpatrix; a woman that vjurpetb.
Viürpé:m, éc:f. vjurped ; often,or unisfip vid

furper. To vfirpe ; tofeife, or incroach en, another

mans right ; al(o,to vfe much, often 10 mention."

Vtagues; or Vtaques:4s Eftaques. ae

Vrenfile: m, An vtenjile ; any implement , +
vfefu


iG NatFEOM
ZFRE-OHIO-SFATE-UN
PS


V Wn


ufefill toole,or boufhold fiuffe, ;

Vtenfile. Bien vten. Throughly firnifhed with vten-
files.

Pern m. ine :f. Of the bellie or wombe; of one and
the fame wombe or bellie; borne of one mother, or
damme.

Herbes vterines. Hearbes which be good for the
a Mother, 3
= Vtile: com. Gainefull, beneficial, profitable, commodi-
ous aduantagious ; alfo,expedient,necefarie, feruicea-

blr,good,conuenient.

Vtile domaine.Tb'eflate'ofa vafiall in th'imheritance
which he holds of bis Lord; fo tearmed becaufe hee
hath onely a proftable,not a direct,intereft in it.
Seigneur vtile. An occupant, or occupier of land; be
that poffeffes,and veceines the fruits ofan inheritance,
for which rent,or Cens,are payed,or feruices done.
Seigneurie vtile.The vfe,occupation,or pofsefion of a

2 fief, or imberitance,

Vtilement. Profitably, gainefülly, beneficially,commo-~

7 dioufly ; with great aduantage, to good purpofe.

Pe. Vtilité: f Vrilitie,commoditie,profit,gaine,bent fit,che-

y uifance aduantage.

| Vtopie+f. 42 imaginarie place,or countrey.

Vtrin. as Veerin,

Vuaine: f. A fheath : Pic.

Vuan: m, 4 glove: Pic.

Vuaranion. #5 Garagnon; (an old word.)

Vuard ; &, Vuarder. as Gard; &,Garder : Pic.

Vuarelque :m. 4 wrecke, or fhip caft away; or the
right of Admiraltie, whereto it belongs.

Vuarifons. Adveftures,& vvar. Corne,grafe, or other
fruits growing, or flanding ; or uncut, vngot, vnga-
thercd,

Vuarlouque : com, Squint eyed, skenning, as kew-loo-
king : Pic.

Vuaudrée : f. Amaulkin,or the clowt wherewith an O-
uen is made cleant : Pic.

Vuayves:f Waifès; ca[ualties ; things which beleft,
abandoned,cftheated;or vnowned. à

Vvedde. weld,woad,garden or tame Woad: @Pic,

Vvée. Menibrane Vvée. The grapie membrane of the

_ eyes Looke Membrane.
ucil. as Vouloir ; will.

Viel. See Venel. ER

wie as Veule in the later fence, | ;
uerp :m. À delincring,or giuing ouer unto ; alfo,a due-

| tie of 12d. Parif. paied by a perchafer unto the She-

fre fir their prefince when poffeffion is, bythe feller,
- delinéred unto him, cee
Vuerpi: m, icf Delixered, yeelded, or given ouer


*


vnto.
| Vuerpir. To deliner, yeeld,or give oner vnto.
vie Vue on Vue as Vouloir ; Will, |
-Vuidange: m. A vcidnefe,emplineffé;inanitie, vecui-
à ing emptying evacuation, eiettion; alfo, the
fa controverfie, '

ges d'une ville, The layfall of a tovone ; or
herein Scauengers and Gold-finders emptie

le carts,


were: & Emptying, voyding , enacua-
-A waflsa void,or emplie Pacesawide,or vaf
ere


guts,
| Vuideté :£ Voidnefe,emptine[fe,bollownefe ; inanitie,


_Vuilles: f. The tendrells or twining [Prigs,of" bine-bran-


| Vzim.


Vuides chambresfont les Dames folles : Pro. #2-
mens freedome breeds their folliewhen they are left a- |
lone all modeflie is gone. ;
De mains vuides prieres vaines: Proy, They that
gue nought get nought ; th'emptie-banded pray in
vaine,


Le plat du bas eft toufiours le premier vuide: Pro.

The loweft difh is ewermore firft emptie; (belike becaufe

i. (off commonly) fürnifhed the worfl,and fed on the |
‘


Vuidé: m, ée: £. vopded emptied enacuated; exbanf:
ted ; purged cleanfed ; hollowed ; auoyded; aifo, deci.
ded, determined, difpatcbed, made an end of; alfo,
feces! haie de id

€ point fera rantoft vuidé, will qui 5
sed, cleered. mr 2 Mr
uide-main :m, A quitting, yeelding, rendering, or
gining up of,

Vuidement: m. A veyding emptying, ewacnating , ex-
haufling ; hollowing ; purging, cleanfing; deciding,de-
termining difpatching,ending.

Vuider.To vord,enacuate,emptieexhauft bollow;purge,

_ Cleanfe; auoyd; alfo,to cleere, determine, decide, re-.
folue,difpatch; rid of, make an end of.

Vui er fes mains. To yeeldrender, giue vp, deliner

ouer; quit, rid bis hands of; alfo, to pay readie money

for things bought publickly, or affigned by publicke Or-
er, : :


Vuider la maifon,ou meftairie, A tenant, or farmer
to goc out of, or gine up,againft his will, the tenement
he tooke, or thought to baue kept, for a longer time. - -
Vuiderles poulets. To draw them, to draw out their


vacuilie,euacuation,
Vuideur: m. A voyder,empticrewacnater.
Vuideure: f # Vuidement: :
Vuiho : m, 4sCocu: €Pic.


ches. ;
Vulgaire: m, A kind of great mall, or hammer where-
within old time,gates vere broke open, ety
Vulgaire.le vul.The vulgar,common people,many bea-
Vv aes ee à je ÿ
aire: com, Vulgar common, p €; ordinarie,
tribal fa or mach Of sé ty : siti
ie eee Volgarly,commonly:; ordinarily, trini- |


ally, :

Vulgal.whence; vif argent vulgal. The b ind |
of Quicksiluer, inde of dtafene bay. ki
ulneraire : com, Uulnerarie,bealing wounds belong.

| ing unto wounds,

Vulpin: m. ine: f Fox-like,of'a Fox.

Aer ad si Re Nirih oat iad. ‘ LÉ
ulve: wombe-pipe,or priuie paBage ; the w
entrance inio the An #4 alfo, fe page 4 ;
wombe it felfe. —

Vvule:£ The Vonla,or palate of the mouth,

Vuy pa aol ral 24
Vuyde: Vuydé ; &, Vuydement. as Vuide: Vui-
dé; &, Vuidement,
pee ond) &, Vuydeté. Looke Vuider; &, Vui-


PE vs as Vies &Vi ‘
It; &, V ytte. as ut; tte. :
ita ses ‘ Xano-


ariginal from


MPAAQHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


x :


Enomanes. qRab. 4 traueller.
X Xilaloë. Lignum Aloes. :
ilobalfame: m.The wood of the Balfame tree.


*


(A Relatine, or Aduerbe of Relation) unto him,
it,or them; thereto,or thereunto; alfo,there,
or thither.

Dieu vous y aide. (To one that fneezeth) God bleffe
you. aks
Te ne fçauroy que vous y faire. 1fbould not know how
to belpe you, or what to doe foryou,in it,
ra a efté troisiours. He bath beene three dayes a-
out st,
Il fe nothmoit Philippus, & y fut fouvent appellé,
And was often called fo.
Puis que piffeurs y a: &, Puis que de nos marottes

a. Seeing that we are [peaking of piffers, oc.

Yéble: m. wallwort, Danewort,Dwarfe Elderne.
Yeofe. as Yeufe.
Yeufe. The Holme Oke , barren Skarlet Oke , French


Oke.

Yeux. (The Plurall to Oeil) Eyes ; Looke Ocil.

+. :m. The Yew ae
inagé. Looke Imagé:

Ypres :m. The Ele tree.

Yraigne.as Araigne. i

Yfard: m.The Shamois,or wild Goat of whofe skin Sba-
mois leather is made.

YMé: m. ée: £ Hoifed, lift up.

Y fer, To hoife,or Lift vp.

Yifir. To iffue ; to come,goe,or flow forth,

Yilué :£, Ax ifue; going @ut, comming forth; alfo, as


Ifuë.

Yve :f. as Ive; alfo,(imold French)water.

Yver: m. winter ; Looke Hyver. «

Yvernade:f. Awintering. ,

Yvernal: m, ale: £. Fit fir, of or belonging to , the
Winter.


Yverner. To winter, to fpend or palfe away the winter; |


alfo,to dig.or dreffe a vineyard mWinter,

Yvoire : m. Ivorie,Elephants tooth.

Yvoirin:m.ine :f. Of Ivorie,like Ivorie.

Yvraifon : f. Drunkenneffe ; 01th’ alt of drunkenne(fe ;

(Yvrongnerie being the vice,or vf thereof.)

Yvrave:f The vicious graine called Ray,or Darnell.
Yvraye fauvage. Ked Daraell , wall Barlie, way
Bennet. .

Yvre: com. Drunken, cupfhotten,tipfie, wbitled; flufht,
mellow,ouerfeene, whofé cap is fet, that bath taken a
pot too uuch,tbat hath feene the dinell.

= Yyre de lai& caillé, Tipled by a fmall matter; whofe
weake braine us diflempercd, or oucrturned, by weake
dri? : : à


inke.
Yvre comme vne foupe. Looke Soupe.
Yvrofle :€ DIE A, e Yirongneñe,
Yvrongne : m. 4 drunkard,
A Ja trongne cognoift on l'yvrongne: Prov. 4
drunkard is by bis rich face difcerned. ;
Yvrongner. To be drunke,or to drinke drunke ; to/iill


Diditized-by Gor gle


x


Z E L |


or caroufe vamea[urably, -

Yvrongnerie: f, Drunkennelfe; (tbe vice,cuflome, or
babit of drunkennefe.)

Yvrongnefle:f. 4 drunken woman, a drunken fow,
Femme fafre, & yvrongnefle, de fon corps n’eft
pas maiftrefle: Prov. we fay, À drunken Tnuc bath

à no Porter. : Be »

vrongnet: m. ette: f. Somewhat drunken,ouerfeene,
or 100 blame ; a little ont of the way. i
Yyroye. as Yvraye.


Z


Affte. 4 kind of exceeding drie fand, or granell;
2 or or it sion of à.
: agaye:f, A fafhion of [lender d long-bez-
ded Pied by the Moorifh pa! 2 ,
auuille. 2s Zagaye.

Zain: m, A horfé thats all of one(darke)colour, without
any flarre, pot,or marke abont bim; and therby come
monly vicious, -

Zalas. Alas: qRab. ®

Zanit : m, 4 Vice to a Tumbler Fc; or in a Play.

Zarzeparille: f The medicinable plant called Zartapa-
she a (corruptly) Saffaparilla, and rough Bindweed
6, ecru.

Zebedée: £. A double Damaske Rofé.

Zec: m. Reed to thatch houfes with,

Zecchin: m. A Venetian coyne of gold, worth about 5


s.fterl.  _

Zedoaire:£ The root of Anthora,or wholefome wolues-
bane,called alfo,Monkes-hood or Helmet. flower, and
Aconits mithridate;And this doe fome flile Zedoaire
@ Auicenne : Others call worme-{eed Semen Zedo-
ariz,or Zedoar-feed.

Zedoaire de Serapion. An Eaft- Jndian root which
refembleth ginger, butis more bitter in taft, and better
in fmell, then it, though not fo {trong in eyther as it.

Zein as Zain. ;

Zelateur : m. 4 xealous,or iealous perfon.

Zelatif : m. iue: f. xealous,or iealous.

Zele :in. Zeale; earneft affection, loue,enuy, emulation;
extreme cate, exceeding defire to doe a thing,

Zelé: m. ée : f. Zealoussealous ; fernent carnefl,or af- |
feitionate,in extremilie. 5

Zeler. To be xealous,or iealous of; to emulate,ov enuy; to
affect extremely;to baue au exceeding care of er defire


Zdots fi

otopie:f. Fealouflie,

Flew roma cae zealous.

Zel . com.as Zelote,

Zenith: m. Our Zenith; or the point of the firmament
which is direGily cuer our heads,

hyre: m. the welt-wind. :

Zero: m. A Cypher in Arithmetick ; a thing that flands

for notbing ; whence ;


Sereduire au Zero.To bring bimfelfe toth'wallet; to ;


ruine bis fortunes to [pend or confume all.
Left: m. The thicke sk, or filme whereby the kernell of
a wallenut is dinided, ,
Tine vaut pas vn Zeft. He is not worth a dodkin,
aw,yu{b,a pinnes bead,the taking UP. ?
. À voice ean hp de the noife made by
aiert,fripe,yarke thwack,crc. ‘
zibelline : f The Sable Martin.
Zigo-


~


| frorr


THE*OHIO”STATE UNIVERSITYE


RP CET 0


. P act La a” . 4 | ' >)
ar Se OE PTT SEE ae ee ae! eRe oY 47 rt


DAT ES FUN ee


-


ny
ee


CENT


ide


pina ie
INTERESSE


NT OS 5


ne
ve
i


Sik di oe ee RS ee a ‘
se - ae | ey 4 :


Z I4N


Zigome. The outward part, or end of the cheeke-bone | Zon : m. The whiske,or found of aj
gO ek 4 aljè,a iert,lafb, box,blow. : “ 2
is Zone: f. Agirdle ; alfoa Zone; or, a certaine breadth
from North to South, bounded out
principall circles ; Of thefe
extreame bot and fierie;
and two which be, for t
rate,or betweene both,
Zoophore : m. 4
bout a Porch,or Piller.
Zoophytes : m.Such things as be partly plants é>
ly linmg creatures ; as Spunges,erc. -
Zoucet : m. The little water.


ards thé eare ; fo tearmed by the Anatomifts of Pa-


vis. _

Zimiech: m. A kind of Eaglewhich preyes upon the
Crane,and other leffe Tle rs

Zin ;ou Zint. ‘The twang, or twanging fownd of the
firing of a hard-bent bow.
inzembre. Ginger.

Zinziberine : f Powder of Ginger.
ivette. Looke Civette.

Zizanie : f. Ray, Darnell.
izolin: m. Gingioline colour.

Zoaire. Looke Zedoaire.

Zodiaque :m. The Zodiacke ; broad circle in the fr-
mament, in which the 12 Signes are placed, and vn-
dev which the Plancts mone.

Zoette : f. An Owle,or Howlet ; called fo about Avig-
non,


Zu


or Die-dopper.


perfett goodneffe.


itch yod,or wand, a


by fome of the globes
breadths there be ria one
two moft cold and exer froxen;
he moft part, mild and tempe- |


painted pr carued girdle,er border a


fomle called a Dabchicke,


Zubelines. Marteszub. Sables.
The Eagle that bath on ber be
a kind of whiteneffe; which is a certaine figne


Pe Briefe Dirg&ions for fu


to learne the French Tongue :
And firft, of the Vowels, and Diphthongs.


NEY! word all; not as we found it in
Hl ale.
SY E,Whenit is thus accented €, whe-
ther inthe middle or in the end of a
word , is called & Mafculine, and founded out,
qe as ia the Latine word docére. Otherwifé it is
called e Feminine, and is to be founded imperfect-
ly as the fecond fillable of Facere, Or as in this Eng-
Lif {peech, Is he come ? If two or three, €, be. m
the end of a word, the firfiare Mafculines,the laft is
c Feminine,as deftinée, creée. :

E, In the fame fillable before N° or M is tobe
founded like a, a¥ enfance, the fir[t fillable like the
fecond : Except micn,tien, fien, bien, chien, rien,
and [ome others ; aad enerver and the like,wherein

Been: cis not founded in the fame fillable with n.
ENT I I, Is 10 be founded like ce in Englifh in feeble or
mecke, So muft you foundamitié,k  ”. .
© O, Before N or M bath the found of 00 in our
: Englifh word Moone, So muft you pronounce the
whe French word mon, comme on dit, commence-
, menr,&c, ; Êy
V, Is founded as if you would whifile it out, 25 in
, _ the word,a Lute.

ee th I, and V,are confonants when they are put before
TR 4 other vowells, as with the Latines as jaloufie, vive
+ le Roy. V alfa flanding before R is fometimes a con-

fonant, as vray, not u-ray. ;
The Dipththong ai i to be founded as it is writ-
ten,in the end of the Aoriff of the fixft Coningation,
as j'aimay, Secondly,ifa vowell follow it, as j'aÿe,
Bons = ayons,ayant. Thirdly, if Il follow it, as couaille.
#4 =: Otherwifeit is alwayes founded like & Mafeuline,

PERS à .  æj'ay, j'aimeray, lie j'é, j'émeré,

EN Ao The Diphthong ao,in the word faoul,is to be pro-
nounced Sou,by omitting the prepofitiue vowell. But
in thefe words paon, tahon, faon, the Subiunéline


; è Dipthdgs.
es Ai


n. ;
The Diphthong au is to be founded like 0, az we
pronounce it in faying Pauls crofle ; fo found aux


LA | paux like os pos,
oy ‘Apoftros _Apoftrophus taketh away a vowell out of a word
ic of rie e,whenit ftandeth before another word
2 eginnin with a vowell ; 48, Leglife ed la eglife;

L’obelon for le obelon; So we fay S'il for fi il.

Synalepha Synalæpha taketh away the found, but not the
à " bodie,of © feminine before a word beginning with a-
nother vowell, as mon pere & ma mere ont difné,
1 Ww! read mon per & ma mer ont difné. Ifa Verbe
‘ end in a or o, and it or on follow it,we put in the


Le


1s to be founded filly, as in this Englifp
ale


vowell is omitted, and they are founded pan, tan,


neg gle:


found of the letter t ; as arle il, parler il,

Jip dicen, die on, si ih
Dizrelis iswhen two points oucy a vowell dinide Diærefis:

it from another vowell, as bou€,queué,read bou-e, x

queu-e,#0t bo-uc;que-ue.


"Of Confonants.


He gencrall rule of Confonants is, That if à
{ word end in a confonant, and the word fol-
lowing begin with another , the finall con{e-
nant of the word going befire is not to be founded,
as tout ce qui luit n’eft pas or, read it thus, touce
qui luy ne pas or.
1. The word end a liquide], m, n, 1, 4 ' ae
mon pere, wot mo pere. Howbeit] is
not to be founded in the word il, as il
faut, read it i faut. ‘
z. The word end in c, as avecmoy, not
"ave moy. pe : +
3. The word end inf, as le bœuf d’An-. 4
” gileterre. wm ‘Ne
4. The word end in g , as le joug de pete
* Chrift eft legicr. (St - 3 k
5. The wordendin q, as vn coq d'Inde,
6. There follow any point ,5 1 21 0
C, witha taile thus ¢ is 10 be founded like s, as
garçon, pieça, like garfon, piefla, Seceraly chis
pronounced like th, as cheval like fheval, Except
in proper names,as Chanaan,and thefe foureappel-
latiues , Cholere, Chorde, Efchole , Cichorée.
Thirdly ¢ before v isnot tobe founded, as faitt,dic-
ton, like fer,ditton, sf
G,loyned with n is to be founded through the nofe,
as you found n inthe Englifh word oinion : So pro-
nounce the French oignon,end Efpagnol like Spa- -
niatd in Engh{h. Thefe jllables gua, guc, gui, are
to be founded like ga,ge, gi, as im guaine, guerre, -
guile: Except the proper names Guife,Guillaume, *
and the Verbe Efguifer. £ 7
L, In the middeft of a word is not to be founded,
as aultre,oultre,lzke autre,outre. I the end of thefe
words, fol,mol, col, (ol, is to be founded like u,as
fou,mou,S&c. If Il come after cor ai,it is to be foun-
ded like lin the Englifh word Scullion,or Collier.
_So muft you found Sillon, toiiaille,as though i were
written after ll, Sillion, rouaillie,
M, In the end of words is to be founded like n, as
nom, faim, dam, temps, lke non, fein, dan,


tans.
~ Nyls not to be founded in the third perfon plurall
; Nann that


Except


= i * ne ee
2  Briefe Direttions to learne the French Tongue,
Bafil; Crefpin,Crifpinus; Chrift, (altbongh m
the moft pronounce the s in it) Efcofle, Hierofmei
vam Syl ian tee re re ‘i i: eal
u feeme by the fame Analogie as fit to es rie


shat endeth in ent,as ilzaiment, ilz parlent, read

iz aimet,&c. £ bef nded lite Lake,
In qua,que, qui, 7 to be fou

ki & Sais choke 3 like katre, kerir, ki-


: ter. j in that from ihe word Kécpuor, 45 3
RS . RaadS, in the beginning of words, or next unto (opp. WAR 24, EE ea
Jome other Confonant,areto be founded out ; more Se , in all words ending inifme; as uda-
firongly when they be double, as in guerre,and poif- | ifme; except Abifme, and the Derivatiues thereof. 2
fon; and as gently, fingle, and betweene two vow- Thirdly, m names of Sels ; as Atheifte, Ana-
ells; as im guere,and poifon 3 the tongue im the for- | baptifte,&c. oy
mer gining onely a touch to the palate, and foundin Fourthly, in all words that fignifie the fafbion of
the later as if it were a Z. "| people; as, “A la Morelque, Greguefque, Barba-
S, Preceding a Confonant within a word, is either refque,&c. : e
Sillly to be fupprefed (as in the mof naturall French And particularly in the words following (where.
words) or filly to be founded: As firft in all proper | wuto fundrie others may be added, which comming
names, as Auguite Sc ; Except im Bafle, the citie | from the Latine, retaine the Latine pronunciation.)
A | H P
Ccofter, when it  Damafquiner. Herborifte. Penfioniftes.
Ss JSignifieth to ape  Defaftre, . Hiftoire, Paftorelle ; but in Pa-
: proach;but whé . Debufquer. ftoureau, and Paif-
Pe it fignifieth to prop Defefpcrer. I tre, s % not to bec
a up, thes isnot tobe * founded.
" Sounded. E Improvifte. . Pafquil. ,
‘ Annalifte, " Incefte, | Pafñtel. .
FR Apofter. Embufcade. Inveftiture, and yet in | Paftenades.
à Apoftolique;thougbin  Enregiftrer, the Verbe Vellirthe Pete
Mes Apoftre the s bee  Efcabcau, Sis not tobe founded, Pifteau, —-
es Supprefed, Efcabreux, "  Juriftes. Pofte.
= Apoftume, , Efcalade, lufques. Poftillon.
= . Artifte, ‘Efcamper, Tufquiame. Poftiles. ah
a Afperges, & Afper-  Efcarbillar. luftice. Prefque ; though Ser-
FE er, Efcarbor. reius doth not proe
F4 Aftres. Efcargot, L nounces.
as Atrefter, Efcarlatin ; yet in the. Profcrire ; but in Ef
4 : word Efcarlate the  Lanfquenets. crite, and Defcrire,
oH sis not founded, Legi you mufi not found s,
‘. Bafque. Efcarpins, ifte, ‘
A Bafte, Efcarcelle, Limeftre. Q
23 +, * Bafile, | Efcopererie, Lefte,
#4 a Baftion, Efcouade, Luftre. Queftion.
2 fo Baftonnades: andyet  Efpace. : :
> in Bafton thes  Efpece. a ae R
me not to be founded, hate: Mafque. Refte, 4
4 Beftialité, & Beftiole;  Efprit, Maftic. Rte." À
7 howbeit that inBef-  Efquadron. Menftrual. :Ruftaud,
tail,Befte, & Befte- Eftafier. Miniftre. . ee
A Lu lette, thes bee not  Eftafe. Mitte, | Ye
FR ‘founded. Etat, _ Monttre, when it figni- .
ee Birrafque, Eftimer. - ficthamonfier : but Sequeftre,
LFP » Bifcaye, Eftocade. “when it fignifieth à Siniftre; yet in Senet
: Pits ~ Bifeuit. _Eftomae, mufler of fouldiors, . tre you mul not pro-
=  Blafphemer, - Eftrade, ' thes is not founded.  nounces.
& © Bofquet. Eftradiots, Mofquet. :  Sufpendre.
Eftrapade. . Moquée. meets
Eftropiat. Mouftache. “Ex
Evangelifte, - Mouttele, . fe
=, Mufcade. “Tempeftatif ; yet in
F Mufcadet, Tempefte the s ws
asa ey Mule. >. not to be founded.
5 Sara Ny Müfcles, . A Fm Se ve
you not founda s. . ° on, oy aS
A 4 3 1 , = N : + ‘ Teftonner, :
G Non obftant, Les. pe
3 -O dE
Obelifque. Veftiaire.
_ Oftade. et nn tas ;
ee Pa


re


les. att sol


a


Sone ttt sa I,
he ee ee a RE


Original from


DRAP STATE UNIVERSITY. 3


(ie


© T'inthisword et is newer pronoxnced,as yous et
moy lite vouse moy. \

~~ X& m the end of a word isto be founded like s,
as paix,prix,like pais,pris: in the middef,like z;as
dixiefine, dizicfme. Butinthefé words, Soixante,


like , as Leffiue, Compleffion, &c. 72 other
wordes that come from the Latine, it-yetaineth


joyned with Articles.


tine, and the Ablatine like the Genitine,


lesfaix; le Glz,aztd les filz.

Words ending in |, change \ intoux; as cheval,
chevaux ; cheveul,cheveux; mal, maux; metal,
metaux; Except thefé irregulars ciel cieux; celuy,
ceux; œil, yeux ; vieil, vieux; genouil, genoux.

__ Words ending in a confonant, in the Plurall lofé
the found of their coufonant ; Grec, Grecs; as if it
were Gres ; except they end in a liquide; as bal,

- bals; nom,noms; don,dons; jour,jours,
À Nownes are all of the Mafculine gender, except
of Nowns 1. the names of women,cr offices'to them belonging ;


Subftan. 4s mere,nourrice ; names of Fuits ; as vne Poire ;

| tiues, fcities sas Clermont, Marfeille,

+ 2 Subfantines in € Maftuline ; as bonté; except

¥ blé,congé,clergé; and fich as come from Latine
FE wards in atus ; as Duché, Comré,marché,


3 Subflantines in e Feminine , as grace; Except
words comming from Mafèulines cr Nenters in La-


~~


“a 4)
Py


Briefe Direttions to learne the French Tongue.


Lexiue,Bruxelles,Complexion, it is to be founded |


its found ; as Zeuxe, excufe. : iss,
Accent the lafi {yllable,untefe it be e feminine,as Accent, —

amotr,aprés,demain, Note this moreouer,that the  : '

taking away of a letter caufeth the vowell that go: ÿ

eth before it to be proncunced long, and confèqwent-

ly ferueth to diflinguifh betweene wordes of like

found, as vefte an bead,and vere a breafl, maftin, 4

mafline and matin the morniug,@rc.


Of a Nowne.


Nownes are commonlyS Le and vnare for the mafculine,
rs and vnefor the mafculine. Plur. les.


The declining of Nownes is made by Prepofitions, the Accufatine cafe being alwayes like the Nomina-
Dele before a vowell,as de Vimmortel,


Genitiue
In the fingu- }cafe { Du before a confonant, as du roy.
lar number “yDatiue ‘Ale before a vowell,as AY immortel,
. \to the cafe Au before a confonant,as au roy,
Thefe Arti-
cles ferne Genitiue $ Des,as des hommes,of men, ;
In the plu Aux,4s aux hommes,to men,or to the men.
rall number J native ja les,as à les femmes, to the women,
to the ‘A des,as à des femmes, fo fome women,
Aux,as aux champs,i the fields.
Ablatiue ; Des,as des cieulx, from the beauens.
Es,as es deferts, in the wilderneffes,
Declining of Nownes.
Mate. Mafc.
es Nom. vn, or le roy. Nom. les roys.
Gen, FA ed duroy. Gen. des roys.
: Dat. à vn,or au roy. Dat. aux roys.
Sing. Accuf, vn,or le roy. Plur. Accuf les sé,
. Vocat, d roy,or à leroy. Vocat, 6 roys,
Ablat, à vn roy,or duroy. Ablat, des roys.
. Femin, Femin.
Nom, vne,or la femme. Ç Nom, les femmes,
Gen. d'vne, 07 de la femme. Gen. des femmes.
Sing. 224! à vne,or à la femme, Plur, ¢2at+ aux femmes,
8 SAccuf: vne,or la femme. * \ Accuf-les femmes,
| Vocat, 6 femme, Vocat, 6 femmes. '
| blat.d'vne;or de la femme, Ablat. des femmes.
| nin The Plural number is formed from the Singular, | tine, as pere,livre,titre; office, facrifices Yet thefe
ae ofthe plu- by putting to s or z, as roy roys, lettré lettrez; ex- | are Feminines, lexiue, refponfe; image, rage, ta-
FN Fa P Ceptroords that end ins,x,orz, whofe Singular and | ble,fable, $
he * Plurall are one; aslepaïs;and les pais; lefaix,a#d | 4 Subfiantines in eur, as douceur; except pleur,


ci heur, with bis compounds, bonheur, mal-
cur. ;
5 Nownesinon 4s affetion, J gence ea eo ex:
eee tifon; and words ending in fon, as
on. Su ;
6 Subfantiues in u, vircu,tribu ; except feftu.
7 Nownes in ix,as paix, voix,noix,poix, for pitch;
except prix. A à
8 Thefearealfo Feminines,mercy, loy, À ps foif,
clef,nef, faim,mois,nonnain, putain, fin, façon,
leçon,mer,toux, cour for a tower , otherwift not;
brebis,perdris, iument, foreft, dent, part, hart,
mort,cour, # F shen ef =
Some Nownes changing their fienification change
alo their Gender ; pr tr a Temple, la rem-
ple,the temple of the head ; vn livre,a syne li=
vre,4 d sagen manche, the belue or bande, la
manche,the fleewe, —
Nonn jj. 207 a


TNT IA a Een Ne
\


"4 Briefe Dire6tions to learnethe French Tongue. =


Of Adjectiues.


Le A Didi forme the feminine gender, by put-
pda An to ¢ féminine, as hault,haulte,cac yh


HA: need chée ; except it end in ¢ feminine, for then it
adjetti Mess > common to both genders, as homme or femme
honorable, l'eau trouble.


Exception.

1 Dieétines in c,turnecinto ch, as fec, feche,
except Grec, Grecque, Duc, Ducheffe,
Clerc, Clergefle.

2 Words in eau change eau into elle,as beau,belle, »

puceau, pucelle,nouveau,nouvelle.

3 Words in eux make the feminine in eufe, a

teux, piteufe, Roux maketh roule, faulx, faulfe,

doulx,doulce, frais, fraifche.

4 Words in £ change f into v, as bricf,brieve, tef-

tif, reftive, penfif, penfive.

s Words in eur make the feminine in cule, as fla-

reur,flateufe,menteur,menteufe, iureur;iureufe,

pecheur maketh pecherefle.


Nom, eo moy. ‘Nom. nous, So decline vw plur. vous,
Gen. de moy. Gen, de nous. and {oy in both num-
Dat. à moy or me. Plur. <Dat. dnous. bers, Nominat, is wan- -
Accuf. moy or me. Accuf, nous. ting. Gen, de foy. Dat. |
Ablat.de moy. \Ablat. de nous. à foy,&c.
Nom. 11 or luy, Nom, Ilz,eulx,ou leur.
, Gen. de luy. Gen. d’eulx,de leur.
Le Dat. à luy and luy. © Plur. <Dat. à eux,leur,leurs. ~
à Accuf, le and luy. Actus. i
æ Ablat. de luy. Ablat, d’eux;leurs.
1 PA
Luy, is common to both genders, and fignifieth to 1 Of place,and fignifieth fio thence; é
a: him,or her; 4 ma mere m’ha Adel ra & je luy ses vien, 1 come from thence, En.


ay refpondu, Leur Lkewifé fignifieth to them in
both genders, as je leur ay baie, 1 gaue it them,
both men and women, But leur with an article isa
Nowne pofeffiue,as le leur, theirs. Eux is fometimes
put for foy the reciprocall, as ilz ont tous biens
- communs entre eux, for entre foy.
Ce and Ceft this, plur. ces. Ce before a Confo-
ste as ce garçon. Ceft before a vowell, as ceft


PRES See ee


omme,

Celuy, that man ; ceftuy, this man; iceluy, the
fame man, plur. ceux and iceux, femin. celle and
icelle, are vail a ina fentence . Celuy goeth
before; qui and iceluy repeateth it as its relative,
as celuy qui feme mauvaife femence, iceluy re-
cucille mauvais À He that foweth ill (eed that
man gathereih ill graine, ace Ve

…Mefine, isioyned to Nownes and Pronownes,an


a “rep 1 felfésluy mefme,
oa Pr + Of ace, f i, ing bothi dé
FR dr tre Me cues:

Yi sJ jy vays1goethither.
© Of the thing mentioned ; as wy
{drone iat cece


DOTE TR ENT ES


ai, aaah dia earls
| RTE: 1. SA


en


k. a asa


en hve


+"


4 “a Go- gle:


is as muchas [elfe in Fifi 4s l’homme mefme, |
CR)


6 Theft double their confonant, bas, baffle, bon,
bonne, net,nette, quel quel, el, telle, bel,bel-
le, here note alfo,that bel pur befateavowellas
bel homme, beau béfore a Confonant as beau gar- —

on, So nouveau is put before the Subflantine, as
fe nouveau Teftament, féminine nouvelle : but
neuf, ad the feminine neuve,after the fubflantine;
as le College neuf. |

‘The compar atine is made by plus,and the füper-

latine by res, as doëte.plus doûte;trefdoéte. Ex-
cept (for the Comparatine) in bon, meilleur, tres-
bon; mauvais, pire,trefmauvais, Petit, moi
or plufpetir;refperit.


Ofa Pronowne.

Eu, jl, jlz, are put when the Verbe is exprefféd;

as, je chante, tu joués, jl frappe, jlzont. But

moy toy, luy, eux, are put when the Verbe isnot
expreffed ; as,qui ha fait cecy? who hath done this?
anfwere moy, not je; toy, not tu. So, Qui ha fait
sar a in à not jl or jlz. je és thus

clined, ,


;


Of the per[on or thing mentio-
ned; as,ha-il vn pere,or du pa-
"pier? hath be a father or bath he
any ne ? ouy il enha, yea, be
bath one,or be bath fome. 7 rae
Thefe P offeffines,mon,ton,fon,Noz,voz, are put Mon,
when the Subjlantine is expreffed ; as mon a à fon.
booke,noz livres, our bookés. But mien, tien, fen, —
noftres,voftres,are put without the Subflantine pa-
ning alwayes an Article ioyned with them; as,a qui
eft cg livre ? whofe booke is this 2 we may either fay. wet
il eft à moy, or elfe, Ceft lemien,jt is mineJesnef- = ©
tres, Noz amis,&les voftres,our friends,c> yours. -


Of a Verbe. 3
7 Erbes with the French are omely of three
inds, Atliues, whofe Preter rfeet eee
formed by jay , as jay aime, 2 Pafiues,
which all along are formed by je Suis, as je fuis ai-
mé, Imp. j eftoys aime,&c. 3 Newters whofe Pre
terperfeet tenfe is formed by je Suis, as je fais allé.
es and tenfes ave the fame with the Latins, ex-
cept the Aorift,which tbe is to ufed ia the Frenth,
Italiane Spanifbwhenwe find ike fame fitlyufed
in our Englifb, uch asare, 1 went, 1 ran, 1 rode, |


ate,&c. ! os
f ‘The Com tions egies ih the SR i
tobe feene in the Table of the Verbes hereunte ade ‘9


En, is @Rela- À
tine fometimes.


JrigMar from] 7
AE Or O- Sid APE GENIVERSITY


Concerning the forming of the Tenfes. The Imper-
fet. of the Jndicatine is formed from the firft perfon
_ plurall of the Prefent. changing ons in oy as chan-
tons, jechantoy. The firft and igs par plu
; : vallin the Prefent of the Optatine, and inthe Jm-
eo 9 sd perfectofall Moods, inter pofe i, in all Coningations,

Sy 4s, Aimions,aimaffions,amerions.

The fecond of the Fmperatiue, is fromthe firft of
the Fndicatiue of dll Coningations, as Di tu, recoy
tu,&c. The third from the third plural of the fame
tenfe,by taking away nt,as ilz donnent, qu’il don-
Ki W3:0 ne,&c. Some be irregular, as qu'il fage, qu'il fa-

che, from font,and fçavent.
The Prefent of the Optatiue, from the third of the
; Imperatine eucrmore. The Imper feet from the fecond
. Singular of the Aorift,cu leus,je leufle.
- The Imperfect of the Subiunttiue from the Future


Briefe Direétions to learne the French Tongue.


of the Indicative, by changing ay in oy,as j'ayme-

_ ray, J'aymeroy,&c. itn ¥e »
The Participle Prefent from the firf plurall of the

prefent of the Indicative, changing ons, in ant, as


bailiffons, baftiffant.


A Verbe Paffive.


= A Verbe Paffiue is made by putting the Partici-
ple of any Verbe to the perfons of the Verbe
je fuis,as je fuis,tu es, il eft aimé,nous fom-
mes,vous eftez,ils font aimez. 1mperfcét. j'eftoye
aimé,nous eftions aimez;&c.

Note alfo, that the third perfons in both numbers
are paffiuely to be rendred , when fe is fet before
wes as il fe fait, itis done, ilz fe font, they are
made. .


i 1 Aftiue is made by putting il before the third perfon , as il convient, il
Bh’ é convenoit,il fault il falloit,il falluft,il ha fallu,il faudra, Sc, Such are


the(é il neige, it fnoweth, il grefle, it baileth,i) Gele, it freezeth,il re-
ante ak le, it Fe ilavefprit,s east night, il plut, it raineth, :
tail 2 Paffine is made by putting on, or lon, before the third per [ons fingular
of Verbes Aétines, as on dit, dicitur, # is faid,or men fay, on aime, a-
matur,wer lowe, on aimoit,on aimaft, &c.
DER i Tay boulu. Fut. Iebouilleray or boudray,
ao Se ‘ The dr Verbes Courir,to Pref: Ie cour, tu cours. Aorift. Te ake Pret,
oe 53 2 runne. Tay couru. Fut. le couriray, and alfo je cour-
© . Aller.to F the firft Coniagation there is onely one auxi- ray. ee
pers goe. , lar Verbe, Aller, to goe, Prefent tenfe. Je | Couvrir, Pref. Ie couvre,nous couvrons.4orif. Ie couvry.
ae vay or je vois, tu vas, il va, nous allons, | to couer, Pret. l'ay couvert, Fut. le couvriray. 3S ate
1 RES vous allez, ils vont. fmperf. l’alloy, tu allois, | Cueillir,to Pre. le cucil or cucille,or je cus,tu cucilles, nous
er &c. Aorift, Pallay, tu allas, &c. Preterit. Ie fuis | gather. cueillons, Aorift, le cucilly. Pret, l'ay cucilly.
ee allé, cu es allé. Plufquam Perfeét. l'eftoye allé, Fat. le cuilleray, ;
ap - &e. Futur. Tray, tu iras,il ira, nous irons,vous | Dormirito Pref-Ic dors,tu dors,il dort,nous dormons, Aorift.
| | irez, ils iront. Jmperat. Va tu. Qu'il aille, or | flépe. Ie dormi.Pret. l'ay dormy. Fut. ledormiray.
a oe qu'il voife, allons,allez, qu’ ils aillent, or qu’ ils Failir >to 2 Pref-Je fau,nous faillons. Aorift, le failly.Pret. —
£ ÿ voifent, Optat, Pref; Dieu vueille que j'ailleor | fatleozimiffe.S  l'ay failly. Fut. le fauldray. a
| voile; tu'ailles or voiles, il aille or voife, nous | Farcir,to  Pref. le fars,nous farçons, Aoriff, Je farcy, Pret,
a allions, vous alliez., ils aillent ar voifent. Jm- | ftuffe.  l'ay farçy. sa oc BX
a a perf. l'allaffe, tu allafles, il allaft. Perf. Que je | Ferir,to Pref- le fier,nous ficrons. Aorif. Ie feru, or accor-
+ foye allé, tu foys allé. Plufquam Perfeët. Que | trike. ding to Caucius, je feris. Pret, l’ay feru, Fut.le
| je fuñle allé. Futur. Que j'aille cy apres. The , feriray or je fierray. 3 Me Tye.
pas Preterimperfett. of the Subiunttiue , Quand j'i- | Fuir,tofly. Pref. Ie fuy,tu fuys, nous fuyons. pee aie
Msy roye, tu iroys, il iroit, nous irions, vous iriez,ils | Gefirto  Pref-Ie gi,tu gis,nous gifons. Aorif?, according to
P - droyent. ; ipe in. Caucius,je gel. But Stephanus and Serreius
Martin Caucius, fol, 48. doth fürther obferue, will haucit to be je jeu. Pret. l'ay jeu, and af
that the word doint is an ixregular third perfon gcfy. Fut. Jc gefiray. PEER


from the Verbe Donner, as Dieu vous doint bon
Jour; as Plautus vférh Duit for det: And Terence
faith, Dij bi dignum faétis exitium duint. An-

gui dria A&,4. Scen. 1. So likewife, Iamais Dieu ne
me pardoint, sil n’eft ainfi.


ee  Theirregulars of the fecond


Coningation,


Fe 7 — 10 Ref. l'affau, tu affaus, if affaule; or according
Pr 8 to Tohn Serreius, j'affaille, tu affailles and
A re en affaillons. Aori/?, Paflailly. Pret, l'ay


_ affailly. Fut. Paflailliray, Cauciws. l'affaudray.
ae Serres, F -
Benir , 02 Be Pref. le beni, is, it,nous beniflons, &c. Pret.


bi | Tay benit.
sto Pref.


' ,


Ie bou, tu bous, il bout, nous bouillons,
Aorift, Le boullu or boully, ils bouillirent.Pret,


Go gle


vis LR
| |


Hair, to Pref. Ic hai,tu hais,nous haions and haiffons. 40 $
bate. vil. Ic hai, Pret. Vay hai, Fut. lehairay. —
Pref: Villis, tu iffis. (Howbeit Caucius faith it


Iffir, to goe Ace
& wanteththe fingular nnmber.) Plural, Nous
pe ana ( iftifions ; or, as Caucius, and fome others,
fir.to ramet nous iffons,vous iffez, ils iffent. Aor, Tiflis, |
wal. ced À Pret. Tay ifftu. In fleed ofthis Verbewe com- —
monly vfe Sortir. tr US es
Mentir,to Pref. Ie ments, nous mentons. Aor. Te


FA menty. tie SE
Mourir, to Pref. le meur, tu meurs, nous mourons, ils meu-
die. “rent. 4orifl. ie mouru. Preterit. Ie fuis mort, |
Fut,Jemourtay. =. arene
Offtir,to Pref: loffre,tu oftres,nous offrons. Aorift. i
offir. Pret. l'ayoffere :" * : aes
Quir,to  Pref. l'ay,tu oys,nous oyons. Arif. l'ouy.Preter.
heare. T'ay oui. Fut. l'ouiray or j'orray. =, -
uvrir, to. Pref: Touvre or j'euvre, nous ouvrons. Aoi, 1°
open:  ouvri, Preterit, Yay ouvert.


Nnanij Partie,


4


Er,


aii vor TPE, ee ee tee ee
, , TS
. . PF


6 Briefe Direttions to learne the French Tongue. 3
To dinide or part. It hathits Pre- | Cheoir, to Pref. Je che,tu ches, nous cheons,ils cheent, de 2
ent, je parti, tu partis, hous | fall. rift,1¢ cheu. Pret. Te fuis cheu. Fat. Je che:


, : ' ons,
Partir, tohen tt figntfieth ro depart or goe away. It hath its
Prefent, je pars,tu pars, nous


r


ray. ;

Douloir, Pref. leme deul,nous nous doulons or dueilloms, - -
togrieue. _—ils fe deulent. pope. Ie douloy or deuloy.
Aorift, Ie me doulu. Fut. Te me dueilleroy,


_ partons. ! : ; cil
Puir, to ig Ie pu,tu pus, nous puons. Aorifl, Xe pu. Fut. st Dueille qu'ils deullent. Pargicip. Do= | FA
e puéray. 2 ent. ae
Poetic, 02 Pref te aus tu quiers, nous querons, vous Debvoir, Pref: Ie doy,nous devons,ils doibvent, 4erifl.le
Querre,to  querez, ils quierent. Æorif. le quis. Pret. Tay | to 0e. deu. Pret, Pay deu, Fur, Ie debvray, Particip, =
goe fetch. quis. Fut. lequerray, like manner forme, ’ Debvant. » ;
acquerir & requerir. Howbeit, Caucius doth Mouvoir, Prefle meu,nous mouvons, ils mouvent or meu-
forme the Aorift, Ie requeru, Pret. Tay requeru, | toimoue. vent. Aorift. Ie meu, Pret. Pay meu, Fat fe. A
mouvray. os


: Butit is better le requis.

Repentir, Pref, le me repents, tu te repents , nous nous
to repent. repentons « Aorift. Ie me repenti. Preterit.

Ie me fuis repenti. Fut. Je me repenuray.
Saillir,to Pref Ie fau, nous faillons, Aorift, Te failly. See
ieape. Affaillir.
Secourir, Pref: le fecours, nous fecourons, Aorifl. le fe-
tofuccour. couru. Pret. l'ay fecouru. Fat. le fecouray,
Sentir,to _ Pref le fens, nous fentons. Aorift, Ic fenty. Pret.
feele. Tay fenti. |
Setvir,to ‘Pref. le fers, nous fervons . Aorift, le fer-


Pouvoir, Pref: le puis or peux,tu peulx,il peult,nous pou.
to be able, vons, ils peuvent. Aorifl. Te peu, Pret. l'aypeu.
Fut. gr ay: Optat. Pref.le puille, Jmperfe
le peufle.
Ramente- Pref: leramentoy,nous rementevons,ils ramen-
voir,to call toivent. Aorift, le ramenteu, Pret.l'ay ramen-
to mind. teu. Fut, le rementevray. ;
Recevoir, Pref.lereçoy,nous recevons. Arifllereceu.Fat.
toreteme.  Jereceuvray. ‘4
Sçavoir, to Pref-le fçay, nous fçavons. Awifi, le fçeu.Pret.
bnoÿv. ty Seep le {gauvray or fçauray. es :
*  faches, qu'il fache, fachons, fachez qu’ils fa-


2. vy. s
Soubve- tis coniugated Fmperfonalh, Pref. 1 me foubvi-
chen. Particip. Pref.fachant or {gavant. Pre!


pir, to res ent. Imperf. Il me foubvenoit. 4orif. Il me
pr foubvint, Perf, Il m'eft foubvenu. Fut, Il me


fceu, %
Seoir;to fit. Pré Je fie tu fes, il fied, nous feons, ils feenc. Aare
- 7 Jefi,ru fis,il fid. Pret. Pay fy, or je me fuis affis.
Fut, le ferray. Imperat. Sec or lies, wil fecor
fie. Opt. Pref. Que je fie. Imperf. le file, Parte «


2 foubviendra, ;
- Soubvertir, A Pref. Ie foubvers, nous fubvertons, Aorift,
‘to ue Sw. § Ic foubyerti.


Pref, Seant, Per feet. Sis. Likewife aflcois. le m°
affie, &c. eat) &

Souloir, to Pref. le fuis accouftumé, tu es accouftumé, il eft
© be wont. accouftumé, nous foulons,vousfoulez, ils fous
‘ lent. Imperf. le fouloye, tu fouloys : the t 3
Tenfes it borroweth from the Verb accouftumer,

as Pret, Ie fuis accouftumé, &c. ei |
Valoir,to Pref: Le vau,tu vaulx, il vault, nous valons, Yous
be worth. yalez, ils vaillent. Aorift. Ie valu. Pret, Pay va-

à lu. Fut. Je vauldray.Imperat Vaulx qu'il vaille, —

Vouloit,t0 Prefcle vueil or je veux,nous voulons,ils veulent. |
be Silling,  Aorifi. Le voulu. Pret, l'ay voulu, Fut.Ie voul-
dray, Optat, Te vueille,nous voulions, il vueil- |

lent, Imperf. Te voulufe or vouliffe,/aith Pilot,
or rather voulifle, faith Caucius, as Le Roy ne
ouvoit trouver gens qui y voufflent aller.
eatre du monde, /ol.110. ! :


EN ns ir,to Pref: le fouftre, nous fuffrons. Aorift, Te fouffri.
 faffer. © Perf. l'ay fouftert. ¥
; me, gor forth. Pref lefors, nous fortons.
 Tenir, to Pref. le tiens, nous tenons, ilstiennent, Aorift.
hold. Ie tins,nous tinfmes, vous tinftes, ils tindrent.
Pret. ’ay tenu, Fut. Je tiendray.
= "Touffir, to Pref; leroufle, nous touflons, as if it were of the
cough.  . fifi Coniugation, phe.
Tollir,an Pref: According to Caucius, Te roul, tu touls, il
_old berbe to toult, nous tollons, ils toulent. Pret. l'ay tollu
take away. — 97 tolly. - aby
Venir, to Pref: Te vien,nous venons, ils viennent. Aorift.
| come. Le vins nous vinfmes, vous vinftes, il vindrent,
Pret. Je fuis venu. Fat. le viendray. Imperat.
A TRE Vien tu,qu'il vienne. ES
_. : Veftir,to Pref: le veft, tu vefts, nous veftons. Aarifi. Te
“gloth. | vefti, Perf. l'ay veltu. Fut. le veftiray.


Lie, Pk À, Paes he Tre \# kev -*


4 : Th .. + > 4 : Pes
i e cd the third The irregulars of the fourth
> = Coningation, | js


a.


. 1 Pref. T apparoy, nous ap: : 2
SA prion ln Caprese: Abfoul- Ref. Ag ey nu a abfolvent,
FU. roifloy. Aorifl. le paru. dre 3 P Aorift. T'abfouls or j'abfolu, ils abfolure
Wa This 2 baba, Pref. I’ apper, anes, ene Pret.j'ay abfouls or abfolu. Fut, bfouldray.
WP SOMMES ) nous apperons,ils apperét. rédre, Pref. T'appren: nous apprennons, 4rifi.l'a
SLA RER Insperft apparoye. Arf L to Pret. Vay apprins. Fut, l'a pans
> apparu.Fuwrl'apparoiftray. | Ardre,to Pref. l'ars,nous aidons. seri Patdl Ie
= Pref V'appercoy,nous appergevons,ils apperçoi- | barne. ards, Particip. Ards.” ‘HR
p : vent, Aurifls Papper eu, nous apperçeufmes. | Attaindre, Pref; Y'atrain,nous attaignons,ils atta
Fut. Vapperçeuray. fmperat. Apperçois, qu'il | toattaine 7%. T'attaigni, tu artaignis, ils
‘a «50 comugate Conçevoir,reçevoir, . Pret. Je fuis artaint. Fut, T’attaine
SERS c Pref. T’attends,nous attendons. Aon


its
Pai
’ re


, This contugat char (A a pa


bnto.

Attendre,
challoit, il me il mha il me
-chaudra, or chaura, according to Stephanus.


te Pret. l'ay attendu. Fut. Ta rav
Battre,to Pret. Je ba,nous battons. Aorift Te batti.£
"beat. \


bartu. Fut. Ie battray. ä


gs he Go gle Tae GHiO STATE | INIVERSITY
A Ne ata mee a Oe 2 : ee


be ss


ei

“to qirD.

fog.
fbut.


ea Ty Lis: LES


… Briefe Directions to ea the French Tongue.


Pref: Ie boy, nous beuvons, ils boivent or beu-

. .vent, Æorifl. Je beu. Pret. Pay beu, Fut. le
‘boiray,or beuvray,

Brüire, to Pref? le bruy , nous bruyons. Æorif Ie. bruy.

makeanoile. Pret. l’ay bruit. Fur.lebruiray,

ne Pref, Ie bray,nousbrayons,&c.

Pref: le ceins, nous ceignons, pens le ccigag.
Pret. Pay ceint, Fur, le ceindra

Pref Je cho, nous cloons; in Dead whereof faith
Stephanus, we v/e Fermons.

Contlure, Pref Le conelus,nous concluons. Auif. Te con-


_ tocBeinde.  <lu.
pfire, Prejile confi,nous confifons,ils confifent, Aorif},
to fauce . Ie confis. Prer. l'ay confit.
-Contrain- Pr¢/. le contrains, nous contraignons. Aorifi.le
_dre,tocon:  contraigny,ils contraignirent, Pret, l’aycon-
“ftraine. | traïnt, Fut, le contraindray. :
Coudre, Pref. le cou, or couds, according to Pilot. nous
to (ew. coufons. Adrift, Ie coufy or coufu. Pret. l'ay
coufu, Fut, le coudray.
Creindre, Pref, le crains, nous craignons, ils-craignent.
to feare. Aorift.le craigni, fay Bellot and Pilot,ils craig-


nirent or craindrent, Pret. T’'ay craint. Fat,
Te craindray.
Croire, to. Pref: Le croy, nous croyons. Aorift. Ie creu. Pret.


beleeue. l'ay creu. Ft. le croyray. Imperat. Croy, qu'il
croye,

Croiftre, Pref Ie croy nous croiffons. Aorift. Ie cru. Pret.
to grow. l'ay cru. Fut. le croiftray.

Cuire,to Pref. le cuy, nous con, Aorift, le cuyfi, fayeth

eth. Caucius,

Defcédre, Pref: Ie defcends. Aorifi Ie defcendi, Pret. Pay
tobefcend.  defcendu. Fut. Ie defcendray.


* Deftruire, Pref. Ie deftru , nous deftruifions. Aorif. Te def.


to beffrop.  truif, ilsde ruifirent.
Dire,ta Pre. le di, nous difons, vous dites, ils difent or
fap. dient. Aorifl. Te di. Pret. l'ay dit, Fut. Ie diray.


Imperat. Dis,qu'il dife or die.
Duire;to  Pref.le dui,nous duifons, Aorift. Ie duify, ils dui-
Tontent. rentor duifirent, Pret. Yay duit. Fut, Ie dui-
“7 © ray. Likewife conduire,deduire,induire,
Done entends, j'entendi, j'ay entendu, j'enten-
bnderftand. :
Eire, to NA piel efcrivons. Aorift, l'eferivi, Pret. Pay


efcrit. Fut, l'éfcriray.
Elite l'efly,nous eflifons. Aorift. l'efleu.Pret.l'ay efleu.
que Fut, l'efliray.
andre? l'efpands, nous efpandons. Æorifl. l'efpandy.
ture 02 (bed. Pret.V'ay efpandu. Fut. l'efpandray.
dre, l’efpars,nous efpardons, 4vrif.l'efpardi. Pret. T'ay


Ë atter, - chers Fut. l'efpardray.
prain-  l'efprains,nous A déni l'efpraigny,


dre,to Delprtadieor Pret, Yay efpraint. Fut. lef-

--fauecseont, .praindray, Likewife coningate efteindre , to
quench. Veftcings,nous efteignons,&c.

“Fire _Ie fay,tu fais, il fait, nous faifons, vous faites, ils

make 02 do. ‘font, Aorifl. le or fei,nous ffmes. Pret. l'ay


fait. Fut.le firay. Imper. Fay, qu'il face, fai-
fons, faites, qu'ils fagent. Opt, Pref: Ie face,
tu faces, il fage, nous Fagians, vous façiez, ils


façent,
ree feig-


Feindre,to. Ie feinscous eignons Aorif. Le fei
faine, ._. nifines,ils feignirent. Pret. Pay
Fendre,to . -Tefends,nousfendons, Aborift. Le fendi, ils fendi-


ane. . - xent Pret. l'ay fendu, Fat, Ie fendray. Like-
we. wife Fondre,to melt, jefons.Aorifi. le fondu, ils
fondurent.


a Ie,fri, nous frions, Aorift. le fri. Pret, Tay


ra Go. ae


Did


Lireto le japon lifons,vous lifez. Aorifl, le leu.Pret.V'ay
read. |
Luire;to  Ielui,nous luifons. 4orÿfl.le luify, nousluififmes,
thine. ilsluirent,


put. mes, ils mirent. Pret, I’ay mis. Fut, le met-
tray,

‘Mordre, Ie LATE mords, ilmord, noûs mordons, 4o-

te bite. vift, Ie mordi, nous mordifimes ; ils mordi-


Nuire, to Le nui,nous nuifons,ils nuifent. Æerifl.Je nui,and


fre ler 8


€. #
frit. Fut, Te frirays © !
Ioindre,to Ie joing,nous joignons. Aorif. Je joigny, nous
toine, joignifmes, ils ioindrent or joignirent. Pret,
Tay joint, Fut, Je joindray.


Mettre,to Te mets,nous mettons. .40ri/l, Te mis, nous mif.


rent. Pret. Tay mordu, ;
Morfôdre Je memorfonds. 4vrifl. Ie me morfondi, ils fe
to chili. morfondirent.
Mouldre, Te mou or meu, nous moulons. Aorif, Temoulu.
to grinde. Pret. l'ay moulu, Fut. Te mouldray,
Naiftre,to Ie nay,nous naiflons, Aorijt. le nafqui. Pret, Ie
be bone. fuis né. Fut. Te naiftray.


annop. nuily, nuififmes, ils nuifirent, Pret, Day nuit,
Fat, le nuiray.
Occire,to T'occis,nous occions, and becs ils occifent, i
H. Aorift, T'occi nous occifmes, ils occirent, Pret,


Tay occis, Fut, l'occiray.
Oindre, to l'oings, nous oignons. Aorifl. Toigny, nous oig-
annoint. nifmes , ils oindrent, Pret, Tay oint. Fut. : */
Toindray. à
Paiftre,to Te pais, nous paifions. 4orif Te peu,nous peu —
feed. me peurent. Pret, T'ay peu. Fut. Tepai, :


Paroiltre , to notes: See Apparoir in the bird Coningation,

Pendre;to Ie pends, nous pendons. 4vrif. Ie pendi, nous «

bang. pendifines, ils pendirent. Pret. Day pendu. Aa
Fat, Je pendray, =

Perdre, to Jepers nous perdons. Avrifl. le perdi, ils perdi-
rent. Pret, l'ay perdu.

Phaireto Te plai,nous plaifons. Aori/t. Te pleu, nous pleut

: ue pleurent. Pret, ay pleu. Fut, Top


Pleindre, je ibe 2 pletioa ipl nous pleighons, Arif. Teme ~
to cOplaine. _Pleigny,nous pleignifmes,ils pleindrent.Pret,  :
“Te mefuis pleint. Fur, Terme pleindray.
Peindre,to Te eins, nous peignons, Aorift.Te peigni,ils pein-
paint. rent, & in Pleindre.
Poindre, Ie poings,nous poignons, doriff. Ie poigninous |
to pricke. poignifmes;ils poignirent. - BEY
Pondre,te Ic pon,nous ponnons,or pondors het st left
lap anegge: © ue. Aovift, Te ponnu, or\ponda. Some fay, Te
nis, whence.commeth the 3.Plurall, Ils pon=
ent. Pret, Tay ponnu. 4 Caucius will baue
Rt jay pu,which is verie irregular. 4
Prendre, Teprens,nouis prennons, Aoriff.Te p peng raf
to take. nous prinfmes, ils prindrents Pret. | pie
Fut,le prendray.) *
Raire,to  Teray;nousrayons;or rafons;ils rafent.But for th this


fhaue. they ufe the‘ verbe’ Rafer: Pret, T ay Taiz, or
rin ‘whence feemeth to come that aduerbiall bec,
Rez terre, gliding by the « =
Refpon- le refponds, nous réfpondons. Aorift Te pA ;


der, toan- _ di, ils refpondirent, Pret. r sut
fier.” > Re : Me

Biss, fe
fangh.


Te ri,tu ris,nous rions. + Aorif. Te ri, nous =.
ils rienc. Pret, Pay riv Fut. le sine TARN:
,il rompt, nous rompons. Aor Men
obgeatic.  py,1 tompirent, Pret, he oe
| rompray. q


Semenidrets he ga Ie femonds. Aorift, Le femondi, ils fe-
mondirent, Pret, Tay femondu, -

: Souldse, tel Te fou,nous foluéns, or folvons according to Cau-

sta loofe. cius: ils foudent, or foluënc. Æorift. Ie folus,

Ca Pret, Yay folu. Likewife Abfouldre, to abfülue,

ve - fauing that it makes its Preter fect, Yay abfoult,

| and xg Optat, Pref; Vabfolve ; as Dieu te ab-


folv
6 Suffire,to | 7 à formed Imperfonally. 1 fuffift, il {uffifoit, il
— * fuice. fuffift,il ha fufh, il fuffira,
»  Suivre;to Tefuy, nousfinvons. #erif. Te fuivy. Pret. Pay
” “foto. fuivy,or according to Caacius, Pay fuir, Fut, Ie
fuivray.
Te ray,or je me teus, nous taifons. Aorift, Ie me


Taire,to
bon teu. Pret, Ie me fuis teu. Fut, Te me tai-


ones


. ï endre,;to Te ak, nous tendons, 4erifl.Ie tendi, ge Tay
tend. tendu.


Pen parts, faith Pilot,may eafily be omitted, and sed, I will fleightly we them
oner obferning onely the hardeft ana thofe which [eldome occurre.


Adverbes.


Of Time. Vprime, or orprimes. Now inflantly; asit
: were,nunc hora prima,
“ue if Cipricinu. Preféatly, faddenly,as it were,
cy pris,cy mis, here taken,and here banged,
Dorefenavant, From hence forward, Entre
xemps,or ce pendant. Inthe meane time.
Guere,or gaire. Much. This word isneuer put
without a Negatiue,as Un'y a guere, for n'y ha
nioult derempsaThere is not much time pall fince,or
not long fince.
Huy. hence come. Aujourd'huy. Today, Mer
huy. A while agone.
. Onques.Euer. It is alwaies put with a Negatiue,
a ne vionques. 1 neuer fav.
eça, as it were, piece ha, Long agone ; or, lt is
s 4 ie peecesor (hace of time fince.
Of Place, . Ens. Within, as ceans, for cy ens; here within;
Leans, for li ens; there within.
* Fors, for hors. as fors que cela ; Except shat.for
hors mis cela, As in Gloucefter fire they likewise
Ja, Out-fer that, for except that.
Illec. There, Vis a vis. Ouer againft.
‘Cet mon, It is true ; or, yea indeed ; as much as
‘s aageiens. Sometimes it is an Interrogatine , as
| pisyinGreeke; as afçavoir mon s’il le feroit. Te
wit whether he would doe it yea or nay. Voire.Yea.
7 nenny,or Nanin. No.
la, or hau. To which they commonly anfwer.
2 What is your pl


Briefe Direftions to learne the French Tongue.


E Of the indeclinable parts, Adverbs: Clin Boe.


pofitions, and Interjeétions.


e?
re a see a volonté, 1would |" y
Aes Arriert, beyond. Chez, at; as
es ceeded te fe fa Of


beyond. Defus,vpon.
vers, mets lufques, untill, Selon, according


Teindre, léteigns, nousteignons. Aorifl, Ye
to bie. cos Pret. Vay teint, Fut.


dray,
Tiftre, to Te nous tiffons. sens 3 Te tifly deep
Seaue. a tiflu, Fur. Ie tiftray, "
Tondre,to Te tonds,nous tondons, Aorifi. Te tondi,is tondie ey
es rent. Pret, l'ay tondu. +
ordre, to Tetords, nous tordons. Aorifi, Te vordi, ils tore
é dirent. Pret. Pay tordu,or j'ay tords. Fate
; tordray. 2 DL
Traire, to Te tray,nous traions,or treons, Aorift, Te trai, ils —
D3a%,02t8 trairent. Pret. l'ay trait. Likewife the come
mike. pound Pourtraire, to limme : bowbeit for Traire +42
they vfè Tirer. À
Vaincre,to Te vaincs, or vainqs, nous vainquons. Aorift, Ie
ouercome.  vainqui. Pret. l'ay vaincu.
Vivreto le vis,nous vivons. Æorif?, le mens
À cu, Fut, Te vivray,


fromthe Latine word Probé, (ignifjing much; “a
when they fay, Vir probè doGus; a man verie lear-
ned. Bon prou leur face. Much good may it doe
them, And in this fence they vfebien and fort, as

the Latines haue their valdè from validè. Homme
bien fgavant, or fort doëte. À man verie learned,


Conjunétions.


T, which neuer foundeth t neither befere Con- Copulae À
E cm Vowell. Ainfy que ; euen as, C'eft tiues.
A fçavoir ; mamely ; or that is to wit, that is to


ay.

Davantage. Moreouer,

Si. If, Sinon que. But rato de that, Pen-
dant gue,or mer que. Wbiles that. a

Combien quent Jaçoit que. Albeit that. Ains, Difcre- Ne
or ainçois, Yea rather. Toutesfois. Notwithfian- tiues,or
ding. Neantmoins. Newerthelefe.Thefe which Ra- i
mus makes Difcretives, Stephanus will baue to be tiues. Ê
Aduerfatines, 24

Ou, either; when it is put without an accent;for Di
when it is accented it is, faith Serreius, an Aduerbe teur
of place ; as otieft il? where i he 2. =È

Dont, Whereuplr. Doncq,or Doncques. The, Mati esor
therefore. Partant. Wherefire, t .

Car. For; from the Grecke 2.Parce que,or pour Ca
autant que. For as much Susi iS


| Prepofitions.


UE] di C10=


chez nous, at our boufè. Chez eux, at their
eed this fide. Dela, on that fide, or
sunder.Vers, or en-


Inter:


ry


2/1030 111R0URS

Interjections. =,
F lamenting, Las, helas,alas, Of filencing, Te

O: with the Latines, The ref} I purpofely
omit. . » 2 2p


Syntaxis of Nounes..


‘Die étines,e (pecially thofe that fign'fie colour,

are put after their Subltantiues, as vin blanc,

vin clairet,pain bis, Thefé are fet before the

Subflantines,bon,beau belle; nouveau,nouvelle;

mauvais, petit; as petithomme, mauvaife fem-
me. ay

The Adieétine agreeth with bis Subflantiue in

Gender ,as mon pere, ma mere. Yet if the Sub-

J'antine begin with a vowell, they put an Adiectine

Majculine before it,as mon efpée, mon hoftefe :

Except m’amie, or if the word begin with h, when

it is founded with afpiration,as ma hauteur. 1

When two Subftantines come together, the later is

put in the Genitiue cafe, as L'argent du Prince eft

fujetà la pince. Sometimes one of the Subftantines

is taken away by Elleipfis, as à la Sain& lean, la

_ Touffain&s , where the word Felte is under


Adiettines of defiring, or plentie, or carefulneffe,
and their contraries gouerne a Genitiue café, as ri-
che d’argent,nonchalant de fon prouffit.

Comparatiues gouerne a Genitine cafe, as laface
n'eft plus grande de demy pied. Sometimes que
Strueth to the Coparatiue, as pl


Of Verbes.


He Infigitine with an Article becommeth a
Noune Subftantiue,as le boire eftaint la foif,
for le boiffon,

When two Verbes tome together, Phe later is the
Infinitine Mood, as je veulx aimer. Sometime the
principall Verbe is underflood, as les maftins de
courir,& nous d’aller apres. 1. commencerent,&
nous commenceafmes,

The Nominatine café goeth before the Verbe. Ex-

"wept the queffion be asked, as iray je? [hall 1 goe ?
as-tu ? haf? thou?

The Accufatine followeth the Verbe,j aime mon
maiftre: except me,te,{e,le,luy,leursnous, vous ;
“as tute prifes,il fe courmente, je luy diray,je leur
efcriray : Except it be the Imperatiue Mood, as bat-
tezle. Moy,toy,foy, are al/o put after the Impera-
tine Mood,as well for the Datine as the Accufatiue,
a di-moy leve-toy,

… Me,te,fe,are put before the particle en,especially


before Verbes Neuters, fignifying mouing to a place,


asjem’en vay, va ven, fui t'en, ilzs’en font al-
1éz. Sometimes a Verbe hath two Pronsunes before


it, as Vous vous corroucez fort, one the Nomin1-


tine,the other the Accufatine cafe; or elfè the Verbe
is placed betweene them , as Comme vous portez


_ + vous? Sometimes there are three, as vous vous en


irez vous?
Some Verbes being conftrued with an Infinitine
~ Mood, canfe it to be rendred paffiuely , as je vous
feraybatre , Iwill make you beaten ; faites faire
chemin, caufe rooms to be made; je le vei mettre


Go gle


us blanc que neige, |


+


Briefe Dire to learne the French Tongue, 9.


‘en prifon, [fawbimputinprifon,
- The Verba


ris elegantiyconfirued with «Par d


ticiple, as ils'en alloïx difanc. x. ildifoir; iPsen


va mourant, I. il meurt. SUR
‘A Participle added to je fuis, to make a Prèter-
Perfect tenfe, may varieboth Gender and Number,
as je fuis venu; elle eft venuë ; nous fommes
‘venus. But being added to ÿ'ay,it changeth not its
termination, as jay difné, ellehadifné, nous a-
vous difné. Yea if a Subftantine goe before the
Nominatine cafe and the Verbe, the Participle file”
_ lowing is rendred paffinely, and agreeth in Gender.
and Number with that Subflantiue , as les graces
que Dieunous ha données ; les corps que lamer: -
ha engloutis, “
À %


Of Adverbes. -


Ethe negatiue is alwayes accompanied with

point,or pas ; as iln’y eft point, or pas, bee

% not there at all. And without either of thefe —
words it is equivalent, to an affirmatine, il eft plus
fçavant que ne fontfes compagnons , be is more
learned then are bis fellowes. ns eel

» Dont % a Particle of Relation, and fignifieth as

much as de gate quoy, du quel, defquels ; 4
Jay le livre dont vous parlez, 1haue the booke of.
which youfpeake. -


of Prepofitions.


1 Standing betweene two Subfiantinesg
maketh thelater an Adiettine, as h6-
me a cheval,an horfeman, homme a
ied, a fiptman , efcuclle à oreil-
ons, aPorrenzer , or a dilh with
eares.
— before a Denominatiue, it .
The Pre-} Jignifieth as much as after the fafbion,
pofition à as Ala Francoife, after the French
fafbion ; à la Todefque, afier the
Dutch fafhion. So en is vfed as vivre
en befte,to line after the manner of a
beaft ; traité en Prince, intertained
like a Prince,
Is put after an Adieétine fienifying
aptne[e,or nimbleneffe,as vifte à Pef-
L ceuf, mimble at the ball,


Standing before a Subfantine, it fig-
nifieth either matter,as bague d’or,a
gold ring; or the inftrument, as batte
e verges, to beat with rods ; iouér .
de l'efpinette, to play on the Virgi-
nalls. die ail ~ i =
2 It is put after Adiettines fieni
ThePre-} dexteritie, as habile de if eke


v


ss


CI


es. .
pofitions skilfiull at his pen; habile du pied,ac- LU


dec du} tine,or fwift of foot.

Standing before the Infinitine mood, —

it is Englifhed to, as je vous prie deg

*] fairecela;1beféechyouto doe that,

Du flanding before a Subflantine fig-

nifieth | edi of any thing, and is Eng
ifhed fome, as du pain, fame bread;

poiffons, fome fifhes. ==>


vs


+


De.


Brie D |


oh y ‘ ts 43 ye at x
Devant. is con, ued % ean ae “5
en né Le pb ps ‘Conjuncons. 3
with the Preterperfeét tenfe F ibe Infini- Omme is ufed for comment; as. comme
¢ mood, as apres ph cub à lettres, after _y Yous portez vous?howdoeyon. is
‘the feccining of your ere DE « Que # diner fly. Engli iftted; as qu'eft ce
Aupres, Arriere, à ue px Ge- a ere. ? what à man f =), ye =
Witine cafe, as Pepe ng! ¢ fre, axmiere | deluy, if 1 were as be; dire
vs, à l'entour def ed about ma ir be cal yn Qui ae
bimfalfe, pe | matter nit 2 —
ES | ? À 4 | 1G SY Toe et
ae : add ge . - ah 7,
a


wert FINES.


v. Original from
