Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth (Antoine Augustin Cournot (Nathaniel T. Bacon, trans.), 1897)
==========================================================
Mathematical economics' founding text: monopoly, duopoly, and equilibrium before Marshall. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bub_gb_AGoGpyJY_SAC).

Re 


arches 


into  the 
mathematical 
principles  of 
the  theory  of 


DarvarD  (College  XiDrar^ 


J.  HUNTINGTON  WOLCOTT 

FUND 

GIVEN  BY  BOGSR  WOLCOTT  [CLASS 
OF  1870]  IN  MEMORY  OF  HIS  FAXBES 
FOE  THE  ''FUEGHASE  OF  BOOKS  OF 
PESMANEMTVALUEiTHEPBEFESBNCE 
TO  BE  GIVEN  TO  W0EK8  OF  HISTOEY, 
FOimCAL  ECONOMY  AND  SOaOLOGY*' 


FROM  THE 


Digitized  by  Google 


..VIIC  CLASSICS 

BY  W.  J/ASHLEY 


aOgustin  cournot 


I 


ECONOMIC  CLASSICS 


Volumes  new  retufy  : 

ADAM  SMITH: 

Setect  Chnpi§rt  mud  Ptusage* 

MALTHUS: 

Parallel  Chapters  from  the 
tut  and  2d  EdiiioHS 

RICA  R  DO: 

First  Six  Chapters 

THOMAS  MUtr: 

Enjj^nd's  Treasure^ 
Forraign  Trade 

RICHARD  yOHES: 
Peasant  Rents 

G  [TS  TA  V  SCfmo  L  L  ER  : 
Mercantile  .iysiem 

AUGUST/y  C  OUR  NOT: 
Matkematical  Principles  of 
the  Theory  of  Wealth 


Fortkeoming: 

TURCOT:  % 

Refieetiansott  the  Formation 
and  DistrHutiOH  ^Riches 


f 


D'igitized  by  Googl 


0  RESEARCHES 


INTO  THE 


MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


OF  THE 


THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


BY 

1  ■ 


A 


AUGUSTIN  COURNOT 


i8^ 


TRANSLATED  BY  NATHANIEL  T.  BACON 

WITH  A 

BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 

BY  IRVING  FISHER 


THE   MACMTLLAN  COMPANY 

LONDON;  MACMILLAN  ft  CO,.  LTD. 

1897 


Digitized  by  Google 


3 


Copyright,  i&gj, 
By  the  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 


J.  6.  Ciuhing  <t  Co.  -  Berwick  Ac  Smith  .  . 


t 

Digitized  by  Google 


Anioine  Augustin  Cournot  was  born  at  Gray,  in  Haute- 
Saone,  France,  on  Aug,  28,  i8oi.  He  received  his  early 
schooling  in  his  native  town,  and  his  first  special  discipline 
in  niathetnatfcs  at  the  Lyc^e  de  Besan^on.  In  182 1  he 
entered  the  Ecole  Norniaic  at  i'aii:^,  where  he  continued  his 
mathematical  studies.  He  became  Professor  of  Mathematics 
at  Lyons  in  1834,  and  the  year  following  Rector  of  the 
Academy  at  Grenoble.  In  1838  appeared  his  Recherches 
stir  les  principes  mathematiques  de  la  theorie  des  richesses,  of 
which  the  present  work  is  a  translation.  In  the  bame  year 
Cournot  was  called  to  Paris  as  Inspecteur  (it^ndral  des 
£)tudes.  He  was  made  Knight  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  in 
1838,  and  Officer  in  1845.  He  became  Rector  of  the 
Academy  at  Dijon  in  1854,  but  in  1862  retired  from  active 
teaching.  From  this  time  to  the  end  of  his  lite  he  was 
busily  engaged  in  writing.  His  Principes  mathematiques  \ 
having  met  with  little  or  no  success^  in  1863  he  paraphrased  \ 
it  in  popular  language  under  the  title  Principes  de  la  thhrie^ 
des  richesseSy  which  was  further  amphfied  in  1876  as  Ra  ue^ 
sommaire  des  doctrines  h'onomiques^  He  died  in  the  follow- 
ing year,  on  March  3I1  in  Paris. 

Among  Cournot's  mathematical  writings  may  be  mentioned 

his  Traits  elhnrtifaire  de  la  theorie  des  fom  fions  et  du 
calcul  infinitesimal^  1841  ;  De  I'origine  et  des  U mites  de  la 
correspondence  entre  Valghbre  et  la  geometrie^  1847 ;  and 
Exposition  de  la  theorie  des  chances  et  des  probabiHies^  iS43« 
In  the  last-named  work  he  showed  how  to  apply  the  theory 
of  chances  to  Statistics. 

V 


Digitized  by 


vi 

Cournot  also  produced  several  philosophical  workii,  e^, 
TraiU  de  Peruhainement  des  idees  fotuiamentaks  dans  les 
sciences  et  dans  rkistaire^  1.86 1  j  and  Considerations  sur/a 
marche  des  idkes  et  des  eifenements  dans  les  temps  modemes, 
1872.  He  also  translated  some  English  mathematical  books, 
including  Sir  John  Herschel's  Astronomy^  and  edited  in  two 
volumes  Euler's  celebrated  Letters  to  a  Princess^  etc. 

For  the  facts  of  Cournot's  4ife  see  Liard^  Revue  des  Deux 
MondeSf  July,  1877;  ^^^^  Nouv€llc  Biogniphie  Gene  rale. 
For  criticisms  of  his  work  in  economics  see  Palgrave's 
Dictionary  of  Political  Economy;  and  the  prefaces  of 
Jevons's  Theory  of  Political  Economy  (second  edition), 
Wahas's  Elements  d^economie  politique  pure,  Auspitz  and 
Lieben's  UntersucJinngen  ilber  die  Tlieorie  des  Preises,  and 
Marshall's  Principles  of  Economics ;  also  an  article  by 
Vilfredo  Pareto,  Di  un  errore  del  Cournot  nel  trattare 
Peconomia  poHtica  colla  matematica,  in  the  Giomale  degli 
economisti,  January,  1892,  and  one  by  Edgeworth,  La  teoria 
pura  del  monopolio,  ibid.^  July,  1897.  'i'he  present  writer  will 
shortly  publish  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  an  ar- 
ticle critical  and  explanatory  of  the  Principes  mathSmaHques^ 
and  intended  especially  for  the  use  of  those  who  may  wish 
to  follow  the  reasoning  of  the  work  in  detail,  but  lack  the 
requisite  familiarity  with  mathematics.  He  is  also  preparing 
a  brief  Introduction  to  the  Calculus  for  a  similar  purpose. 

In  rendering  the  book  into  English,  the  translator  (Mr. 
Nathaniel  T.  Bacon,  of  Peacedale,  R.I. ;  Ph.B.,  Yale,  1879) 
has  tried  to  be  as  literal  as  possible,  and  to  retain  the  slight 
archaism  of  the  French.    He  has  also  followed  out  the 
*  mathematical  operations  with  great  care,  and  in  so  doing 
.  discovered  a  surprisingly  large  number  of  errors.   Most  of 
^  these  were  misprinta ,  others  were  due  to  obvious  caieiess- 


Digitized  by 


ness  of  the  author,  while  still  others  were  doubtful  as  to  their 

origin.  All  have  been  corrected  except  two,  which  were  the 
only  ones  seriously  affecting  the  argument.  Fhese  are  for- 
mula (6)  on  page  122,  aad  the  next  but  last  inequality  on 
page  158.  The  true  formulae  may  be  transcribed  from 
(6),  page  122,  by  substituting  zero  for  c ;  and  the  inequality 
on  page  158  may  be  corrected  by  reversing  the  sign  of 
inequality.  The  conclusions  which  follow  each  passage 
must  be  materially  modified. 

For  nearly  forty  years  the  Principes  mathemaHques  was 
completely  ignored  by  economists.  The  writers  chicily 
instrumental  in  reviving  the  work  were  Jevons,  Walras,  and 
Boccardo.  At  present,  though  mathematico-economic 
works  are  not  yet  widely  read^  Coumot's  treatise  is  diligently 
studied  by  a  few,  and  exercises  a  very  definite  and  powerful 
influence  on  etunuinic  thought.  Professor  Edgeworth  says 
of  it  in  Palgrave's  Dictionary,  that  it  "  is  still  the  best 
statement  in  mathematical  form  of  some  of  the  highest 
generalisations  in  economic  science  *' ;  while  Professor  Mar- 
shall, in  the  preface  to  his  Pfincip/es,  declares  that  "  Cour- 
not's  genius  must  give  a  new  mental  activity  to  every  one 
who  passes  through  his  hands." 

The  bibliography  of  mathematical  economics  is,  of  course, 
founded  on  that  appended  to  Jevons's  Theory  of  Political 
Economy.  A  number  of  writings  in  the  latter  list  have  been 
omitted,  as  they  did  not  make  use  of  symbols.  Even  the 
yolkswirthscha/isiehre  of  Menger,  who  shares  with  Jevons 
and  Walras  the  honour  of  independently  developing  the 
theory  of  marginal  utility,  has  not  been  included,  as  it  must 
properly  be  credited  to  the  literary  and  not  the  mathematical 
method.  Jevons's  list  has  also  been  carefully  revised  and 
corrected,  as  well  as  continued  to  1897. 


Digitized  by 


VIU 

The  bibliography  divides  itself  very  naturally  into  four 
periods^  beginning  respectively  with  the  treatises  of  Ceva, 
Cournot,  Jevons,  and  Marshall.  Ceva  enjoys  the  distinction 

of  being  the  first  known  writer  to  apply  mathematical  method 
to  economic  problems ;  Cournot  was  apparently  the  first  to 
apply  it  with  any  great  degree  of  success;  Jevons  (and 
almost  simultaneously  Walras)  attracted  the  serious  attention 
of  economists  to  this  method  ;  and  Marshall  brought  it  (or 
at  any  rate  its  simpler  diagrams)  into  general  use.    The  four 
periods  are  of  constantly  decreasing  length,  being  respec- 
tively 127, 33, 19,  and  8  years,  but  the  number  of  titles  grows 
greater  in  each  succeeding  period.    It  will  also  be  observed 
that  the  variety  of  subjects  to  which  the  mathematical  method 
is  being  applied  shows  a  rapid  increase,  that  the  number  of 
complete  economic  treatises  has  grown  relatively  less,  and 
that  the  mass  of  literature  on  transportation  has  first  risen 
and  then  tallca  rclatiN  ely  to  the  total  writing. 

In  prei>aring  the  work  for  the  press,  important  aid  has 
been  rendered  by  Mr.  John  M.  Gaines,  of  the  graduate 
department  of  Yale  University.  Mr.  Thomas  G.  Barnes, 
Mr.  James  O.  Moore,  and  especially  Mr.  William  B.  Bailey, 
also  students  at  Vale,  have  contributed  materially  in  the 
formation  of  the  bibliography.  Grateful  acknowledgments 
are  due  to  the  many  other  persons  who  have  supplied  biblio- 
graphical data,  and  in  particular  to  Professors  Pantaleoni, 
Walras,  Paretu,  and  Edgeworth. 

1.  F, 


Digitized  by  ,!c 


CONTENTS" 


CHAPTEK  tAQ£ 

Preface    i 

I.   Of  Value  in  Exchange  or  of  Wealth  in  Gi:NtkAi.  7 

II.   Of  Changes  in  Value,  Absolute  and  Relaiivk      .  18 

III.   Of  the  Exchanges   29 

iV.   Of  THE  Law  of  Demand   44 

V.    Of  MoNofoi  y   56 

VL  Of  THE   Influence  of  Taxation  on  G)MMt)DrnKs 

PRODUCED  UNDER  A  MONOPOLY         ....  67 

Vir.    Ov  iHK  Co\ii'i;mu)N  cr  Pkdducers    ....  79 

VIII.    Of  Unllmited  CoMPErrnioN   90 

IX.   Of  THE  Mutual  Relations  of  Producers        .      .  99 
X.   Of  the  Communication  of  Markets  .      .      .  .117 

XI.   Of  the  Social  Income   127 

XII.   Of  Variations  in  the  Social  Income,  resulting 

from  the  CoMML MCATION  OF  MARKETS           .         .  1 50 


PREFACE 


IP! 

The  science  known  as  Political  Economy,  which  for  a 
century  has  so  much  interested  thinkers,  is  to-day  more 

generally  diftused  than  ever  before.  It  shares  with  pohtics 
proper  the  attention  of  the  great  journals,  which  are  to-day 
the  roost  important  means  of  spreading  information;  but 
the  public  is  so  tired  of  theories  and  systems  that  now  the 
demand  is  for  so-called  "  positive "  matter,  i,e,  in  pohtical 
economy,  custom-house  abstracts,  statistical  documents,  and 
government  reports,  such  as  will  throw  the  light  of  experi- 
ence on  the  important  questions  which  are  being  agitated 
before  the  country,  and  which  so  greatly  interest  all  classes 
of  society. 

i  make  no  objection  to  this  tendency ;  it  is  good,  and 
in  accord  with  the  laws  which  govern  the  development  of 

aU  branches  of  science.  I  will  only  observe  that  theory 
ought  not  to  be  confounded  with  systems,  although  in 
the  infancy  of  all  sciences  the  instinct  of  system  neces- 
sarily attempts  to  outline  theories.  I  will  add  that  theory 
should  always  have  some  part,  small  though  it  may  be, 
in  the  development  of  a  science ;  and  that,  to  a  man  of  my 
profession  in  particular,  more  than  to  any  other,  it  should 

be  permissible  to  consider  from  an  exclusively  theoretical 
u  t 

Digitized  by  Goch^Ic 


2 


PREFACE 


Standpoint,  a  subject  of  general  inter^t  which  has  so  many 

different  sides. 

But  the  title  of  this  work  sets  forth  not  only  theoretical 
researches  \  it  shows  also  that  I  intend  to  apply  to  them  the 
forms  and  symbols  of  mathematical  analysis.  This  is  a  plan 
likelyi  I  confess^  to  draw  on  me  at  the  outset  the  condem- 
nation of  theorists  of  repute.  With  one  accord  they  have 
set  themselves  against  the  use  of  mathematical  forms,  and  it 
will  doubtless  be  difficult  to  overcome  to-day  a  prejudice 
which  thinkers,  like  Smith  and  other  more  modem  writers, 
have  contributed  to  strengthen.  The  reasons  for  this  preju- 
dice seem  to  be,  on  the  one  hand,  the  false  point  of  view 
from  which  theory  has  been  regarded  by  the  small  number 
of  those  who  have  thought  of  applying  mathematics  to  it ; 
and^  on  the  other  hand,  the  false  notion  which  has  been 
formed  of  this  analysis  by  men  otherwise  judicious  and  well 
versed  in  the  bubject  of  Political  Economy,  but  to  whonci  the 
mathematical  sciences  are  unfamiliar. 

The  attempts  which  have  been  made  in  this  direction  have 
remained  very  little  known,  and  1  have  been  able  to  learn 
only  the  titles  of  them,  except  one,  Les  Principe s  de  I' Econ- 
omie  PoHHque^  by  Canard^  a  small  work  published  in  the 
year  X  [of  the  French  Republic,  a.d.  rSoi],  and  crowned 
by  the  Institut.  These  pretended  principles  are  so  radi- 
cally at  fault,  and  the  application  of  them  is  so  erroneous, 
that  the  approval  of  a  distinguished  body  of  men  was  un- 
able to  preser\'e  the  work  from  oblivion.  It  is  easy  to  see 
why  essays  of  this  nature  should  not  incline  such  econo- 
mists as  Say  and  Ricardo  to  algebra. 

I  have  said  that  most  authors  who  have  devoted  them- 


Digitized  by 


PREFACE 


3 


selves  to  political  economy  seem  also  to  have  had  a  wrong 
idea  of  the  nature  of  the  applications  of  mathematical 
analysis  to  the  theory  of  wealth.  They  imagined  that  the 
use  of  symbols  and  fonnuias  could  only  lead  to  numerical 
calculations^  and  as  it  was  clearly  perceived  that  the  sub- 
ject was  not  suited  to  such  a  numerical  determination  of 
values  by  means  of  tlieory  alone,  the  conclusion  was  drawn 
that  the  mathematical  apparatus^  if  not  liable  to  lead  to 
erroneous  results,  was  at  least  idle  and  pedantic.  But  those 
skilled  in  malheiiiatical  analysis  know  that  its  object  is  not 
simply  to  calculate  numbers,  but  that  it  is  also  employed  to 
find  the  relations  between  magnitudes  which  cannot  be  ex- 
pressed in  numbers  and  beUseen  functions  whose  law  is  not 
capable  of  algebraic  expression.  Thus  the  theory  of  prob- 
abilities furnishes  a  demonstration  of  very  important  propo- 
sitions, although,  without  the  help  of  experience,  it  is 
impossible  to  give  numerical  values  for  contingent  events, 
except  in  questions  of  mere  curiosity,  such  as  arise  from 
certain  games  of  chance.  Thus,  also,  theoretical  Mechanics 
furnishes  to  practical  Mechanics  general  theorems  of  most 
useful  application,  although  in  almost  all  cases  recourse  to 
experience  is  necessary  for  the  numerical  results  which 
practice  requires. 

The  employment  of  mathematical  symbols  is  perfectly 
natural  when  the  relations  between  magnitudes  are  under 
discussion ;  and  even  if  they  are  not  rigorously  necessary,  it 
would  hardly  be  reasonable  to  reject  them,  because  they 
are  not  equally  familiar  to  all  readers  and  because  they  have 
sometimes  been  wrongly  used,  if  they  are  able  to  facilitate 
the  exposition  of  problems,  to  render  it  more  concise,  to 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


4 


PREFACE 


open  the  way  to  more  extended  developments,  and  to  avoid 
the  digressions  of  vague  argumentation. 

There  are  authors,  like  Smith  and  Say,  who,  in  writing  on 
Political  Kconomy,  have  preserved  all  the  beauties  of  a 
purely  literary  style ;  but  there  are  others,  like  Ricardo^  who, 
when  treating  the  most  abstract  questions,  or  when  seeking 
great  accuracy,  have  not  been  able  to  avoul  algebra,  and 
have  only  disguised  it  under  arithmetical  calculations  of 
tiresome  length.  Any  one  who  understands  algebraic  nota- 
tion, reads  at  a  glance  in  an  equation  results  reached  arith- 
metically only  with  great  labour  and  pains. 

I  propose  to  show  in  this  essay  that  the  solution  of  the 
general  questions  which  arise  from  the  theory  of  wealth, 
depends  essentially  not  on  elementary  algebra,  but  on  that 
branch  of  analysis  which  comprises  arbitrary  functions, 
which  are  merely  restricted  to  satisf3ring  certain  conditions. 
As  only  very  simple  conditions  will  be  considered,  the  first 
principles  of  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  suffice  for 
understanding  this  little  treatise.  Also,  although  I  fear  that 
it  may  appear  too  abstruse  to  most  people  who  have  a  liking 
for  these  topics,  I  hardly  dare  to  hope  that  it  will  deserve 
the  attention  of  professional  mathematicians,  except  as  they 
may  discover  in  it  the  germ  of  questions  more  worthy  of 
their  powers. 

^  But  there  is  a  large  class  of  men,  and,  thanks  to  a  famous 

school,  especially  in  France,  who,  after  thorough  mathe- 
matical training,  have  directed  their  attention  to  applica- 
tions of  those  sciences  which  particularly  interest  society. 
Theories  of  the  wealth  of  the  community  must  attract  their 
attention ;  and  in  considering  them  they  are  sure  to  feel,  as  ^ 

*  1 

Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE 


5 


i  have  felt,  the  need  of  rendering  determinate  by  symbols 
familiar  to  them,  an  analysis  which  is  generally  indetermi- 
nate and  often  obscure,  in  authors  who  have  thought  fit  to 
confine  thenibclves  to  the  resources  of  ordinary  language. 
In  thinking  that  they  may  be  led  by  their  reflexions  to  enter 
upon  this  path,  I  hope  that  my  book  may  be  of  some  use  to 
them,  and  may  lessen  their  labour. 

In  the  remarks  on  the  first  notions  of  competition  and 
the  mutual  relations  of  producers,  they  may  possibly 
notice  certain  relations,  which  are  very  curious  from  a 
purely  abstract  standpoint,  without  reference  to  proposed 
applications. 

T  have  not  set  out  to  make  a  complete  and  dogmatic 
treatise  on  Political  Economy ;  I  have  put  aside  questions, 
to  which  mathematical  analysis  cannot  apply,  and  those 
which  seem  to  me  entirely  cleared  up  already.  I  have 
assumed  that  this  book  will  only  fall  into  the  hands  of 
readers  who  are  familiar  with  what  is  found  in  the  most 
ordinary  books  on  these  topics. 

I  am  far  from  having  thought  of  writing  in  support  of  any 
system,  and  from  joining  the  banners  of  any  party;  I 
believe  that  there  is  an  immense  step  in  passing  from 
theory  to  governmental  applications ;  I  believe  that  theory 
loses  none  of  its  value  in  thus  remaining  preserved  from 
contact  with  impassioned  polemics  ;  and  I  believe,  if  this 
essay  is  of  any  practical  value,  it  will  be  chiefly  in  making 
clear  how  far  we  are  from  being  able  to  solve,  with  full 
knowledge  of  the  case,  a  multitude  of  questions  which  are 
boldly  decided  every  day. 


Digitized  by  Google 


♦ 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


RESEARCHES 


INTO 

THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

OF 

THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 

CHAPTER  I 

OF  VALUE  IN  EXCHANGE  OR  OF  WEALTH  IN  GENERAL 

I.  The  Teutonic  root  Rik  or  Reich,  which  has  passed 
into  all  the  Komance  languages,  vaguely  expressed  a  rela- 
tion of  saperioiity^  of  strength,  or  of  power.  Las  rices 
hombres  is  still  used  in  Spain  for  distinguished  noblemen 
and  eminent  men,  and  such  is  also  the  force  of  the  words 
riikes  hommes  in  the  French  of  de  Joinville.  The  idea 
which  the  word  wealth  presents  to  us  to-day,  and  which 
is  relative  to  our  state  of  civilization,  could  not  have  been 
grasped  by  men  of  Teutonic  stock,  either  at  the  epoch  of 
the  Conquest,  or  even  at  much  later  periods,  when  the 
feudal  law  existed  in  full  vigour.  Property,  power,  the  dis- 
tinctions between  masters,  servants  and  slaves,  abundance, 
and  poverty,  rights  and  privileges,  all  these  are  found 
among  the  most  savage  tribes,  and  seem  to  flow  necessa- 
rily from  the  natural  laws  which  preside  over  aggregations 

7 


Digitized  by  Go 


8 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRWCIPLES 


of  individuals  and  of  families  ;  but  such  an  idea  of  wealth 
as  we  draw  from  our  advanced  state  of  civilization,  and  such 
as  is  necessary  to  give  rise  to  a  theory,  can  only  be  slowly 
developed  as  a  consequence  of  the  progress  of  commercial 
relations,  and  of  the  gradual  reaction  of  those  relations  on 
civil  institutions. 

A  shepherd  is  in  possession  of  a  vast  pasture  ground,  and 
no  one  can  disturb  him  with  impunity  ;  but  it  would  be  vain 
for  him  to  think  of  exchanging  it  for  something  which  he 
might  prefer :  there  is  nothing  in  existing  habits  and  cus- 
toms to  make  such  an  exchange  possible ;  this  man  is  a 
landholder,  but  he  is  not  rich. 

The  same  shepherd  has  cattle  and  milk  in  abundance; 
he  can  provide  for  a  numerous  retinue  of  servants  and 
slaves;  he  maintains  a  generous  hospitality  towards  poor 
dependents ;  but  he  is  neither  able  to  accumulate  his  prod- 
ucts, nor  to  exchange  them  for  objects  ol  luxury  which  do 
not  exist ;  this  man  has  power,  authority,  the  enjoyments 
which  belong  to  his  position,  but  he  has  not  wealth. 

2.  It  IS  inconceivable  that  men  should  live  for  a  consid- 
erable time  near  together  without  effecting  an  exchange  of 
goods  and  services ;  but  from  this  natural,  and  we  may  even 
say  instinctive,  action,  it  is  a  long  step  to  the  abstract  idea 
of  vahu  in  exchatige^  which  supposes  that  the  objects  to 
which  such  value  is  attributed  are  in  commercial  eirculaiion; 
i.e.  that  it  is  always  possible  to  find  means  to  exchange 
them  for  other  objects  of  equal  value.  The  things,  then,  to 
which  the  state  of  commercial  relations  and  civil  institutions 
permits  a  value  in  exchange  to  be  atlached,  are  those  which 
in  the  language  of  to-day  are  characterized  by  the  word  | 

* 
J 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


9 


wealih;  and  to  form  an  intelligible  theory  we  ought  to 

absolutely  identify  the  sense  of  the  word  weaiih  with  that 
which  is  presented  to  us  by  the  words  exchangeable  values. 

Under  this  conception,  wealUi  has  doubtless  only  an  ab- 
stract existence  ;  for,  strictly  speaking,  of  all  the  things  on 
which  we  set  a  price,  or  to  which  we  attribute  a  value  in  ex- 
change, there  are  none  always  exchangeable  at  will  for  any 
other  commodity  of  equal  price  or  value.  In  the  act  of  ex- 
change, as  in  the  transmission  of  power  by  maciiinery,  there  is 
friction  to  be  overcome,  losses  which  must  be  borne,  and 
limits  which  cannot  be  exceeded.  The  proprietor  of  a  great 
forest  is  only  rich  on  condition  of  managing  his  lumbering 
with  prudence,  and  of  not  glutting  the  market  with  his  lum- 
ber ;  the  owner  of  a  valiiable  picture  gallery  mny  spend  his  life 
in  the  vain  attempt  to  find  purchasers  \  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  city  the  conversion  of  a  sack 
of  grain  into  money  will  only  recjuire  the  time  necessary  to 
carry  it  to  the  grain  market ;  and  at  great  commercial  cen- 
tres  a  stock  of  coffee  can  always  be  sold  on  the  exchange. 

The  extension  of  commerce  and  the  development  of  com- 
mercial facilities  tend  to  bring  the  actual  condition  of  affairs 
nearer  and  nearer  to  this  order  of  abstract  conceptions,  on 
which  alone  theoretical  calculations  can  be  based,  in  the 
same  way  as  the  skilful  engmeer  approaches  nearer  to  theo- 
retical conditions  by  diminishing  friction  through  polished 
bearings  and  accurate  gearing.  In  this  way  nations  are  said 
to  make  progress  in  the  commercial  or  mercantile  system. 
These  two  expressions  are  etymologically  equivalent,  but  one 
is  now  taken  in  a  good  and  the  other  in  a  bad  sense,  as  is 
generally  the  case,  according  to  Bentham,  with  the  names  of 
things  that  involve  advantages  and  evils  of  a  moral  order. 


Digitized  by  Google 


10  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


We  will  not  take  up  either  these  advantages  or  these  evils. 

The  proijress  of  nations  m  the  commercial  system  is  a  fart 
in  the  kce  of  which  all  discussion  of  its  desirability  becomes 
idle ;  our  part  is  to  observe,  and  not  to  criticise^  the  irre- 
sistible laws  of  nature.    Whatever  man  can  measure,  calcu- 
late^ and  systematize^  ultimately  becomes  the  object  of  meas- 
urement, calculation^  and  system*   Wherever  fixed  relations 
can  replace  indeterminate,  the  substitution  finally  takes  place, 
it  is  thus  that  the  sciences  and  all  human  institutions  are 
organized*   The  use  of  coin,  which  has  been  handed  down 
to  us  from  remote   antiquity,  has  powerfully  aided  the 
progress  of  commercial  organization,  as  the  art  of  making 
glass  helped  many  discoveries  in  astronomy  and  physics; 
but  commercial  organization  is  not  essentially  bound  to  the 
use  of  the  monetary  metals.    All  means  are  good  which 
tend  to  facilitate  exchange,  to  fix  value  in  exchange ;  and 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  further  development 
of  this  organization  the  monetary  metals  will  play  a  part  of 
\  gradually  diminishing  importance. 

3.  The  abstract  idea  of  wealth  or  of  value  in  fxchange,  a 
dehmte  idea,  and  consequently  susceptible  of  rigorous  treat- 
ment in  combinations,  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from 
the  accessory  ideas  of  utility,  scarcity,  and  suitability  to  the 
needs  and  enjoyments  of  mankmd,  which  the  word  wealik 
still  suggests  in  common  speech.   These  ideas  are  variable, 
and  by  nature  indeterminate,  and  consequently  ill  suited  for 
the  foundation  of  a  scientific  theory.   The  division  of  econ- 
omists into  schools,  and  the  war  waged  between  practical 
men  and  thcorihts,  have  arisen  in  large  measure  from  the 
ambiguity  of  the  word  wealth  in  ordinary  speech,  and  the 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  11 


confiision  which  has  continued  to  obtain  between  the  hxed, 
definite  idea  of  vnUue  in  exchange,  and  the  ideas  of  utility 

which  every  one  estimates  in  his  own  way,  because  there  is 
no  hxed  standard  for  the  utihty  of  things.'' 

It  has  sometimes  happened  that  a  publisher,  having  in 
store  an  unsalable  stock  of  some  work,  useful  and  soughi 
after  by  connoisseurs^  but  of  which  too  many  copies  were 
originally  printed  in  view  of  the  class  of  readers  for  whom 
it  was  intended,  has  sacrificed  and  destroyed  two  thirds 
of  the  number^  expecting  to  derive  more  profit  from  the 
remainder  than  from  the  entire  edition.t 

There  is  no  doubt  thai  there  might  be  a  book  of  which 
it  would  be  easier  to  sell  a  thousand  copies  at  sixty  francs^ 
than  three  thousand  at  twenty  francs.  Calculating  in  this 
way,  the  Dutch  Company  is  said  to  ha\  e  cause  d  the  destruc- 
tion in  the  islands  of  the  Sound  of  a  part  of  the  precious 
spices  of  which  it  had  a  monopoly.  Here  is  a  complete 
destruction  uf  objects  to  which  the  wcjid  wealth  is  apphetl 
because  they  are  both  sought  after,  and  not  easily  obtain- 
able.  Here  is  a  miserly,  selfish  act,  evidently  opposed  to 

the  nuerests  of  society  ;  and  yet  it  is  rje\ ci  theless  evident 
that  this  sordid  act,  this  actual  destruction,  is  a  real  crea- 
tion of  wealth  in  the  commercial  sense  of  the  word.  The 

*  By  this  we  do  not  intend  that  there  is  neither  truth  nor  error  in  optn- 
ions  on  the  utility  of  things;  we  only  mean  that  generally  neither  the  truth 
nor  the  error  is  capable  of  proof ;  that  these  are  questions  of  valuation,  and 

not  soluble  by  calculation,  nor  by  logical  argument. 

t  1  uave  heard  it  said  by  a  vi-ry  respectable  surveyor,  that  one  of  the 
greatest  griefs  whivii  he  had  felt  ju  his  youth  had  been  to  leai  ri  liiat  liie  pub- 
Usher  Dupunt  iiad  dotie  thus  wtth  the  valuable  collection  of  the  Memoirs  of 
the  old  Academy  of  Sciences. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


12 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


publisher's  inventory  will  rightly  show  a  greater  value  for 
h^  assets ;  and  after  the  copies  have  left  his  hands,  either 
wholly  Oi  in  part,  if  each  individual  should  draw  up  his 
inventory  in  commercial  fashion^  and  if  all  these  partial 
inventories  could  be  collated  to  form  a  general  inventory 
or  balance  sheet  of  the  wealth  in  circulation,  an  increase 
would  be  found  in  the  sum  of  these  items  of  wealth. 

On  the  contrary,  suppose  that  only  fifty  copies  exist  of  a 
curious  book,  and  that  this  scarcity  carries  up  the  price  at 
auction  to  three  hundred  francs  a  copy.  A  publisher  re> 
prints  this  book  in  an  edition  of  a  thousand  copies,  of  which 
each  will  be  worth  five  francs,  and  which  will  bring  down 
the  other  copies  to  the  same  price  from  the  exaggerated 
value  which  their  extreme  scarcity  had  caused.  The  1050 
copies  will  therefore  only  enter  for  5250  francs  into  the  sum 
of  wealth  which  can  be  inventoried,  and  this  sum  will  thus 
have  suffered  a  loss  of  9750  fmncs.  The  decrease  will  be 
even  more  considerable  if  (as  should  be  the  case)  the  value 
of  the  raw  materials  is  considered,  from  which  the  reprints 
were  made,  and  which  existed  prior  to  the  reprinting. 
Here  is  an  industrial  operation,  a  material  production,  use- 
ful to  the  publisher  who  undertook  it,  useful  to  those  whose 
products  and  labour  it  employed,  useful  even  to  the  public 
if  the  book  contains  valuable  information,  and  which  is 
nevertheless  a  real  destruction  of  wealth,  in  the  abstract  and 
commercial  meaning  of  the  terni. 

The  rise  and  fall  of  exchange  show  perpetual  oscillations 
in  values,  or  in  the  abstract  wealth  in  circulation,  without 
intervention  of  actual  production  or  destruction  of  the  phys-  ^ 
ical  objects  to  which,  in  the  concrete  sense,  the  term  wealth  » 
is  applicable. 

Digitized  by  Goocle 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  13 


It  has  been  long  remarked,  and  justly,  that  commerce,  , 
properly  so  called,  i>.  the  traosportation  of  raw  materials  or 
finished  products,  ffom  one  market  to  another,  by  adding 
to  the  worth  of  ilie  u Injects  transported,  creates  value  or 
.  wealth  in  just  the  same  way  as  the  labour  of  the  miner 
who  extracts  metals  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  or  the 
workman  who  adapts  them  lo  our  needs.  What  ought 
to  have  been  added,  and  what  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
develop,  is  that  commerce  may  also  be  a  cause  of  destruc- 
tion of  values,  even  while  making  profits  for  the  merchants 
who  carry  it  on,  and  even  when  in  every  one's  eyes  it  is 
a  benefit  to  the  countries  which  it  connects  in  commercial 
intercourse. 

A  fashion,  a  whim,  or  a  chance  occurrence  may  cause  a 
creation  or  annihilation  of  values  without  notable  influence 
on  what  is  regarded  as  pubhc  iiuhty  or  the  general  welfare ; 
it  can  even  come  about  that  a  destruction  of  wealth  may  be 
salutary,  and  an  increase  detrimental.  If  chemists  should 
solve  the  p.rulildrn  ot  inakiiig  diamonds,  jewellers  and  the 
ladies  who  own  sets  of  jewellery  would  sulfer  heavy  losses ; 
the  general  mass  of  wealth  capable  of  circulation  would 
experience  a  notable  decrease,  and  yet  I  can  hardly  tlmik 
than  any  sensible  man  would  be  tempted  to  consider  it  a 
public  calamity,  even  though  he  might  regret  the  individual 
losses  invoked.  On  the  contrary,  it  the  taste  for  diamonds 
should  decline,  if  wealthy  people  should  stop  devoting  an 
important  part  of  their  fortunes  to  this  idle  vanity,  and  if,  in 
consequence,  the  value  of  diamuiids  in  commerce  :>iiuuld 
decrease,  wise  men  would  gladly  commend  this  new  depart- 
ure of  fashion. 


Digitizedoy  Goo^^Ie 


14 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


4.  When  any  event,  accounted  favourable  to  a  country, 
as  improving  the  condition  of  the  majority  of  its  inhabitants 
(for  what  other  basis  can  be  taken  to  estimate  utility?),  has 
nevertheless  for  its  first  effect  the  diminution  of  the  mass 
of  values  in  circulation,  we  are  tempted  to  suppose  that 
this  event  conceals  the  germ  of  an  increase  in  the  general 
wealth  by  means  of  its  remote  consequences,  and  that  it 
will  in  this  way  turn  out  to  the  advantage  of  the  country. 
Experience  unquestionably  shows  that  this  is  true  in  most 
cases,  since,  in  general,  an  incontestable  improvement  in 
the  condition  of  the  people  has  kept  pace  with  an  equally 
incontestable  increase  in  the  sum  total  of  wealth  in  circula- 
tion. But  in  consequence  of  the  impossibility  of  following 
up  analytically  all  the  consequences  of  such  complex  rela- 
tions, theory  is  unable  to  explain  why  this  usually  happens 
and  is  still  less  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  must  always  con- 
tinue to  occur.  Let  us  avoid  confounding  what  is  in  the 
domain  of  accurate  reasoning  with  what  is  the  object  of  a 
more  or  less  hapjjy  guess;  what  is  rational  with  what  is 
empirical.  It  is  enough  to  have  to  guard  against  errors  in 
logic  on  the  first  score ;  let  us  avoid  encountering  passionate 
declamations  and  insoluble  questions  on  the  other. 

5,  From  a  standpoint  of  mere  etymology,  whatever  apper- 
tains to  the  organization  of  society  belongs  to  the  field  of 
Political  Economy  ;  but  it  has  become  customary  to  use  this 
last  term  in  a  sense  much  more  restricted  and  by  so  much 
less  precise.  The  Political  Economist,  being  occupied  prin- 
cipally with  the  material  wants  of  mankhid,  only  considers 
social  institutions  as  far  as  they  favour  or  interfere  with 
labour,  thrift,  commerce,  and  population ;  and  as  far  as  they 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  IS 

affect  the  subdivision  between  the  members  of  society  of 
the  gifts  of  nature  and  the  rewards  of  labour. 

This  subject  is  still  far  too  vast  to  be  properly  grasped  by 
any  one  man.  It  affords  inexhaustible  material  for  unripe 
systems  and  slow  investigations.  How  can  we  abstract  the 
moral  influences  which  enter  into  all  these  questions  and 
which  are  entirely  incapable  of  measurement  ?  How  are  we 
to  compare  what  may  be  called  the  material  wel&re  of  the 
Alpine  shepherd  with  that  of  the  Spanish  idler  or  of  the  Man- 
chester workingman  ;  the  convent  alms  with  the  poor-rates  ; 
the  drudgery  of  the  farm  with  that  of  the  workshop  i  the 
pleasures  and  expenditures  of  a  Norman  noble  in  his  feudal 
numor,  with  the  pleasures  and  expenditure^  of  his  far-away  de- 
scendant in  a  house  m  London  or  on  a  tour  through  Europe  ? 

If  we  compare  one  nation  with  another,  by  what  invaria- 
ble token-,  shall  \vc  determine  the  progress  or  decay  ul  their 
prosperity?  Shall  it  be  according  to  population?  In  that 
case  China  would  far  excel  Europe.  According  to  the 
abundance  of  coin?  The  example  of  Spam,  mistress  of  the 
Peruvian  mines^  turned  the  world  away  from  this  gross  error 
long  ago,  and,  in  fact,  before  even  the  first  crude  notions  of 
the  true  role  of  coin  were  developed.  According  to  busi- 
ness activity?  Then  inland  peoples  would  be  very  unfortu- 
nate compared  with  those  whom  proximity  to  the  sea  invites 
to  a  mercantile  career.  According  to  the  high  price  of 
goods  or  of  wages?  Ihen  some  miserable  island  would 
surpass  the  most  smiling  and  fertile  countries.  According 
to  the  pecuniary  value  of  what  economists  call  the  annual 
product?  A  year  when  this  value  increases  greatly  may 
easily  be  one  of  great  distress  for  the  greatest  number. 


Digitized  by  Google 


16  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


According  to  the  actual  quantity  of  this  product  reckoned 

in  the  appropriate  unit  for  each  kind  of  goods?  But  the 
kinds  of  goods  produced  and  the  relative  proportions  are 
different  for  each  country.  How  can  comparisons  be  made 
in  this  respect?  According  to  the  rate  of  movement  up 
or  down  whether  of  population  or  of  annual  product  ?  Pro- 
vided that  the  reckoning  covers  a  sufficient  time  this  is,  to 
be  sure,  the  least  equivocal  symptom  of  the  wcliare  or 
misery  of  society ;  but  how  can  this  symptom  help  us  except 
to  recognize  accomplished  facts,  and  facts  which  have  been 
produced,  not  only  by  economic  causes  in  the  ordinary 
meaning  of  the  words,  but  also  by  the  simultaneous  coopera- 
tion of  a  multitude  of  moral  causes. 

\Vc  are  far  from  wishing  to  depreciate  the  philanthropic 
efforts  of  those  who  seek  to  throw  some  light  on  social 
economy.    It  is  characteristic  only  of  narrow  minds  to 
decry  medical  science  because  physiological  phenomena 
cannot  be  calculated  as  accurately  as  the  planetary  move- 
ments.   Political  Economy  is  the  hygiene  and  pathology  of  ^ 
the  social  system.    It  recognizes  as  its  guide  experience  or  j 
rather  observation ;  but  sometimes  the  sagacity  of  a  supe- 
rior mind  can  even  anticipate  the  results  of  experience. 
We  only  seek  to  make  clear,  that  Political  Economy  £i!ls 
to  make  progress  by  theory,  towards  its  noble  object  of  the  ^ 
improvement  of  the  lot  of  mankind,  either  because  the 
relations  which  it  has  to  deal  with  are  not  reducible  to  | 
fixed  terms,  or  because  these  relations  are  much  too  com-  . 
plicated  for  our  powers  of  combination  and  analysis.  1 

6.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  abstract  idea  of  wealth  « 
according  to  our  conception  couititutes  a  perfectly  deter-     \  \ 

if 

Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  17 


minate  relation,  like  all  precise  conceptions  it  can  become 
the  object  of  theoretical  deductions,  and  if  these  deductions 

are  sutliciently  numerous  and  sceui  important  enough  to  be 
collected  into  a  system,  it  will  presumably  be  advantageous 
to  present  this  s)rstem  by  itself,  except  for  such  applications 
as  it  may  seem  proper  to  make  to  those  branches  of  Political 
Economy  with  which  the  theory  of  wealth  is  ultimately  con- 
nected. It  will  be  useful  to  distinguish  what  admits  of  abstract 
demonstration  from  what  allows  only  of  a  questionable  opinion. 

The  Theory  of  Wealth,  according  to  the  idea  we  are  try- 
ing to  give,  would  doubtless  only  be  an  idle  speculation,  if 
the  abstract  idea  of  wealth  or  value  in  exchange,  on  which  it 
is  founded,  were  too  far  from  corresponding  with  the  actual 
objects  which  make  up  wealth  in  the  existing  social  status. 
The  same  would  be  true  of  hydiuatatics  if  the  character  of 
ordinary  fluids  should  be  too  far  removed  from  the  hypothe- 
sis of  perfect  fluidity.  However,  as  we  have  already  said, 
the  influence  ui  a  progressive  civilization  curiolantly  tends 
to  bring  actual  and  variable  relations  nearer  and  nearer  to 
the  absolute  relation,  which  we  attain  to  from  abstract  con- 
siderations, in  such  matters  everything  becomes  more  and 
more  easily  valued,  and  consequently  more  easily  measured. 
The  steps  towards  finding  a  market  resolve  themselves 
into  brokerage,  losses  of  time  into  discounts,  chances  of  loss 
into  insurance  charges,  and  so  on.  'ihe  progress  of  the 
gregarious  tendency  and  of  the  institutions  related  to  it, 
and  the  modifications  which  have  taken  place  in  our  civil 
institutions,  all  cooperate  towards  this  mobility,  which  we 
would  neither  apologize  for  nor  detract  from,  but  on  which 
the  application  of  theory  to  social  facts  is  founded* 
c 


Digitized  by 


18  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


CHAPTER  II 

OF  CHANGES  IN  VALUE,  ABbULUTE  AND  RELATIVE 

7*  Whenever  there  is  occasion  to  go  back  to  the  funda- 
mental conceptions  on  which  any  science  rests,  and  to 
formulate  tlieia  with  accuracy,  we  almutst  always  encounter 
difficulties^  which  come,  sometimes  from  the  very  nature  of 
these  conceptions,  but  more  often  from  the  imperfections 
of  language.  For  instance,  in  the  writings  of  economists, 
the  definition  of  value^  and  the  distinction  between  absolute 
and  relative  value,  are  rather  obscure :  a  very  simple  and 
strikingly  exact  comparison  will  serve  to  throw  light  on  this. 

We  conceive  that  a  body  moves  when  its  situation  changes 
with  reference  to  other  bodies  which  we  look  upon  as  fixed. 
If  we  observe  a  system  of  material  points  at  two  different 
times,  and  find  that  the  respective  situations  of  these  points 
are  not  the  same  at  both  times,  we  necessarily  conclude  that 
some,  if  not  all,  of  these  p  oints  have  moved ;  but  if  besides 
this  we  are  unable  to  refer  them  to  points  of  the  fixity  of 
which  we  can  be  sure,  it  is,  in  the  first  instance,  impossible 
to  draw  any  conclusions  as  to  the  motion  or  rest  of  each  of 
the  points  in  the  system. 

However,  if  all  of  the  points  in  the  system,  except  one, 
had  preserved  their  relative  situation,  we  should  consider  it 
very  probable  that  this  single  point  was  the  only  one  which 

\ 
J 

Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


19 


had  moved,  unless,  indeed,  all  the  other  points  were  so  con- 

necterl  that  the  aiuvement  of  one  would  involve  the  move- 
ment of  all. 

We  have  just  pointed  out  an  extreme  case,  viz.,  that  in 

which  all  except  one  had  kept  their  relative  positions;  but, 
without  entering  into  details,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  among 
all  the  possible  ways  of  explaining  the  change  in  the  state 

of  the  system  there  ma)  be  some  niiich  simpler  than  others, 
and  which  without  hesitation  we  regard  as  much  more 
probable. 

If.  without  beinq  Umited  to  two  distinct  times,  observa- 
tion should  follow  the  system  through  its  successive  states, 
there  would  be  hypotheses  as  to  the  absolute  movements  of 
the  different  points  of  the  system,  which  would  be  consid- 
ered preferable  for  the  explanation  of  their  relative  move- 
ments. Thus,  without  reference  to  the  relative  size  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  and  to  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  j:ravitation, 
the  hypothesis  of  Copernicus  would  explain  the  apparent 
motions  of  the  planetary  system  more  simply  and  plausibly 
than  those  of  Ptoletny  or  Tycho. 

In  the  preceding  paragraph  we  have  only  looked  on 
motion  as  a  geometric  relation,  a  change  of  position,  with- 
out reference  to  anv  iclea  of  cause  or  motive  power  or  any 
knowledge  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  movements  of  mat- 
ter. From  this  new  point  of  view  other  considerations  of 
probability  will  arise.  If,  for  instance,  the  mass  of  the  \^oAy 
A  is  considerably  greater  than  that  of  the  body  we  judge 
that  the  change  in  the  relative  situation  of  the  bodies  A  and 
B  is  mure  probably  due  lu  the  displacement  of  B  than 
of  A. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


20  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


Finally,  there  are  some  circumstances  which  may  make  it 
certain  that  relative  or  apparent  movements  come  from  the 
displacement  of  one  body  and  not  of  another.*  Thus  the 
appearance  of  an  animal  will  show  by  unmistakable  signs 
whether  it  is  stopping  or  starting.  Thus,  to  return  to  the 
preceding  example,  experiments  with  the  pendulum,  taken 
in  connection  with  the  known  laws  of  mechanics,  will  prove 
the  diurnal  motion  of  the  earth  ;  the  phenomenon  of  the 
aberration  of  Ught  will  prove  its  annual  motion;  and  the 
hypothesis  of  Copernicus  will  take  its  place  among  estab- 
lished truths. 

8.  Let  us  now  examine  how  some  considerations  per- 
fectly analogous  to  those  which  we  have  just  considered, 

spring  from  the  idea  of  exchangeable  values. 

Just  as  we  can  only  assign  situation  to  a  point  by  refer- 
ence to  other  points,  so  we  can  only  assign  value  to  a 
commodity  t  by  reference  to  other  commodities.  Tn  this 
sense  there  are  only  relative  values.  But  when  these  rela- 
tive values  change,  we  perceive  plainly  that  the  reason  of  the 
variation  may  lie  in  the  change  of  one  term  of  the  relation 
or  of  the  other  or  of  both  at  once ;  just  as  when  the  distance 
varies  between  two  points,  the  reason  for  the  change  may 
lie  in  the  displacement  of  one  or  the  other  or  both  of  the 

♦Sec  Newton,  Principia,  Book  I,  at  the  end  of  the  preliminary  defi- 
nitions. 

t  It  is  almost  needless  to  observe  that  for  conciseness  the  word  cotn- 
modity  is  used  in  its  most  general  ^cnse,  and  that  it  includes  tiie  rendering 
of  valuable  services,  which  can  be  exchanged  either  for  other  services  or 
for  commodUic-  proper,  and  which,  like  such  commodities,  have  a  definite 
price  or  a  value  in  exchange.  We  shall  not  repeat  this  remark  in  the  future, 
as  it  can  easily  be  supplied  from  the  context 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  21 


two  points.  Thus  again  when  two  violin  strings  have  had 
between  them  a  definite  musical  interval,  and  when  after  a 

certain  time  they  cease  to  give  this  interval,  the  question 
is  whether  one  has  gone  up  or  the  other  gone  down,  or 
whether  both  of  these  effects  .have  joined  to  cause  the  varia- 
tion of  the  interval. 

We  can  therefore  readily  distinguish  the  relative  changes 
of  value  manifested  by  the  changes  of  relative  values  from 
the  absolute  changes  of  value  of  one  or  another  of  the  com- 
modities between  which  commerce  has  estabtished  relations. 

J  list  as  it  is  possible  to  make  an  indefinite  number  of 
hypotheses  as  to  the  absolute  motion  which  causes  the 
observed  relative  motion  in  a  system  of  points,  so  it  is 
also  possible  to  multiply  indefinitely  hypotheses  as  to  the 
absolute  variations  which  cause  the  relative  variations  ob- 
served in  the  values  of  a  system  of  commodities. 

However,  if  all  but  one  of  the  commodities  preserved  the 
same  relative  values,  we  should  consider  by  far  the  most 
probable  hypothesis,  the  one  which  would  assign  the  abso- 
lute change  to  this  single  article ;  unless  there  should  be 
manifest  such  a  connection  between  all  the  others,  that  one 
cannot  vary  without  involving  proportional  variations  in  the 
values  of  those  which  depend  on  it. 

For  instance,  an  observer  who  should  see  by  inspection 
of  a  table  of  statistics  of  values  from  century  to  century, 
that  the  value  of  money  fell  about  four-fifths  towards  the 
end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  while  otlici  commodities  pre- 
served practically  the  same  relative  values,  would  consider 
it  very  probable  that  an  absolute  change  had  taken  place 
in  tae  value  ui  money,  even  if  he  weitj  iguurant  ui  the 


Digitized  by 


22  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


discovery  of  mines  in  America.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he 
should  see  the  price  of  wheat  double  from  one  year  to  the 

next  withuut  any  remarkable  variation  in  the  price  of  most 
Other  articles  or  in  their  relative  values,  he  would  attribute 
it  to  an  absolute  change  in  the  value  of  wheat,  even  if  he 

did  not  know  liiat  a  bad  grain  iiarvest  had  preceded  the 
high  price. 

Without  reference  to  this  extreme  case,  where  the  disturb- 

a  nee  of  the  system  of  relative  values  is  ex]ilaine(i  by  the 
movement  of  a  single  article,  it  is  evident  tiiat  among  all 
the  possible  hypotheses  on  absolute  variations  some  explain 

the  relative  vaiiations  laoic  biiupl)  and  more  probably  than 
others. 

If,  without  being  limited  to  consideration  of  the  s)rstem 

of  relative  values  at  two  distinct  periods,  observation  follows 
it  through  its  intermediate  states,  a  new  set  of  data  will  be 
provided  to  determine  the  m'ost  probable  law  of  absolute 
variations,  from  all  possibilities  for  satisfying  the  observed 
law  of  relative  variations* 
9.  Let 

/i>  A»  At  etc., 

be  the  values  of  certain  articles,  with  reference  to  a  gram  of 
silver  ;  if  the  standard  of  value  is  changed  and  a  myriagram 
of  wheat  is  substituted  for  the  gram  of  silver,  the  values  of 
the  same  articles  will  be  given  by  the  expressions 

i/h  -Ai  -p9»  etc., 
a      a  a 

a  being  the  price  of  the  myriagram  of  wheat,  or  its  value 
with  reference  to  a  gram  of  lilver.   In  general,  whenever  it 


Digitized  by  Google  f 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  23 

is  desired  to  change  the  standard  of  value,  it  will  suffice  to 
multiply  the  numerical  expressions  of  individual  values  by  a 
constant  factor,  greater  or  less  than  unity ;  just  as  with  a 
system  of  points  conditioned  to  remain  m  a  straight  line,  it 
would  suftice  to  know  the  distances  from  these  points  to  any 
one  of  their  number^  to  determine  by  the  addition  of  a  con- 
stant number,  positive  or  negative,  their  distances  referred 
to  another  point  of  the  system,  taken  as  the  new  origin. 

From  this  there  results  a  very  simple  method  of  express- 
ing by  a  mathematical  illustration  the  variations  which  occur 
in  the  relative  values  of  a  system  of  articles.  It  is  suffi- 
cient to  conceive  of  a  system  composed  of  as  many  points 
arranged  in  a  straight  line  as  there  are  articles  to  be  com- 
pared, so  that  the  distances  from  one  of  these  points  to  all 
the  others  constantly  remain  proportional  to  the  logarithms 
of  the  numbers  which  measure  the  values  of  all  these  arti- 
cles with  reference  to  one  of  their  number.  All  the  changes 
of  distance  which  occur  by  means  of  addition  and  subtrac- 
tion, from  the  relative  and  absolute  motions  of  such  a  system 
of  movable  points,  will  correspond  perfectly  to  the  changes 
by  means  of  multiplication  and  division  in  the  system  ot 
values  which  is  being  compared :  from  which  it  follows  that 
the  calculations  fur  deiciinining  the  most  probable  hypothe- 
sis as  to  the  absolute  movements  of  a  system  of  points,  can 
be  applied,  by  going  from  logarithms  back  to  numbers,  to 
the  dctcnnmaiiun  of  the  most  probable  hypothesis  fur  the 
absolute  variations  of  a  system  of  values. 

But,  in  general,  such  calculations  of  probability,  in  view  of 
the  absolute  ignorance  in  which  we  would  be  of  the  causes 
of  variation  of  values,  would  be  of  very  slight  interest. 


Digitized  by  Google 


24 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


W  hat  IS  really  important  is  to  know  the  laws  which  govern 
the  variation  of  values,  or^  in  other  words,  the  theory  of 
wealth.  This  theory  alone  can  make  it  possible  to  prove 
to  what  absolute  variations  are  due  the  relative  variations 
which  come  into  the  field  of  observation;  in  the  same 
manner  (if  it  is  permissible  to  compare  the  most  exact  of 
sciences  with  the  one  nearest  its  cradle)  as  the  theory  of 
the  laws  of  motion,  begun  by  Galileo  and  completed  by  . 
Newton,  alone  makes  it  possible  to  prove  to  what  real  and 
absolute  motions  are  due  the  relative  and  apparent  motions 
of  the  solar  system. 

10.  To  sum  up,  there  are  only  relative  values ;  to  seek  for 
others  is  to  fall  into  a  contradiction  with  the  very  idea  of 
value  in  exchange^  which  necessarily  implies  the  idea  of  a 
ratio  between  two  terms.  But  also  an  accomplished  change 
in  this  ratio  is  a  relative  effect,  which  can  and  should  be 
explained  by  absolute  changes  in  the  terms  of  the  ratio. 
There  are  no  absolute  values,  but  there  are  movements  of 
absolute  rise  and  fall  in  values. 

Among  the  possible  hypotheses  on  the  absolute  changes 
which  produce  the  observed  relative  changes,  there  are 
some  which  the  general  laws  of  probability  indicate  as  must 
probable.  Only  knowledge  of  the  special  laws  oi  the  matter 
in  question  can  lead  to  the  substitution  of  an  assured  deci- 
sion for  an  oj)inion  as  to  probability, 

11.  If  theory  should  indicate  one  article  incapable  of 
absolute  variation  in  its  value,  and  should  refer  to  it  all 
others,  it  would  be  possible  to  immediately  deduce  their 
absolute  variations  from  their  relative  variations  ;  but  very 
slight  attention  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  such  a  fixed  term 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


IS 


does  not  exist,  although  certain  articles  ap])roach  much 
more  nearly  than  others  to  the  necessary  conditions  for  the 
existence  of  such  a  term. 

The  monetary  metals  are  among  the  things  which^  under 
ordinaiy  circumstances  and  provided  that  too  long  a  period 
is  not  considered,  only  experience  slight  absolute  variations 
in  their  value.  If  it  were  not  so^  all  transactions  would  be 
'  disturbed^  as  they  are  by  paper  money  subject  to  sudden 
depreciation.* 

On  the  other  hand,  articles  such  as  wheat,  which  form 
the  basis  of  the  food  supply,  are  subject  to  violent  dis- 
turbances ;  but,  if  a  sufficient  period  is  considered,  these 
disturbances  balance  each  other,  and  the  average  value  ap- 
proaches iixed  conditions,  perhaps  even  more  closely  than 
the  monetary  metals*  This  will  not  make  it  impossible  for 
the  value  so  determined  to  vary,  nor  prevent  it  from  actually 
experiencing  absolute  variations  on  a  still  greater  scale  of 
time.  Here,  as  in  astronomy,  it  is  necessary  to  recog- 
nize secular  variations,  which  are  independent  of  periodic 
variations. 

Even  the  wages  of  that  lowest  grade  of  labour,  which  is 

only  considered  as  a  kind  of  mechanic  al  agent,  the  element 
often  proposed  as  the  standard' of  value,  is  subject  like 
wheat  to  periodic  as  well  as  secular  variations ;  and,  if  the 
periodic  oscillations  of  this  element  have  generally  been  less 

*  What  characterises  a  contract  of  sale,  and  distinguishes  it  essentially 
from  a  contract  of  exchange,  is  the  invariability  of  the  absolute  value  of 
the  monetary  metals,  at  least  for  the  lapse  of  time  covered  by  an  ordinary 
business  transaction.  In  a  country  where  the  absolute  value  of  the  mone- 
tary tokens  is  perceptibly  variable,  there  are,  properly  speaking,  no  con* 
tracts  of  sale.  This  distinction  should  affect  some  legal  questions* 


Digitized  by  Google 


26  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


wide  than  those  of  wheat,  on  the  other  hand  we  may  sus- 
pect that  in  future  the  progressive  changes  in  the  social 
status  will  cause  it  to  suffer  much  more  rapid  secular 

variations. 

But  if  no  article  exists  having  the  necessary  conditions  for 
perfect  fixity,  we  can  and  ought  to  imagine  one,  which,  to 
be  sure,  will  only  have  an  abstract  existence.*  It  will 
only  appear  as  an  auxiliary  term  of  comparison  to  facilitate 
conception  of  the  theory,  and  will  disappear  in  the  final 
applications. 

In  like  manner,  astronomers  imagine  a  mean  sun  endowed 
with  a  uniform  motion,  and  to  this  imaginary  star  they  refer, 
as  well  the  real  sun  as  the  t>iher  heavenly  bodies,  and  so 
finally  determine  the  actual  situation  of  these  stars  with 
reference  to  the  real  sun. 

12.  It  would  perhaps  seem  proper  to  first  investigate  the 
causes  which  produce  absolute  variations  in  the  value  of 
the  monetary  metals,  and,  when  these  are  accounted  for,  to 
reduce  to  the  corrected  value  of  money  the  variations  which 
occur  in  the  value  of  other  articles*  This  corrected  money 
would  be  the  equivalent  of  the  mean  sun  of  astronomers. 

But,  on  one  hand,  one  of  the  most  delicate  points  in  the 
theory  of  wealth  is  just  this  analysis  of  the  causes  of  varia- 
tion of  the  value  of  the  monetary  metals  used  as  means  of 
circulation,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  legitimate  to  admit, 
as  has  been  ahready  said,  that  the  monetary  metals  do  not 
suffer  notable  variations  in  their  values  except  as  we  com- 
pare very  distant  periods,  or  else  in  case  of  sudden  revolu- 
tions, now  very  improbable,  which  would  be  caused  by  the 

♦  Montesquieu,  Esprit  dts  Lois^  Book  XXII,  Chap.  8. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  27 

discovery  of  new  metallurgical  processes,  or  of  new  mineral 
deposits.  It  is,  to  be  sure^  a  common  saying,  that  the 
price  of  money  is  steadily  diminishing,  and  fast  enough 
for  the  depreciation  of  value  of  coin  to  be  very  perceptible 
in  the  course  of  a  generation ;  but  by  goin^back  to  the 
cause  of  this  phenomenon,  as  we  have  shown  how  to  do  in 
this  chapter,  it  is  plain  that  the  relative  change  is  chiefly 
due  to  an  absolute  upward  movement  of  the  prices  of  most 
of  the  articles  which  go  directly  for  the  needs  or  pleasures 
of  manivind,  an  ascending  movement  produced  by  the  in- 
crease in  population  and  by  the  progressive  developments 
of  industry  and  labour.  Sufficient  ,  explanations  on  this  doc- 
trinal point  can  be  found  in  the  writings  of  most  modern 
economists. 

Finally,  in  what  follows,  it  will  be  the  more  legitimate  to 

neglect  the  absolute  variations  which  affect  the  value  of  the 
monetary  metals,  as  we  do  not  have  numerical  applications 
directly  in  view.  If  the  theory  were  sufficiently  developed, 
and  the  data  sufficiently  accurate,  it  would  be  easy  to  go 
from  the  value  of  an  article  in  terms  of  a  fictitious  and  inva- 
riable modulus,  to  its  monetary  value.   If  the  value  of  an 

article,  \\\  terms  of  this  fictitious  modulus,  was  at  a  time 
when  that  of  the  monetary  metal  was  ir,  and  if  at  another 
time  these  quantities  had  taken  other  values,/'  and  7f\  it  is 
evident  that  the  monetary  value  of  the  article  would  have 
varied  in  the  ratio  of 

WW' 

If  the  absolute  value  of  the  monetary  metals  during  long 
periods  only  suffers  slow  variations,  which  are  hardly  per* 


Digitized  by  Google 


28 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


ceptible  throughuut  the  commercial  world,  the  relative 
-values  of  these  very  metals  suii'er  slight  variations  from 
one  coromercial  centre  to  another,  which  constitute  what 
is  known  as  the  rate  of  exchange,  and  of  which  the  mathe- 
matical formula  is  very  simple,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  next 
chapter. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


29 


CHAPTER  III 

OF  THE  EXCHANGES 

« 

13.  The  time  will  doubtless  come  when  all  civilized 
peoples  will  appreciate  the  beaefit  of  uniformity  of  meas- 
ures. One  of  the  titles  of  the  French  Revolution  to  the 
gratitude  of  future  generations,  is  that  it  initiated  this  great 
social  improvement  \  and,  in  spite  of  national  and  political 
prejudices,  this  example  has  not  lacked  imitators. 

The  uniformity  and  stability  of  measures  acquire  a  still 
greater  importance  when  we  have  to  do  with  the  mone- 
tary system,  so  often  turned  upside  down  by  the  selfish- 
ness and  bad  faith  of  governments.  Moreover,  the  state 
of  society  in  the  difierent  countries  of  Europe  makes  im- 
possible the  return  to  the  disorder  in  which  so  simple  a 
thing  in  itself  as  the  monetary  system  remained  for  so 
long  a  time  and  among  almost  all  peoples.  It  would  be 
superfluous  to  repeat  observations  on  this  subject,  which 
have  become  perfectly  familiar. 

Let  us  suppose  then  that  all  commercial  peoples  have 
adopted  the  same  monetary  unit,  for  instance,  one  gram  of 
fine  silver,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  that  the 
ratio  of  each  monetary  unit  to  a  gram  of  fine  silver  be  per- 
manently established.  Knowledge  of  these  ratios  forms  a 
large  part  of  what  is  known  among  those  engaged  in  the 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


30 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  TRJNCIFLES 


busiaess  as  the  science  of  exchange.  This  science,  which 
can  be  summed  up  in  a  table  found  everywhere^  should  not 
distract  our  attention.  In  other  words,  we  have  nothing  to 
do  with  nominal  exchange,  but  only  with  actual  exchange, 
/>.  the  ratio  between  the  values  in  exchange  of  the  same 
weight  of  fine  silver  according  as  it  is  payable  in  diflferent 
places.  It  is  plain  also  that  the  cost  of  exchange,  or  the  dif- 
ference of  the  ratio  of  exchange  from  unityi  cannot  exceed 
the  cost  of  transportation  of  this  weight  of  fine  silver  from 
one  place  to  the  other,  when  free  trade  in  the  precious 
metals  is  allowed  between  the  two  places,  or  the  cost  of 
transportation  plus  the  expense  of  smuggling  when  this 
trade  is  embarrassed  by  prohibitory  laws.  To  find  the 
equations  of  exchafige^  we  will  suppose,  to  begin  with,  that 
the  cost  of  exchange  is  less  than  the  cost  of  transportation, 
or  that  the  exchange  takes  place  without  any  real  transpor- 
tation of  money,  without  any  cliange  in  the  distribution 
of  the  precious  metals  between  the  two  commercial  centres. 

14.  Let  us  suppose  at  first  only  two  centres  of  ex- 
change. Let  us  designate  by  mi^^  the  total  of  the  sums 
for  which  the  centre  (i)  is  annually  indebted  to  the  centre 
(2) ;  and  by  m^  x  the  total  of  the  sums  for  which  the  place 
(2)  is  annually  indebted  to  the  pkce  (1) ;  by  the  rate 
of  exchange  at  the  place  (i)  on  the  place  (2),  or  the 
amount  of  silver  given  at  the  place  (2)  in  exchange  for  a 
weight  of  silver  expressed  by  i  and  payable  at  the  place 

Adopting  this  notation,  and  starting  firom  the  hypothesis 
that  the  two  places  balance  their  account  without  transport- 
ing money  in  either  direction,  it  is  plain  that  we  shall  have 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


31 


^1.2^1.2  =  »»s.i»  or  C\^% 


Wc  have  in  general     ^2,  i  =  — » 


and  in  this  particular  case     1  = 


Whenever,  therefore,  the  ratio        only  differs  from 


by  a  quantity  less  than  the  cost  of  transportation  of  a  mone- 
tary unit  Irum  one  place  to  the  other,  the  balance  between 
the  two  places  will  be  settled  without  actual  transportation 
of  money  and  by  the  mere  effect  of  the  rate  of  exchange. 

Let  us  now  suppose  any  number  of  places  in  correspond- 
ence, and  let  m^^^  express  generally  the  total  of  the  sums 
annually  due  from  the  place  (/)  to  the  place  {k),  and  ^  the 
cocnicieiu  of  exchange  from  (/)  to  (k).  The  number  of 
these  coefficients  for  a  number  of  places  (r)  willbe_r(r-- 1 ) ; 

but,  as  in  general,      =  — ,  the  number  of  coethcients  to 

be  determined  is  reduced  at  the  outset  to  — ^  


Nor  are  all  these  coefficients  mutually  independent ;  for 
if,  for  instance, 


any  one  having  to  convey  money  from  {k)  to  (/),  instead 
of  getting  a  diaft  from  (k)  on  (1),  will  find  it  cheaper  to 
get  one  from  (k)  on  (/)  which  he  can  exchange  for  one 
from  (/;  on  (1).  For  the  same  reason  it  is  impossible  lu 
have 


2 


Djg'itized  by 


32 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


for  this  is  equivalent  to 


or 


which  has  just  been  proved  impossible,  whatever  the  letters 

I,     I  may  be. 
Thus  we  have  in  general 


or  at  least,  if  this  relation  temporarily  ceases  to  be  satisfied, 
banking  transactions  continually  tend  to  reestablish  it.  But 
our  analysis  only  considers  that  state  of  equilibrium  about 
which  commercial  changes  cause  the  rates  of  exchange  to 
oscillate  continually. 

The  relation  (a)  can  be  represented  geometrically  by 
imagining  a  series  of  points  (/*),  {k),  (/),...  so  placed  that 
the  distance  between  each  two  points,  such  as  (i),  (^)  is 
measured  by  the  logarithm  of  the  number  By  means 
of  this  convention  the  relation  {a)  expresses  that  the  points 
0)>  (^)»  general  all  the  points  of  the  series, 

equal  in  number  to  the  centres  of  exchange,  must  be  sit- 
uated in  the  same  straight  line. 

i^rom  this  it  results  that  it  is  enough  to  know  the  coeffi- 
cients of  exchange  from  one  centre  to  all  the  others,  to 
deduce  the  rates  for  all  the  centres  from  one  to  the  other. 
On  tins  account  there  only  remains  a  number  of  unknown 
coefficients  expressed  by  r  —  i,  r  being  the  number  of  the 
centres  of  exchange. 

15.  Now  it  is  easy  to  find  as  many  equations  as  there  are 
centres  in  correspondence,  starting  always  from  the  hypothe- 


Digitized  by  Gi 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


33 


sis  that  there  is  no  actual  transportation  of  money  from 
oue  centre  to  another,  and  that  thus  what  one  centre  owes 
to  all  the  others  is,  at  this  first  centre,  of  precisely  the  same 
value  as  what  all  the  uthers  owe  to  it. 

1^  rom  this  consideration  the  following  equations  are  ob- 
tained: 


(^) 


"I"  ^^r.  2^r,  2> 


These  equations  are  in  number  r,  while,  by  what  has  just 
been  said,  all  the  unknown  coefficients  can  be  expressed  in 
functions  of  the  coefficients  2,  ^1, 3,  •  •  •  ^1.  r>  which  are  only 
I  in  number.  It  must  therefore  be  that  one  of  the 
above  equations  is  involved  in  the  others;  and,  in  fact,  if 
we  put 

I  I  I 


if) 


^3,2  —  ^3,1  X  ^j^i 


by  (^)c)>,;K 


Dig'itized  by  \jOc)^;ic 


(,'0 


34  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

« 

the  equations  (b)  become : 

^  J 
(Wr,i  +  w,,,  4- ...  +  m,^,        =  «i.r  +  »'2,Vi,i  + 

Adding  all  these  equations  together  except  the  first,  and 
eliminating  from  each  member  the  terms  which  cancel,  we 
obtain  again  the  first  equation.  Thus  there  are  only  just  as 
many  distinct  equations  as  there  are  independent  variables. 

Where  only  three  centres  are  considered,  the  equations 
{ii)  would  become 

{nu  ,  +  ;;/,,  ,) ^-2.1  =  Wi,2  +  W3.2^3.ii 

From  this  can  be  obtained : 


„  ^2, 1  ^1.  3  "H  ^1,  2  ^1  3  ^7^1?  ^''^J 

and  consequently 

_  ^1.1^1,8  ~H  >Wi,a^3 

^8,1^1,2  +  ^\,t^^%  +  ^I.S^'S.S 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


35 


The  (Composition  of  the  values  of  ^Tj. i>  ^x\>  ^^id  c^^^^  in  this 
particular  case,  shows  clearly  enough  how  the  ratio  of  «f|^2  to 
1  can  vary  considerably,  without  causing  great  variations 
in  the  value  of  ,  ;  or,  in  other  words,  how  the  interconnec- 
tion of  centres  of  exchange  diminishes  the  variations  in  the 
rate  of  exchange  from  one  place  to  another. 

1 6.  The  preceding  analysis  assumes  that  the  value  of 
each  coefficient,  such  as  ^2.  i  >  does  not  fail  below  a  certain 
limit  ys,],  which  depends  on  the  cost  of  actual  transportation 
of  the  monetary  unit  from  the  cenirc  (  2)  to  the  centre  (i), 
includmg  the  premuim  for  smugghng  if  the  laws  interfere 
with  exportation  of  the  precious  metals.  Thus  if  A,  1  indi- 
cates this  cost  of  transportation,  the  superior  hmit  of  c^^  2 
will  be 

and  for  the  inferior  luuiL  of    i  we  shall  have 

If  on  the  other  hand  the  equations  (r)  and  (d)  give 

it  will  be  concluded  that  the  hypothesis  which  excludes 
actual  transportation  of  money  from  the  centre  (3)  to  the 
centre  (i)  is  inadmissible,  and  that  consequently  the  two 

first  equations  (r/), 

{mi^  1  +       +    -l-»»j,f     1  =^1, 2  +  ^'jr,     1+ -f-  w,,  8^:,,  1, 

cease  to  liold  true,  since  they  express  that  the  centres  (i) 
and  (3)  balance  their  debits  and  credits  by  the  compensa* 


Digitized  by 


36 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


tion  of  exchange  alone,  without  either  exportation  or  im- 
portation of  money.  It  will  be  necessary  to  replace  the 
unknown  quantity  c^x  by  the  constant  ys,i  in  the  other 
equations  (^)  ;  and  as  these  equations  number  r  —  2,  they 
will  be  just  enough  to  determine  the  r  —  2  remaining 
unknown  quantities,  />.  ^3.  n  ^4, 1  *  •  *  ^r,  1  • 

Reverting  to  the  meaning  of  the  first  two  equations  of 
{h),  which  cease  to  be  true  under  the  present  hypothesis, 
it  IS  evident  that  the  net  sum  imported  at  the  centre  (i), 
after  deducting  the  cost  of  transportation^  will  be 

and  that  the  sum  exported  from  the  centre  (2),  including 
the  cost  of  transportation,  is  expressed  by 

=  ^1  +  ^».a+ 
Furthermore,  we  will  have 

since  the  difference  between  E  and  /  arises  only  from  the 

cost  of  transportation  from  (2)  to  (i).  This  equation  of 
condition  must  therefore  reduce  to  an  identity  by  means  of 
the  values  of  r^,  i, ...  1,  derived  from  the  equations  {d) 
after  substituting  for  ^2,1  its  real  value  of  y^  y.  If,  now,  we 
add  the  equations  {d)  except  the  hrst  two,  which  are  no 
longer  true  in  this  case,  and  if  we  cross  out  the  terms  which 
cancel,  we  shall  come  to  an  equation  of  condition  precisely 
identical  with  equation  (tf). 


Digitized  by  Gi 


OP  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  37 


17.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  relation 

continues  to  hold  even  when  the  coefficients  c  attain  their 
limits  y  in  consequence  of  actual  transportation  of  specie 
from  one  place  to  the  other.   The  former  argument  for  this 

equaiiuii  is  as  apphcable  to  the  present  case.    If  we  have, 
for  instance, 

any  one  wishing  to  send  funds  from  (k)  to  (1),  instead  of 
paying  the  actual  cost  of  this  transportation,  would  get  a 

draft  at  {k)  on  (/),  and  with  the  proceeds  of  the  draft 
would  have  specie  shipped  from  (/)  to  (1 ) .  If,  on  the  other 
hand, 

y,,*<y..iX<:i,jk, 
the  deduction  would  be 

• 

and  any  one  having  funds  to  send  from  (/)  to  (/)  would  get 
a  draft  at  (/ )  on  {k)  and  ship  the  proceeds  to  (1 ).  In  con- 
sequence, even  if  we  suppose  the  ratio 

y^*  =  y*,iXir^ji 

to  be  temporarily  disturbed,  banking  operations  constantly 
tend  to  reestablish  it. 

A  singular  consequence  of  this,  and  nevertheless  a  very  ^ 
strict  one,  at  least  in  theory,  is,  that  if  three  banking  centres 
are  considered,  (/),  (X'),  and  (/),  there  will  always  be  at  , 
least  two  between  which  there  will  be  no  direct  shipments 


Digitized  by  Google 


38  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

of  specie,  or  between  which  exchange  will  be  effected  by 

simple  shifting  of  values,  without  actual  transportation  of 
rnoney  and  without  the  rate  of  exchange  touching  the  limit 
which  it  would  reach  if  the  rate  were  fixed  by  the  actual 
cost  of  transportation  from  one  of  these  centres  to  the  other. 
In  fact,  if  there  could  be  an  actual  transportation  of  specie 
from  (/)  to  {k),  from  {i)  to  (/),  and  from  {k)  to  (/),  as  the 
causes  which  fix  the  cost  of  actual  transportation  from  (/)  to 
(k)  are  independent  of  those  which  fix  the  cost  between  (/ ) 
and  (/),  and  as  neither  depend  in  any  way  on  those  which 
fix  the  price  between  {k)  and  (/),  it  would  be  infinitely 
improbable,  or  physically  impossible,  that  the  coefiRcients  y,,^, 
yi^t,  and  y^,*  should  exactly  satisfy  the  equation  of  condition 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  principle  is  not  one  of  rigorous 
application  in  practice,  for  the  rate  of  exchange  is  not  fixed 
with  mathematical  accuracy,  and  there  may  be  also  special 
reasons  for  coin  shipments  when  the  cost  of  transportation 
does  not  too  far  exceed  the  loss  in  buying  exchange.  In 
this  question,  as  in  all  which  arise  under  the  theory  of 
wealth,  the  principles  deduced  from  theory  are  of  general 
applicability,  but  must  not  be  rigorously  applied  to  each 
individual  case. 

i8.  What  has  just  been  said  of  three  centres  of  exchange 
is  equally  true  of  any  number  of  centres.  If  this  number 
is  designated  by  r,  the  number  of  coefficients  of  exchange 
will  be  r(r—  i),  but  by  virtue  of  the  equations  (c)  it  is 
enough  to  know  r  —  i  of  these  coefficients  to  determine 
all  the  others.    Supposing,  then,  that  r  —  i  coethcicats, 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE   THEORY  OF  WEALTH  39 


such  as  ^(^4,  reach  their  [lowerj  hmiting  values  as  y^^j^,  be- 
cause there  is  an  actual  movement  of  specie  between  the 
centres,  as  between  (  / )  and  {k) ;  the  inverse  coefficients^ 
such  as  ^i^^  reach  their  [upper]  limiting  values; 
but  there  will  be         i)  —  2  (r—  i)  =  (r—  2)  co- 

efficients, such  as  which  will  not  reach  their  limiting 
values;  so  that  the  equalization  of  credits  between  the 
centres  (k)  and  (/)  will  take  place  by  banking  transfers, 
without  actual  transportation  of  coin. 

In  other  words,  by  the  present  hypothesis,  all  the  centres 
which  form  a  part  of  the  system  will  import  or  export 
money,  but  there  will  not  be  import  or  export  between  every 
pair  of  centres.    Of  the  total  number  of  combinations 

between  the  centres,  there  will  be  r  —  i  which 

2 

will  correspond  to  actual  transportation  of  specie,  and 
^^^'^       which  will  correspond  to  simple  banking 
transfers. 

Moreover,  this  must  necessarily  be  so  ;  for  otherwise  the 
amounts  which  must  flow  annually  from  one  place  to  the 
other  would  be  indeterminate  \  which  cannot  be  accepted 
as  true.  And,  in  fart,  if  we  extend  to  any  number  of 
places  the  reasoning  which  we  have  employed  above  to 
determine  the  amount  imported  and  exported  when  there  is 
actual  transportation  of  specie  between  two  places  only,  it 
will  be  recognized  that,  to  determine  the  total  of  each 
import  or  export,  there  cannot  be  more  than  r  equations, 
which  are  easily  deduced  from  the  equations  {b^  or  (//), 
and  which  even  reduce  to  r  —  i  distinct  equations.  The 
number  of  quantities  to  be  determined,  therefore,  is  also 


Digitized  by  Google 


40 


IHE  MATHEMATICAL  PRIXCIPLES 


reduced  to  r— i,  and  consequently  there  can  only  be 
between  the  centres  r  —  i  combinations  which  correspond 
to  real  movements  of  specie. 

But  if  it  could  be  admitted  that  for  a  particular  case 

as  this  equation  would  mean  that  it  costs  exactly  as  much  to 
transport  a  sum  of  money  from  {k)  to  (t)  as  to  send  it  first 

from  (>^)  to  (/)  and  then  from  (/)  to  (/),  there  would  then  be 
no  method,  according  to  the  data,  to  determine  completely 
what  would  be  the  sums  transported  from  one  of  these  places 
to  the  other,  and  also,  in  this  case,  there  would  be  more 
unknown  quantities  than  equations.  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  all  the  results  of  this  analysis  are  intimately  connected. 

19.  All  commercial  nations  employ  simultaneously  gold 
and  silver  as  monetary  metals,*  and  hence  arise  certain  rela- 
tions between  the  course  of  exchange  and  the  comparative 
prices  of  gold  and  silver  in  different  commercial  centres. 
As  before,  let  us  call  c^^^  the  coefficient  of  exchange  from 

-  The  Russian  government  has  struck  some  platinum  coins;  but,  as 
Babbage  very  well  observes  in  his  book  on  manuliM:turing  industry,  plati- 
num so  feu-  lacks  one  of  the  essential  qualities  of  a  money  metal :  an  ingot 
of  platinum  is  worth  much  more  in  a  single  mass  then  when  cut  up,  on 
account  of  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  all  processes  for  obtaining  platinum 
in  large  masses.  As  foreign  coins  have  only  the  value  of  the  precious  metal 
contained  in  them,  it  follows  that  in  foreign  parts  platinum  money  would 
t>e  worth  much  less  than  the  ingots  used  in  making  it.  For  a  like  reason 
subsidiary  coinage  is  worth  less  in  foreign  parts  than  the  silver  contained  la 
it  was  worth  in  ingots,  on  account  of  the  expense  necessary  for  purifying 
the  metal  for  conversion  into  ingots.  Consequently  any  government  would 
be  unwise  to  make  subsidiary  coinage  beyond  the  requirements  for  small 
change  in  its  own  jurisdiction. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


41 


the  centre  (/)  to  the  centre  {Jt)y  or  the  amount  of  silver 
given  at  (k)  in  exchange  for  a  weight  of  silver  expressed 
by  and  payable  at  (i) ;  let  as  also  designate  by  pi  the 
ratio  of  the  price  of  gold  to  the  price  of  silver  at  (/) ,  or 
the  number  of  grams  of  silver  given  at  (/)  for  one  gram 
of  gold,  and  by  the  ratio  of  the  price  of  gold  to  the 
price  of  silver  at  {k) .  Let  us  also  suppose  that  if  an  amount 
h  in  gold  coin  is  transported  from  (/)  to  {k)^  this  sum 
will  be  reduced  to  ti^^h^  after  subtracting  the  cost  of  actual 
transportation  and  the  cost  of  smuggling,  in  case  prohibi- 
tory laws  embarrass  the  export  of  gold  from  (i)  to  {k). 

With  a  weight  of  gold  expressed  by  a  weight  of 
silver  can  be  bought  at  (/)  expressed  by  p^,  and  payable 
at  the  same  place  \  with  this  same  weight  of  silver,  or  with 
the  equivalent  weight  of  gold,  a  weight  of  silver  can  be 
bought  expressed  by  p,r,.  ^  h,  and  payable  at  {k) .  But  the 
weight  of  gold  expressed  by  /e,  if  it  were  actually  trans- 
ported to  the  centre  (k)y  would  be  reduced  to  f^,j|^,  after 
subtracting  the  cost  of  transportation,  and  would  buy  at 
this  latter  place  a  weight  of  silver  expressed  by  p^c.^^^ ; 
hence  actual  transportation  will  take  place  if  we  have 

As  long  as  this  inequality  holds,  there  will  be  a  flow  of 

gold  from  (0  to  {k)  ;  as  gold  becomes  scarcer  at  (/),  it 
will  be  more  sought  after ;  the  ratio  of  the  value  of  gold  to 
Stiver  will  rise  at  (i),  and,  for  the  same  reason,  this  ratio 
wiU  &11  at  (K)  until  we  reach 

-  =  or  <— • 
Pi 


Digitized  by  Google 


42  THE  MATHEMATICAL  rKIXCIPLLS 

Repetiiion  of  the  same  argument,  or  mere  permutation  of 
the  subscript  letters,  shows  that  alter  equiUbrium  is  estab- 
lished we  must  have 

pi  ^^*,< 
—  =  or  <  —  : 

Ph 

that  is  to  say, 

5===  or  >^i,*X€j|,„ 
on  account  of  the  ratio 


moreover,  the  determination  of  the  number  follows 
by  permutation  of  subscripts  from  that  of  the  number  c,  ^. 

The  more  the  values  c^,*,      approach  to  unity,  the  nar- 
rower the  limits  between  which  is  restricted  the  value  of  the 

coefficient       when  the  ratio  ^  is  given,  or  reciprocally 

the  value  of  the  ratio  l?,  when  the  coefficient  of  exchange 

Pi 

0,  *  is  given.  If  these  numbers  differ  only  slightly  from  unity, 

as  will  ordinarily  be  the  case,  on  account  of  the  ease  of 

exporting  gold  at  slight  expense,  and  of  eluding,  if  necessary, 

Pk 

prohibitory  laws,  we  shall  practically  have  —  s=  r,,  ^ . 

In  this  case  the  price  of  gold  at  one  centre  and  the 
coefficients  of  exchange  are  data  enough  to  deduce  the 
value  of  gold  at  all  the  other  centres  with  which  the  first 
I  has  banking  relations.   It  Is  vain  for  governments  in  insti- 
tuting their  monetary  bj  stem  to  fix  a  legal  ratio  for  the 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


43 


value  of  gold  and  that  of  silver  (as  in  France,  where  the 
law  assigns  to  this  ratio  the  value  15.5)  ;  if  the  value  of  gold, 
resulting  from  the  conditionii  given  above,  is  greater,  gold 
will  command  a  premium  with  dealers  in  exchange,  and  will 
thus  recover  its  true  commercial  value. 

No  change  would  be  caused  in  the  foregoing  argument 
by  the  supposition  that  the  coefficient  of  exchange  r^,^ 
reaches  its  limiting  value,  which  value  has  been  termed 
previously  y.-j^. 

The  cost  of  coinage  and  the  seigniorage  which  most  gov- 
ernments charge  for  the  making  of  coin  raises  the  price  of 
a  gram  of  silver  or  a  gram  of  gold  coined  above  the  price 
of  a  gram  of  silver  or  gold  uncoined  or  in  ingots  throughout 
the  national  domain. 

This  added  value  disappears  whenever  the  coin  goes 
abroad,  where  it  is  only  valued  for  its  fineness  and  weight ; 
it  is  as  if  the  cost  of  transportation  were  increased  by  the 
amount  of  this  loss  which  exportation  causes  for  the  money 
of  any  nation,  and  by  this  means  it  can  be  considered  with- 
out modifying  the  preceding  analysis. 

Coinage  gives  to  copper  pieces  a  value  far  above  the 
intrinsic  value  of  the  metal.  For  this  reason  copper  pieces 
are  not  exported,  and  constitute  a  conventional  coinage 
which  only  circulates  in  its  national  domain. 

The  wear  of  coin,  or  the  loss  of  weight  which  coins  suf- 
fer by  long  use,  is  another  consideration  which  influences 
banking  operations.  For  these  technical  details  the  works 
may  be  consulted  of  those  authors  who  have  gone  into 
the  question  in  detail,  and  particularly  the  treatise  of 
Smith. 


Digitized  by 


44  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


CHAFIER  IV 

OF  THE   LAW  OF  DKiMAND 

20.  To  lay  the  foundations  of  the  theory  of  exchangeable 
values,  we  shall  not  accompan\  most  speculative  writers 
back  to  the  cradle  of  the  human  race  ;  we  shall  uiulcrtake 
to  explain  neither  the  origin  of  property  nor  that  of  exchange 
or  division  of  labour.  All  this  doubdess  belongs  to  the  his- 
tory of  mankind,  but  it  has  no  intlucnce  on  a  theory  which 
could  only  become  applicable  at  a  very  advanced  state  of 
civilization,  at  a  period  when  (to  use  the  language  of  mathe- 
maticians) the  influence  of  the  imiuil  conditions  is  entirely 
gone. 

We  shall  invoke  but  a  single  axiom,  or,  if  you  prefer, 

make  but  a  single  hyputhesis,  i.e.  that  each  one  seeks  to 
derive  the  greatest  possible  value  from  his  goods  or  his 
labour.  But  to  deduce  the  rational  consequences  of  this 
principle,  we  shall  endeavour  to  establish  better  than  has 
been  the  case  the  elements  of  the  data  which  observation 
alone  can  furnish.  Unfortunately,  this  fundamental  point  is 
one  which  theorists,  almost  with  one  accord,  have  presented 
to  US|  we  Will  not  say  f^sely,  but  in  a  manner  which  is 
really  meaningless. 

It  has  been  said  almost  unanimuusl)  that  the  price  of 
goods  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  quantity  offered,  and  in 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


45 


the  direct  ratio  of  the  quantity  demanded."   It  has  never 

been  considered  that  the  statistics  necessary  for  accurate 
numerical  estimation  might  be  lacking,  whether  of  the 
quantity  offered  or  of  the  quantity  demanded,  and  that  this 
might  preveiu  deducing  from  this  principle  general  conse- 
quences capable  of  useful  application.  But  wherein  does 
the  principle  ilself  consist?  Does  it  mean  that  in  case  a 
double  quantity  of  any  article  is  offered  for  sale,  the  price 
will  fall  one-half?  Then  it  should  be  more  simply  expressed, 
and  it  should  only  be  said  that  the  price  is  in  the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  quariliL)  offered.  Hut  ilic  principle  thub  made 
intelligible  would  be  false  \  for,  in  general,  that  loo  units  of 
an  article  have  been  sold  at  20  francs  is  no  reason  that  200 
units  would  sell  at  10  francs  in  the  same  lapse  of  time  arad 
under  the  same  circumstances.  Sometimes  less  would  be 
marketed ;  often  much  more. 

Furthermore,  what  is  meant  by  the  quantity  demanded  ? 
Undoubtedly  it  is  not  that  which  is  actually  marketed  at  the 
demand  of  buyers,  for  then  the  generally  absurd  conse- 
quence would  result  from  the  pretended  principle,  that 
the  more  of  an  article  is  marketed  the  dearer  it  is.  If  by 
demand  only  a  vague  desire  of  possession  of  the  article  is 
understood,  without  reference  to  the  limited  price  which 
every  buyer  supposes  in  his  demand,  there  is  scarcely 
an  article  for  which  the  demand  cannot  be  considered 
indefmite  ;  but  if  the  price  is  to  be  considered  at  which 
each  buyer  is  willing  to  buy,  and  the  price  at  which  each 
seller  is  wiUing  to  sell,  what  becomes  of  the  pretended  prin> 
ciple?  It  is  not.  we  repeat,  an  erroneous  proposition — it  is 
a  proposition  devoid  of  meaning.    Consequently  all  those 


Digitized  by 


46  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


who  have  united  to  proclaim  it  have  likewise  united  to  make 

no  use  of  it.    Let  us  try  to  adhere  to  less  sterile  principles. 

The  cheaper  an  article  is^  the  greater  ordinarily  is  the 
demand  for  it.  The  sales  or  the  demand  (for  to  us  these 
»t\vo  words  are  synonymous,  and  we  do  not  see  for  what 
reason  theory  need  take  account  of  any  demand  which 
does  not  result  in  a  sale) — the  sales  or  the  demand  gener- 
ally, we  say,  increases  when  the  price  decreases. 

We  add  the  word  generally  as  a  corrective ;  there  are,  in 
fact,  some  objects  of  whim  and  luxury  which  are  only 
desirable  on  account  of  their  rarity  and  of  the  high  price 
which  is  the  consequence  thereof.  If  any  one  should  suc- 
ceed in  carrying  out  cheaply  the  crystallization  of  carbon, 
and  in  producing  lur  one  franc  the  diamond  which  to-day 
is  worth  a  thousand,  it  would  not  be  astonishing  if  diamonds 
should  cease  to  be  used  in  sets  of  jewellery,  and  should  dis- 
appear  as  articles  of  commerce.  In  this  case  a  great  fail  in 
price  would  almost  annihilate  the  demand.  But  objects  of  this 
nature  play  so  unimportant  a  part  in  social  economy  that  it  is 
not  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  the  restriction  of  which  we  speak. 

The  demand  might  be  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  price ; 
ordinarily  it  increases  or  decreases  in  much  more  rapid 
proportion  —  an  observation  especially  applicable  to  must 
manufactured  products.  On  the  contrary,  at  other  times 
the  variation  of  the  demand  is  less  rapid ;  which  appears 
(a  very  singular  thing)  to  be  equally  applicable  both  to  the 
most  necessary  things  and  to  the  most  superfluous.  The 
price  of  violins  or  of  astronomical  telescopes  might  fall  one- 
half  and  yet  probabl)  ihe  demand  would  not  double;  for 
this  demand  is  fixed  by  the  number  of  those  who  cultivate 


Digitized  by  Go 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


47 


the  art  or  science  to  which  these  instruments  belong;  who 
have  the  disposition  requisite  and  the  leisure  to  cultivate 
them  and  the  means  to  pay  teachers  and  to  meet  the  other 
necessary  expenses,  in  consequence  of  which  the  price  of 
the  instruments  is  only  a  secondary  question.  On  the  con- 
trary, firewood,  which  is  one  of  the  most  useful  articles,  could 
probably  double  in  price,  from  the  progress  of  clearing  land 
<»r  increase  in  population^  long  before  the  annual  consump- 
tkm  of  fuel  would  be  halved ;  as  a  large  number  of  con- 
sumers are  disposed  to  cut  down  other  expenses  rather  than 
get  along  without  firewood. 

21.  Let  us  admit  therefore  that  the  sales  or  the  annual 
demand  D  for  each  article,  a  particular  funclion  F{p)  of 
the  price  p  of  such  article.  To  know  the  form  of  this  func- 
tion would  be  to  know  what  we  call  the  law  of  demand  or  of 
sales.  It  depends  evidently  on  the  kmd  of  utility  of  the 
article,  on  the  nature  of  the  services  it  can  render  or  the 
enjoyments  it  can  procure,  on  the  habits  and  customs  of 
the  people,  on  the  average  wealth,  and  on  the  scale  on 
which  wealth  is  distributed. 

Since  so  many  moral  causes  capable  of  neither  enumera* 
tion  nor  measurement  aiiect  the  law  of  demand,  it  is  plain 
tliat  we  should  no  more  expect  this  law  to  be  expressible 
by  an  algebraic  formula  than  the  law  of  mortality,  and 
all  the  lawb  whose  determination  enters  into  the  field  of 
statistics,  or  what  is  called  social  arithmetic.  Observation 
must  therefore  be  depended  on  for  furnishing  the  means 
oi  drawing  up  between  proper  limits  a  table  ui  the  corre- 
sponding values  of  D  and  p ;  after  which,  by  the  well-known 
methods  of  interpolation  or  by  graphic  processes,  an  empiric 


Digitized  by  Google 


48 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


formula  or  a  curve  can  be  made  to  represent  the  function 
in  question ;  and  the  solution  of  problems  can  be  pushed  as 
far  as  numerical  applications. 

But  even  if  this  object  were  unattainable  (on  account  of  the 
difficulty  of  obtaining  observations  of  sufficient  number  and 
accuracy,  and  also  on  account  of  the  progressive  variations 
which  the  law  of  demand  must  undergo  in  a  country  whidh 
has  not  yet  reached  a  practically  stationary  condition)^  it 
would  be  nevertheless  not  improper  to  introduce  the  un- 
known law  of  demand  into  analytical  combinations,  by  means 
of  an  indeterminate  symbol ;  for  it  is  well  known  that  one 
of  the  most  important  functions  of  analysis  consists  precisely 
in  assigning  determinate  relations  between  quantities  to 
which  numerical  values  and  even  algebraic  forms  are  abso- 
lutely unassignable. 

Unknown  functions  may  none  the  less  possess  properties 
or  general'characteristics  which  are  known  \  as,  for  instance*, 
to  be  indefinitely  increasing  or  decreasing,  or  periodical, 
or  only  real  between  certain  limits.  Nevertheless  such  data, 
however  imperfect  they  may  seem,  by  reason  of  their  very 
generality  and  by  means  of  analytical  symbols,  may  lead 
up  to  relations  equally  general  which  would  have  been 
difficult  to  discover  without  this  help.  Thus  without  know- 
ing the  law  of  decrease  of  ihe  ca])illary  forces,  and  slaruug 
solely  from  the  principle  that  these  forces  are  inappreciable 
at  appreciable  distances,  mathematicians  have  demonstrated 
the  general  laws  of  the  phenomena  of  capillaiiiy,  aud  these 
laws  have  been  confirmed  by  observation. 

On  the  other  hand,  by  showing  what  determinate  rela- 
tions exist  between  unknown  quautiiies,  analysis  reduces 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


49 


these  unknown  quantities  to  the  smallest  possible  number, 

and  guides  the  observer  to  the  best  observations  for  dis- 
covering their  values.  It  reduces  and  coordinates  statistical 
documents ;  and  it  diminishes  the  labour  of  statisticians  at 
the  same  tinae  that  it  throws  Hght  on  them. 

For  instance,  it  is  impossible  a  priori  to  assign  an  alge- 
braic form  to  the  law  of  mortality ;  it  is  equally  impossible 
to  formulate  the  function  expressing  the  subdivision  of 
population  by  ages  in  a  stationary  population ;  but  these  ? 
two  functions  are  connected  by  so  simple  a  relation,  that,  ^ 
as  soon  as  statistics  have  permitted  the  construction  of  a  ' 
table  (A  mortality,  it  will  be  possible,  without  recourse  to 
new  observations,  to  deduce  from  this  table  one  expressing 
the  proportion  of  the  various  ages  in  the  midst  of  a  station- 
ary population,  or  even  of  a  population  for  which  the  annual 
excess  of  deaths  over  births  is  known.* 

Who  doubts  that  in  the  field  of  social  economy  there  is 
a  mass  of  figures  thus  mutually  connected  by  assignable 
relations,  by  means  of  which  the  easiest  to  determine  empiri- 
cally might  be  chosen,  so  as  to  deduce  all  the  others  from  it 
by  means  of  theory  ? 

22.  We  will  assume  that  the  function  which  ex- 

presses the  law  of  demand  or  of  the  market,  is  a  continuous 
function,  i.e.  a  function  which  does  not  pass  suddenly  from 
one  value  to  another,  but  which  takes  in  passing  all  inter- 

•  The  Annuairf  du  lUit  tum  de.s  l  ongitudes  contains  these  tu  o  tables,  the 
second  deduced  tioiu  the  first,  as  above,  and  calculated  on  the  hypothesis 
of  a  stationary  population. 

riie  work  bv  Duvillard,  entitled  De  1' htjluence  df  la  petite  v^role  sur 
la  mortality,  contains  many  good  examples  of  mathematical  connections 
between  eftsentialiy  empirical  functions. 
E 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


THE  MATIIEMATiCAL  FKINCIPLES 


mediate  values.    It  might  be  otherwise  if  the  number  of 
consumers  were  very  limited :  thus  in  a  certain  household 
the  same  quantity  of  firewood  will  possibly  be  used  whether 
wood  costs  io  francs  or  15  francs  the  stere,*  and  the 
consumption  may  suddenly  be  diminished  if  the  price 
of  the  stere  rises  above  the  latter  figure.   But  the  wider 
the  market  exieucls,  and  the  more  the  combinations  of 
needs,  of  fortunes,  or  even  of  caprices,  are  varied  among 
consumers,  the  closer  the  function  F{p)  will  come  to  vary- 
ing with  /  in  a  continuous  manner.    However  little  may  be 
the  variation  of    there  will  be  some  consumers  so  placed 
that  the  slight  rise  or  fall  of  the  article  will  affect  their  con- 
sumptions, and  will  lead  them  to  deprive  themselves  in  some 
way  or  to  reduce  their  manufacturing  output,  or  to  substitute 
something  else  for  the  article  that  has  grown  dearer,  as,  for 
instance,  coal  for  wood  or  anthracite  for  soft  coal.  Thus  tlie 
exchange "  is  a  thermometer  which  shows  by  very  slight 
variations  of  rates  the  fleeting  variations  in  the  estimate 
of  the  chances  which  affect  government  bonds,  variations 
which  are  not  a  sufficient  motive  for  buying  or  selling  to 
most  of  those  who  have  their  fortunes  invested  in  such  bonds. 

If  the  function  Fi^p)  is  continuous,  it  will  have  the  prop- 
erty common  to  all  fimctions  of  this  nature,  and  on  which 
so  many  important  applications  of  mathematical  analysis  are 
based :  the  variations  of  the  demand  loill  be  sensibly  propor- 
tional to  the  variations  in  price  so  iong  as  ^ese  last  are 
small  fictions  of  the  original  price.  Moreover,  these  varia- 
tions will  be  of  opposite  signs,  i.e.  an  increase  in  price  will 
correspond  with  a  diminution  of  the  demand. 

[•  X  stere  =  i      =^  35.3  cu.  ft.  ^  {'t  cord.  —  TkaNSLATOR.J 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE   THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


51 


vSuppose  that  in  a  country  like  France  the  consumption 
of  sugar  is  lOO  million  kilograms  when  the  price  is  2 
francs  a  kilogram,  and  that  it  has  been  observed  to 
drop  to  99  millions  when  the  price  reached  2  francs  10 
centimes.  Without  considerable  error,  the  consumption 
which  would  correspond  to  a  price  of  2  francs  20  centimes 
can  be  valued  at  98  millions,  and  the  consumption  corre- 
sponding to  a  price  of  i  franc  90  centimes  at  loi  millions. 
It  is  plain  how  much  this  principle,  which  is  only  the  math- 
ematical consequence  of  the  continuity  of  functions,  can 
faciUtate  applications  of  theory,  either  by  simplifying  ana* 
lytlcal  expressions  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  movement 
ui  values,  or  in  reducing  the  number  of  data  to  be  borrowed 
irom  experience,  if  the  theory  becomes  sufficiently  developed 
to  lend  itself  to  numerical  determinations. 

Let  us  not  forget  that,  strictly  speaking,  the  principle  just 
enunciated  admits  of  exceptions,  because  a  continuous  func- 
tion may  have  interruptions  of  continuity  in  some  points  of 
its  course  ;  but  just  as  friction  wears  down  roughnesses  and 
softens  outlines,  so  the  wear  of  commerce  tends  to  suppress  ' 
these  exceptional  cases,  at  the  same  time  that  commercial 
*  machine  r\  moderates  vai  uuions  in  prices  and  tends  to  main- 
tain them  between  limits  which  facilitate  the  application  of 
theory. 

23.  To  define  with  accuracy  the  quantity  D,  or  the  func- 
tion which  is  the  expression  of  it,  we  have  supposed 
that  D  represented  the  quantity  sold  annuaUy  throughout 
the  extent  of  the  country  or  of  the  market  ♦  under  consider- 

*  It  is  well  known  that  by  markii  economists  mean,  not  a  certam  place 
where  puichaset  and  sales  are  carried  on,  but  the  entire  territory  of  whieh 


Digitized  by  Google 


52  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

ation.  In  fact,  the  year  is  the  natural  unit  of  time,  espe- 
cially for  researches  having  any  connection  with  social 
economy.  All  the  wants  of  mankind  are  reproduced 
during  this  term,  and  all  the  resources  which  mankind 
obtains  from  nature  and  by  labour.  Nevertheless,  the  price 
of  an  article  may  vary  notably  in  the  course  of  a  year^  and, 
strictly  speaking,  the  law  of  demand  may  also  vary  in  the 
same  interval,  if  the  country  experiences  a  movement  of 
progress  or  decadence.  For  greater  accuracy,  therefore,  in  ' 
the  expression  F{p), p  must  be  held  to  denote  the  annual 
average  price,  and  the  curve  which  represents  function  F  to 
be  in  itself  an  average  of  all  the  curves  which  would  repre- 
sent this  function  at  different  times  of  the  year.  But  this 
extreme  accuracy  is  only  necessary  in  case  it  is  proposed  to 
go  on  to  numerical  applications,  and  it  is  superfluous  for 
researches  which  only  seek  to  obtain  a  general  expression 
of  average  results,  independent  of  periodical  oscillations. 

24.  Since  the  function  is  continuous,  the  (unction 
pF{p)f  which  expresses  the  total  value  of  the  quantity 
annually  sold,  must  be  continuous  also.  This  function  would 
equal  zero  if  /  equals  zero,  since  the  consumption  of  any 
article  remains  finite  even  on  the  h}  pothesis  that  it  is  abso- 
lutely free  ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  theoretically  always 
possible  to  assign  to  the  symbol  /  a  value  so  small  that  the 
product  pF(p)  will*  vary  imperceptibly  from  zero.  The 
function  //^(  /*)  disappears  also  when  p  becomes  infinite,  or, 
m  other  words,  theoretically  a  value  can  always  be  assigned 
to  /  so  great  that  the  demand  for  the  article  and  the  pro- 

the  parts  m  so  united  by  the  relations  of  unrestricted  commerce  that  prices 
there  take  the  same  level  throughout,  with  ease  and  rapidi^. 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  53 

duction  of  it  would  cease.  Since  the  function  pF(p)  at  first 
increases^  and  then  decreases  as  p  increases,  there  is  there- 
fore a  value  of  /  which  makes  this  function  a  maximum,  and 
which  is  given  by  the  equation^ 

.(1)  H/>)-tpF(p}^o^  '  T  i 

in  which  F't  according  to  Lagrange's  notation,  denotes  the 
difTerential  coefficient  of  function  F. 

If  we  lay  out  the  curve  and  (Fig.  i ),  ui  which  the  abscissas 
aq  and  the  ordinates  gn  represent  the  variables  /  and  the 
root  of  equation  ( i )  will  be  the  abscissa  of  the  point  n  from 
which  the  triangle  formed  by  the  tangent  ///  and  the 
radius  vector  on^  is  isosceles^  so  that  we  have  oq  =  qt 

We  may  admit  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  (unc- 
tion F{p)  empirically  for  each  article,  but  it  is  by  no  means 
the  case  that  the  same  obstacles  prevent  the  approximate 
determination  of  the  value  of  p  which  satisfies  equation  (i) 
or  which  renders  the  product  pF{p)  a  maximum.  The 
construction  of  a  table,  where  these  values  could  be  found, 
would  be  the  work  best  calculated  for  preparing  for  the 
practical  and  rigorous  solution  of  questions  relating  to  the 
theory  of  wealth. 

But  even  if  it  were  impossible  to  obtain  from  statistics 
the  vahie  of  /  which  should  render  the  product  //'(/)  a 
maximum,  it  would  be  easy  to  learn,  at  least  for  all  articles 
to  which  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  extend  commercial 
statistics,  whether  current  prices  are  above  or  below  this 
value.  Suppose  that  when  the  price  becomes  p  -H  A/,  the 
annual  consumption  as  shown  by  statistics,  such  as  custom- 
house records,  becomeb  JJ  —  ^D,    Accordmg  as 


Digitized  by  Go 


54  ^  THE  MATHEiMATKAL  PR  IN  CULLS 

—  <  or  >— , 

the  increase  in  price.  A/,  will  increase  or  diminish  the  prod- 
uct pF{p)  'y  and,  consequently,  it  will  be  known  whether 
the  two  values  p  and  p \p  (assuming  A/  to  be  a  small 
fraction  oip)  fall  above  or  below  the  value  which  makes  the 
product  under  consideration  a  maximum. 

Commercial  statistics  should  therefore  be  required  to 
separate  articles  of  high  economic  importance  into  two 
categories,  according  as  their  current  prices  are  above  or 
below  the  value  which  makes  a  maximum  of  pF{p).  We 
shall  see  that  many  economic  problems  have  difterent  solu- 
tions, according  as  the  article  in  question  belongs  to  one 
or  the  other  of  these  two  categories. 

25.  We  know  by  the  theory  of  maxima  and  mmima  that 
equation  (i)  is  satisfied  as  well  by  the  values  of  p  which 
render  pF{p)  a  minimum  as  by  those  which  render  this 
product  a  maximum.  The  argument  used  at  the  beginning 
of  the  preceding  article  shows,  indeed,  that  the  function 
pF{p)  necessarily  has  a  maximum,  but  it  might  have  sev- 
eral and  pass  through  minimum  values  between.  A  root 
of  equation  (i)  corresponds  to  a  maximum  or  a  minimum 
according  as 

2F\p)-^pF\p)<oi>o, 

or,  substituting  for  /  its  value  and  considering  the  essentially 
negative  sign  of  J^(p), 

* 

In  consequence,  whenever  F"{p)  is  negative,  or  when  the 


Digitized  by  C 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


55 


curve  D  =^  Fi^p)  turns  its  concave  side  to  the  axis  of  the 
abscissas,  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  a  tninimum, 

nor  more  than  one  maxiinuiu.  In  the  contrary  case,  the 
existence  of  several  maxima  or  minima  is  ngt  proved  to  be 
impossible. 

But  if  we  cease  considering  the  question  from  an  exclu- 
sively abstract  standpoint,  it  will  be  instantly  recognized 
how  improbable  it  is  that  the  function  pF{p)  should  pass 
through  several  intermediate  maxima  and  minima  inside  of 
the  limits  between  which  the  value  of  /  can  vary ;  and  as  it 
is  unnecessary  to  consider  maxima  which  fall  beyond  these 
limits,  if  any  such  exist,  all  problems  are  the  same  as  if  the 
function  pF{p)  only  admitted  a  single  maximum.  The 
essential  question  is  always  whether,  for  the  extent  of 
the  limits  of  oscillation  of  the  function  pF(p)  is  increas- 
ing or  decreasing  for  increasing  values  of  p. 

Any  demonstration  ought  to  proceed  fcovck  the  simple  to 
the  complex:  the  simplest  hy])othesis  for  the  purpose  of 
investigating  by  what  laws  prices  are  fixed,  is  that  of  mo- 
nopoly, taking  this  word  in  its  most  absolute  meaning,  which 
supposes  thaf  the  production  of  an  article  is  in  one  man's 
hands.  This  hypothesis  is  not  purely  fictitious  ;  it  is  realized 
in  certain  cases ;  and,  moreover,  when  we  have  studied  it, 
we  can  analyze  more  accurately  the  effects  of  competition 
of  producers. 


Digitized  by 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


CHAPTER  V 


OF  MONOPOLY 


26.  For  convenience  in  discussion,  suppose  that  a  man 
finds  himself  proprietor  of  a  mineral  spring  which  has  just 
been  found  to  possess  salutary  properties  possessed  by 
no  other.  He  could  doubtless  fix  the  price  of  9.  Uter  of 
this  water  at  100  francs  ;  but  he  would  soon  see  by  the  scant 
demand,  that  this  is  not  the  way  to  make  the  most  of  his 
property.  He  will  therefore  successively  reduce  the  price  of 
the  liter  to  the  point  which  will  give  him  the  greatest  possi- 
ble profit ;  ue,  if  F{p)  denotes  the  law  of  demand,  he  will 
end,  after  various  trials,  by  adopting  the  value  of  /  which 
renders  the  product  pF{p)  a  maximum,  or  which  is  deter- 
mined by  the  equation 


will  be  the  annual  revenue  of  the  owner  of  the  spring,  and 
this  revenue  will  only  depend  on  the  nature  of  function  F. 

To  make  equation  (i)  applicable,  it  must  be  supposed 
that  for  the  value  of  /  obtained  from  it,  there  will  be  a 
corresponding  value  of  D  which  the  owner  of  the  spring 
can  deliver,  or  which  does  not  exceed  the  annual  flow  of 


The  product 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  IVEALTff 


57 


this  spring  :  otherwise  the  owner  could  not,  without  damage 
to  himself,  reduce  the  price  per  liter  as  low  as  would  be  for 
his  interest  were  the  spring  more  abundant.  If  the  spring 
produces  annually  a  number  of  liters  expressed  by  A,  by 
deducing  /  from  the  relation  F{  />)  =  A,  we  necessarily  obtain 
the  price  per  liter  which  must  finally  be  fixed  by  the  com- 
petition of  customers. 

27,  In  this  simplest  case,  chosen  for  a  type,  the  pro- 
ducer has  no  cost  of  production  to  bear,  or  the  cost  can 
be  considered  insignificant.  Let  us  go  on  to  that  of  a 
man  who  possesses  the  secret  of  a  medical  preparation  or 
an  artificial  ^i^ral  water,  for  which  the  materials  and  labour 
must  be  paid  for.  .It  will  no  longer  be  the  function  pF( /), 
or  the  annual  gross  receipts ^  which  the  producer  should  strive 
to  carry  to  its  maximum  value,  but  the  net  receipts^  or  the 
function  pF(p)  —  <j>(D)y'm  which  <fr(Z>)  denotes  the  cost  of 
making  a  number  of  liters  equal  to  D.  Since  D  is  con- 
nected with  p  by  the  relation  D^^Fip),  the  complex  function 
pFi  p)  —  <t>(D)  can  be  regarded  as  depending  implicitly 
on  the  single  variable  /,  although  generally  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction is  an  explicit  function,  not  of  the  price  of  the  arti- 
cle produced,  but  of  the  quantity  produced.  Consequently 
the  price  to  which  the  producer  should  bring  his  article  will 
be  determined  by  the  equation 

(a)  />^.^^|;>-J^J  =  o. 

This  price  will  fix  in  turn  the  annual  net  receipts  or  the 

revenue  of  the  inventor,  and  the  capital  value  of  his  secret, 
or  his  produc0ve  property^  the  ownership  of  which  is  guar* 


Digitized  by  C 


58 


THR  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


anteed  by  law  and  can  have  commercial  circulation  as  well 
as  that  of  a  piece  of  land  or  any  material  property.  If  this 
value  IS  nil  or  insignificant,  the  owner  ul  the  property  will 
obtain  no  pecuniary  profit  from  it ;  he  will  abandon  it  gratis^ 
or  for  a  very  small  payment,  to  the  first  comer  who  seeks  to 
develop  it.  The  value  of  a  liter  will  only  represent  the  value 
of  the  raw  materials,  the  wages  or  profits  of  the  agents  who 
cooperate  in  making  and  marketing  it,  and  the  interest  on 
the  capital  necessary  for  development. 

a8.  The  terms  of  our  example  prevent  our  admitting  in 
this  case  a  limitation  of  the  productive  forces,  which  would 
hnuler  the  producer  from  lowering  the  price  to  the  rate 
which  would  give  the  maximum  net  receipts,  according  to 
the  law  of  demand.  But  in  a  great  many  other  cases  there 
may  be  such  a  limitation,  and  if  A  expresses  the  limit  which 
the  production  or  the  demand  cannot  exceed,  the  price  will 
be  fixed  by  the  relation  F{p)  ^  A,  as  if  there  were  no  cost  of 
prodiu  tion.  The  cost,  in  this  case,  is  not  l)ornc  by  the  (^(^n- 
sumers  at  all ;  it  only  diminishes  the  income  of  the  producer. 
It  falls  not  exactly  on  the  proprietor  (who,  unless  the  inventor 
or  first  holder,  —  a  question  ot»  original  conditions  with  which 
theory  has  nothing  to  do, — acquired  the  property,  himself  or 
through  his  agents,  for  a  vahie  proportioned  to  its  revenue), 
but  on  the  property  itself.  A  decrease  of  this  cost  will  onlv 
be  to  the  advantage  of  the  producer,  so  far  as  it  does  not 
result  in  the  possibility  of  increasing  his  producing  power. 

29.  Let  us  return  to  the  case  where  this  possibility  exists, 
and  where  the  price  /  is  determined  according  to  equa- 
tion (3),    We  shall  observe  that  the  coeliicieai 

dD 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  59 


though  it  may  increase  or  decrease  as  D  increases, 
must  be  supposed  to  be  positive,  for  it  would  be  absurd 
that  the  absolute  expense  of  production  should  decrease  as 
production  increases.    We  shall  call  attention  also  to  the 

fact  that  necessarily  being  the  in- 

crease of  production,  ^[^(^)]  is  the  increase  in  the  cost, 
pdD  is  the  increase  of  the  gross  receipts,  and  whatever  may 

be  the  abundance  of  the  source  of  production,  the  producer 

will  always  stop  when  the  increase  in  expense  exceeds  the 

increase  in  receipts.  This  is  also  abundantly  evident  from 

the  form  of  equation  (2),  since  D  is  always  a  positive  quan- 
dD 

tity,  and  —  a  negative  quantity. 
dp 

In  the  course  of  our  investigations  we  shall  seldom  have 

occasion  to  consider  directly,  but  only  its  differential 

coefficient  which  we  will  denote  by         .  This 

differential  coeihcient  is  a  new  function  of  />,  the  form  of 
which  exerts  very  great  influence  on  the  principal  problems 
of  economic  science. 

The  function  ^\D)  is  capable  of  increasing  or  decreas- 
ing as  D  increases,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  producing 
forces  and  of  the  articles  produced. 

For  what  are  properly  called  manufactured  articles^  it  is 

♦ 

generally  the  case  that  the  cost  becomes  proportionally  less 
as  production  uicreases,  or,  in  other  words,  when  D  increases 
41  {D)  is  a  decreasing  function.  This  comes  from  better 
organization  of  the  work,  from  discounts  on  the  price  of 
raw  materials  for  large  purchases,  and  finally  from  the 
reduction  of  what  is  known  to  producers  as  general  expense* 


Digitized  ^  Go()^;;I(j 


60  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


It  may  happen,  huwcver,  even  in  exploiting  products  of  this 
nature^  that  when  the  exploitation  is  carried  beyond  certain 
limits,  it  induces  higher  prices  for  raw  materials  and  labour, 
to  the  point  where  <\>\D)  again  begins  to  increase  with  D, 
Whenever  it  is  a  question  of  working  agricultural  lands, 
of  mines,  or  of  quarries,  i^,  of  what  is  essentially  real 
estate,  the  function  <t>'{Z>)  increases  with  D ;  and,  as  we 
shall  soon  see,  it  is  in  consequence  of  this  fact  alone  that 
farms,  mines,  and  quarries  yield  a  net  revenue  to  their 
owners,  long  beiure  all  has  been  extracted  Iroiii  tlie  soil 
which  it  is  physically  able  to  produce,  and  notwithstand- 
ing the  great  subdivision  of  these  properties,  which  causes 

bfctwt^tn  producers  a  competition  which  can  be  considered 
as  unlimited.  On  the  contrary,  investments  made  under 
the  condition  that  as  />  increases  ^'(/^)  decreases, 
can  only  yield  a  net  income  or  a  r^nt  in  the  case  of  a 
monopoly  properly  so-called,  or  of  a  competition  suffi- 
ciently limited  to  allow  the  effects  of  a  monopoly  collec- 
tively maintained  to  be  still  perceptible. 

30.  Between  the  two  csL^tt>  wiiere  the  function  4*'il^)  is 
increasing  and  decreasing,  there  &Us  naturally  the  one  where 
this  function  reduces  to  a  constant,  the  cost  being  constantly 
proportional  to  the  production,  and  where  equation  ^2)  takes 
the  form 

The  case  must  also  be  pointed  out  where  is  a  con- 
stant, and  ^'(2>)  =  o,  so  that  the  price  is  the  same  as  if 
there  were  no  cost.  I'his  case  occurs  more  frequently  than 
would  be  {inspected  at  first  glance,  especially  where  we  have 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  61 

to  do  witb  production  under  a  monopoly,  and  where  the 

v^alue  of  the  number  D  receives  the  extension  of  which  it 
admits.  For  instance,  in  a  theatrical  enterprise  D  denotes 
the  number  of  tickets  sold,  and  the  cost  of  the  enterprise 
remains  practically  the  same,  without  reference  to  the  num- 
ber of  spectators.  For  the  tolls  of  a  bridge,  which  is  another 
monopolistic  investment,  D  denotes  the  number  of  passen- 
gers ;  and  the  costs  for  repairs,  watching,  and  bookkeeping 
will  be  the  same,  whether  the  crossing  is  much  or  little  used. 
In  such  cases  the  constant  g  disappears,  equation  (2)  be- 
comes the  same  as  equation  (i),  and  the  price /is  deter- 
mined in  the  same  manner  as  if  there  were  no  costs, 

31.  It  seems  a  matter  of  course  that  when  the  cost  of 
production  increases,  the  price  fixed  by  the  monopolist, 
according  to  equation  (^2),  will  increase  hkewise ;  but,  on 
consideration,  it  will  appear  that  so  important  a  proposition 
should  be  supported  by  a  rational  demonstration ;  and  fur- 
thermore, this  demonstration  will  lead  us  to  an  equally 
important  observation,  which  only  mathematics  can  incon- 
testably  establish. 

Let  /o  he  the  root  of  equation  (2 ;  which  we  will  put  in 
the  form 

(3)  +  -«A(/)]=o, 

as  can  be  more  simply  replaced  by  ^(/); 

and  suppose  that,  as  the  function  «//(/)  varies  by  a  quantity 
V,  and  becomes  ^\^p)  -h  //,  /  becomes  /o  +  S.  If  we  neglect 
the  squares  and  higher  powers  of  the  increments  u  and  8, 
equation  (3)  will  establish  the  following  relation  between 
these  two  increments : 


Digitized  by 


(jI  the  MATUEMA2 ICAL  PRINCIPLES 

(4)        }/^'(/«)[2  -  ^'(A)]  +  ^  V«)[A  -  }S 

-  «-^'(  A)  ==  o ; 

the  coefficient  of  8  in  .this  expression  being  the  derivative 
with  respect  to  /  of  the  first  member  of  equation  (3),  in 
which  derivative  the  value  A  has  been  given  to  /. 

But  this  coefficient  of  8  is  necessarily  negative,  according 
to  the  well-known  theory  of  maxima  and  minima ;  for  if  it 
were  positive,  the  root  A  of  equation  (3)  would  correspond 
to  the  minimum  of  the  function  pF{p)  —  and  not  to 

the  maximum  of  this  function^  as  it  should.  Moreover 
P(p)  is  by  its  nature  a  negative  quantity.  In  general,  there- 
fore, the  increment  ^  is  of  the  same  sign  as  the  incre- 
ment u, 

32.  This  result  has  been  deuionsuated  on  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  variations  h  are  very  small  quantities,  of 
which  the  squares  and  products  can  be  neglected  without 
seiibible  error,  hut  by  a  very  simple  a.iguiuenl  tins  restricdon 
can  be  removed.  In  fact,  whatever  the  increase  of  cost 
denoted  by     it  can  be  supposed  that  the  function  ^(  p) 

jjasses  houi  the  value  to  the  value  by  a 

series  of  very  small  increments,  ivj,  etc.,  ail  ot  the 

same  sign.   At  the  same  time  p  will  pass  from  the  value  p^ 
to  the  value  /o  +  ^  by  a  series  of  corresponding  increments, 
also  very  small,  Si,      ^a*  etc. ;  ^  will  be  (according  to  the 
preceding  paragraph)  of  the  same  sign  as  1^1,  2^  as  etc. 
Therefore, 

=  Si  +    -i-  S3  +  etc.,  ^ 

will  be  of  the  same  sign  as 

«  =    -h  »,  -f-  »a  -f  etc. 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  Of  WEALTH  63 

This  method  of  demonstration  should  be  borne  in  mind^  as 

it  will  be  frequeiuly  recurred  to. 

33.  From  equation  (4)  we  obtain 

8^  ^^\P.)  

u  /^'(A)[2-f(A)]+^"(A)[A-'A(A)] 

and  since  both  terms  of  tlie  fraction  in  the  second  member 
are  negative,  we  conclude  that  8  will  be  numerically  greater 
or  less  than  u  according  as  we  have 

-  ^(A)  ^  -  A)[a  -  f  (A)]  -  A)  [A  -  *(A)  ], 
or,  in  other  words, 

/"(A)  [I  -  ^'(A)]  +  -/^"(A)  [A  -  ^ACA)] ^  o, 

which,  by  replacing  —  i/'(/o)  by  its  value  as  deduced 
from  equation  (3),  becomes 

[^( A)r[i  -  f  (A)] -  ^( A)  X  -^"( A)  $  o.  ■ 

34.  To  make  this  more  obvious  by  numerical  applica- 
tions, let  us  take  a  fictitious  case.  Suppose  that  the  func- 
tion ^\D)  were  at  first  =  o,  and  that  it  subsequently 
reduces  to  a  constant  g.  The  first  value  of  /  or  will  be 
given  by  the  equation 

/^(/)+/^'(/)  =  oj 

the  second  value  of    which  we  will  call     will  be  given  by 

another  equation 

(s)  np)^^P-&)p\P)^^- 

Suppose,  in  the  first  place,  that         =  -       ;  the  values 


Digitized  by  Google 


64  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

of     and  p\  according  to  the  preceding  equations,  will  be 

respectively 


Pfi^yjt,  and  p'^g^y/b  4-^*=i'  + V/o' 

(the  root  of  equation  (5;  which  would  give  a  negative  value 
for  must  necessarily  be  excluded).  In  this  case  we  see 
that  p*  is  greater  than  p^  by  a  quantity  greater  than  g,  Le, 
greater  than  the  amount  of  the  neu  c  ost  imposed  on  the 
production.  If,  for  instance,  the  new  cost  is  one-tenth  of 
the  original  price,  or  M g^^^ p^  we  shall  have  ^'=/b  1.148S ; 
the  increase  in  prire  will  be  very  iiciily  one  and  one-half 
tenths ;  the  old  price  being  20  francs  and  the  cost  2 
francs,  the  new  price  will  be  23  francs,  or,  nkore  exactly, 
22  francs  97  ceiUiUics».* 

Suppose,  in  the  second  place,  wP(/)  =  ^-^  ,  we  shall 
have  /o^'Yj '       equation  (5)  will  become 

or  /-|^/-A*'=o, 

which  by  the  ordinary  method  of  solution  will  give 


In  this  case  the  excess  of    over  A  will  be  less  than  g, 

«  Note  by  the  Translator.— The  figures  given  above  are  as  they 
appear  in  the  original  French,  but  there  was  evidently  a  mistake  in  arith- 
metic made  by  the  author,  who  used  under  the  radical  f^+g  instead  of 
/a' The  figures  should  be p'—ptx  1.1050,  and  the  new  price  22  francs 
and  10  centimes. 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


65 


,  If  ^=^/,),  we  shall  have  /'=:/y  x  1.0505.  Thus  if  the 
new  cost  is  one-tenth  of  the  original  price,  the  increase  in 
price  will  only  be  one-half  of  one-tenth  of  that  price.  The 
old  price  being  20  francs,  and  the  added  cost  2  francs,  the 
new  price  will  be  only  21  francs,  or,  more  exactly,  21  francs 
.01  centime. 

35.  The  result  which  we  have  just  reached  is  well  worth 
attention :  it  shows  us  that,  accordmg  to  the  form  of  the 
function  F{p)y  or  according  to  the  law  of  demand,  an  in- 
crease in  the  cost  of  production  augments  the  price  of  a 
coniniotiiiy,  fur  which  there  exists  a  monopoly,  somelnnes 
much  more  and  sometimes  much  less  than  the  increase  in 
cost;  and  that,  in  the  same  manner,  there  is  no  equality 
between  the  reduction  of  cost  and  fall  in  the  price  of  the 
commodity. 

It  results  from  this,  that  if  the  new  cost  were  not  met  by 

the  producer  himself,  but  by  the  consumer,  or  by  an  inter- 
mediate agent,  who  would  be  reimbursed  by  the  consumer, 
this  increase  in  cost,  which  would  always  make  the  article 
dearer  for  the  consumer,  and  which  would  always  diminish 
the  net  income  of  the  producer,  might,  according  to  cir- 
cumstances, produce  an  advance  or  a  decline  in  the  price 
paid  to  the  ])roducer. 

Reciprocally,  a  fall  in  the  cost  of  transmission^  or  in  that  , 
of  passing  the  commodity  from  the  possession  of  the  pro- 

ducer  to  that  of  the  consumer,  may  ha\e  the  effect  at  one 
time  of  increasing  the  price  paid  to  the  producer,  and  at 
another  time  of  diminishing  it;  but  in  all  cases  it  wOl 
diminish  the  final  price  paid  by  the  consumer,  and  will 
cause  an  increase  in  the  net  income  of  the  producer. 

F 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


All  those  expenses  which  are  incurred  with  a  view  to  pre- 
paring  for  final  consumption  the  crude  commodicy  as  it 

leaves  the  producers'  hands,  must  in  this  respect  be  con- 
sidered in  the  same  hght  as  costs  of  transmission. 

However,  this  calculation  is  only  applicable  in  the  case 
where  the  producer  can  meet  the  demand  which  gives  him 
the  greatest  net  return,  and  reduce  his  price  as  much  as  is 
necessary  to  attain  this  maximum  return.   In  other  cases, 
he  will  produce  all  he  can,  before  as  well  as  after  the  change* 
in  the  cost,  whether  of  production  or  of  transmission,  and 
the  cost  price  to  the  consumer  will  remain  invariable,  be- 
cause in  a  condition  of  equilibrium,  and  on  a  large  scale, 
there  cannot  be  two  different  prices  for  the  same  quantity 
marketed.   The  increase  of  cost,  therefore,  from  whatever 
source,  must  fmally  be  wholly  Luinc  by  the  producer. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


67 


CHAPTER  VI 

OF  THE  INFTJOENCE  OF  TAXATION  ON  COMMODITIES  PRODUCED 

UNDER  A  MONOPOLY 

36.  The  considerations  developed  at  the  close  of  the 
preceding  chapter  are  of  course  applicable  k>  the  theory  of 
taxation.  The  burden  of  taxation  makes  what  might  be 
called  an  artificial  cost,  adjusted  according  to  a  more  or  less 
systematic  plan,  and  of  which  at  least  the  distribution,  if 
not  the  general  rate,  is  within  the  power  of  the  legislator  to 
determine ;  and  consequently  the  theory  of  the  incidence 
of  taxation  is  one  of  the  great  objects  of  investigations  in 
Political  Economy. 

The  forms  of  taxation  may  vary  widely.  At  the  time 
when  public  affairs  were  conducted  in  secret,  it  was  consid- 
ered a  great  art  to  be  able  so  to  diversify  forms  as,  it  was 
thought,  to  increase  the  supplies  to  the  treasury  without 
making  its  exactions  felt.  Later,  according  to  a  half-under- 
stood theory,  it  was  considered  desirable  to  make  taxation 
as  uniform  as  possible ;  but  the  financial  legislation  which 
stands  to-day  in  France  is  equally  removed  from  both  these 
extremes  and  recognizes  forms  of  taxation  essentially  dis- 
tinct, though  quite  hmited  in  number,  which,  from  practi- 
cal rather  than  theoretical  considerations,  it  classes  in  two . 
main  categories  of  direct  and  indirect  taxes.    The  levy 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


68 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


assessed  according  to  the  assumed  net  income  of  a  land- 
owner or  of  a  producer  is  a  direct  tax.  ihe  excise  which 
must  be  paid  on  an  article  before  it  reaches  the  consumer's 
hands  is  an  indirect  ^ax;  and  we  intend  to  consider  only 
these  two  kinds  of  taxation.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind, 
that  in  this  chapter  only  those  articles  are  considered  of 
which  the  production  is  controlled  by  a  mopopoly. 

If  a  tax,  either  fixed  or  proportional  to  his  n^  incgine, 
is  laid  upon  a  moQopoUst  producer,  it  is  plain,  according  to 
explanations  in  the  two  preceding  chapters,  that  this  tax 
will  have  no  direct  influence  on  the  price  of  the  article 
which  he  produces,  and  consequently  none,  on  the  quantijty 
produced,  and  that  it  will  not  be  a  burden  to  the  consumer 
in  "aily^ay.  Its  only  immediate  result  is  to  diminish  the 
income  and  the  capitalized  wealth  of  the  producer. 

Tt  can  even  be  said  that  this  tax  only  injures  first  holders, 
inventors,  and,  in  general,  those  who  were  profiting  by  the 
property  at  the  time  when  the  tax  was  laid,  and  such  of 
their  successors  as  have  obtained  the  property  gratuitously. 
For  successors  who  have  to  pay  regulate  their  purchase 
price  according  to  the  net  returns,  after  deduction  of  the 
tax.  If  the  capitalized  value  is  reduced  while  the  property 
is  in  their  hands,  it  is  a  real  disaster  for  them. 

Even  though  this  tax  does  not  affect  consumers  it  may 
be  nevertheless  very  prejudicial  to  public  interests,  not  prin- 
cipally because,  by  reducing  the  wealth  of  the  producer  so 
taxed,  it  reduces  his  means  as  a  consumer  and  affects  the 
law  of  demand  for  other  articles ;  but  especially  because  the 
part  withdrawn  by  the  tax  from  the  income  of  the  producer 
is  ordinarily  employed  in  a  manner  less  advantageous  for 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  69 

the  increase  of  the  annual  product,  the  national  wealth,  and 
the  comfort  of  the  people,  than  if  it  had  remained  at  the 
disposal  of  the  producer  himself.  We  will  not  consider  here 
the  effects  on  the  distribution  of  the  products  of  nature 
and  of  labour  of  such  a  levy,  although  this  is  undoubtedly 
the  final  object  of  all  problems  connected  with  the  theory 
of  wealth. 

But  it  is  possible  to  say,  in  agreement  with  all  authorities, 
that  even  though  it  does  not  prevent  invested  capital  from 

producing  as  much  as  before  its  taxation,  a  tax  on  the 
income  of  the  producer  is  an  obiiiai^le  to  the  creation  of 
new  investnien^.^d  even  to  the  improvement  of  existing 
ones,  if  a  proportional  tax  is  to  be  considered.  No  one  will 
embark  his  capital  in  new  investments,  nor  m  the  improve- 
ment of  existing  investments,  if  he  can  no  longer  obtain  the 
ordinary  interest  brought  in  l)y  capital  in  enterprises  of  the 
same  kind,  on  account  of  the  tax  imposed  on  the  net  income 
from  his  investment  It  is  by  closing  an  avenue  of  empjgy- 
mcnt  for  labour  and  industry,  that  such  a  tax,  when  exagger- 
ated, has  its  most  disastrous  effect. 

Bounties,  an  invention  of  modem  times,  are  the  opposite 
of  taxes.  To  use  an  algebraic  expression,  they  are  a 
negative  tax,  so  that  the  same  analytical  formnlns  are  appli- 
cable to  taxation  and  bounties.  But  bounties  differ  from 
taxes  in  being  reckoned  on  the  gross  product ;  it  has  never 
been  proposed  to  grant  a  bounty  on  the  net  product,  so 
that  it  is  only  for  the  sake  of  system  that  we  mention  boun- 
ties at  all  here  in  connection  with  taxation  on  income  or 
net  product. 

37*  The  tax  may  and  generally  does  consist  in  a  fixed 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


70  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

f 

charge  levied  on  each  unit  of  a  coniniudity,  or  one  of  which 
the  product  is  proportional  to  Z>.  Its  effects  are  the  same 
as  if  the  function  <^'(Z>)  were  increased  by  a  constant  /. 
An  increase  in  cost  to  the  consumer  must  always  result 
from  it,  and  a  decrease  of  consumption  or  production ;  but, 
according  to  circumstances,  the  increase  of  cost  to  the  con- 
sumer may  be  greater  or  less  than  /.  It  makeb  no  diUerence 
in  the  absolute  effects  of  taxation  to  producer  or  consumers, 
from  whom  the  tax  is  collected,  or  at  what  period  the  reve- 
nue collector  reaches  the  commodity^  only  the  apparent 
effects  will  vary  according  as  the  producer  does  or  does  not 
pay  the  tax  in  advance;  />.  if  he  advances  it,  the  price 
of  the  commodity  as  it  leaves  his  hands  will  always  be  in- 
creased by  taxation;  in  the  opposite  case  this  price  may 
rise  in  some  cases  and  fall  in  others. 

However,  in  saying  that  the  absolute  effects  of  taxation 
are  the  same,  whether  the  producer  does  or  does  not  pay 
the  tax  in  advance,  we  mean  to  restrict  this  proposition 
to  the  case  in  which  only  the  principal  is  considered,  and 
where  the  additional  charges  arising  from  interest  on  this 
principal  are  neglected.  When  the  commodity  must  pass 
through  many  hands  before  reaching  consumers,  as  eat  h 
intermediate  agent  must  employ  additional  capital,  if  the 
article  has  already  paid  its  tribute,  so  evidently  the  com- 
modity will  be  sold  at  a  higher  price  to  consumers  just 
in  proportion  as  the  tax  is  prematurely  collected ;  and  the 
consumption  will  be  further  reduced  correspondingly.  It  is 
important,  therefore,  to  consumers,  tu  producers,  and  even 
to  the  treasury,  that  the  tax  should  be  paid  late,  and,  if 
possible,  by  the  consumer  himself;  although,  on  the  other 


Digitized  by  Go 


O/f'  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  71 


handi  the  collection  of  a  tax  becomes  more  expensive  by 
subdivisions^  and  tends  more  to  excite  complaints  by  the 
masses,  />.  the  consumers,  because  it  makes  the  operation 
of  the  revenue  department  more  evident  to  them. 

58.  Let  us  call  tl^e  price  of  the  commodity  before  the 
tax,  and  /'  the  price  which  follows  imposition  of  the  tax. 
/o  will  be  the  root  of  the  equation  .  . 

and  /'  that  of  the  equation  - 

With  an  approximation  proportionally  greater  as  /  be- 
comes smaller  relatively  to  /q,  we  shall  have 

The  pecuniary  loss  borne  by  consumers,  who  continue  to 
buy  the  commodity  notwithstanding  the  increased  price^ 
will  be 

(/-/o)^(/); 

the  gross  profit  of  the  treasury  will  be 

so  that  the  loss  of  consumers  alone  will  exceed  this  gross 
profit  in  all  cases  where  we  have 

i*€*  in  the  same  cases  where  imposition  of  the  tax  would 
increase  the  price  on  leaving  the  producer's  hands  when 

he  does  not  pay  tiie  tax  in  advance. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


72  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRmCIPLBS 


The  loss  of  net  income  borne  by  the  monopolisl  will  be 
-  \p'F{p')  -  <^W^-\  -  iF{p')\ 

But,  since  ^  is  the  value  of  /  which  renders  the  function 

pF{p)  -  ^iF^P)\ 
a  maximum^  we  must  necessarily  have 

and  therefore  the  loss  to  the  monopolist  alone  will  exceed 

the  gross  profit  of  the  treasury.  The  loss  borne  by  con- 
sumers will  therefore  remain  without  any  compensation,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  doctrine  of  Quesnay's  school  is 
perfectly  applicable  to  the  products  of  monopoly ;  namely, 
that  it  is  better  to  leyy  a  direct  tax  on  the  net  income  of 
the  monopolist  than  to  lay  a  specific  tax  on  the  commodity. 

The  amount  spent  in  consumption  of  the  article  before 
the  tax  was  /o^(/o)  \  ^^er  the  tax  it  becomes  p*F{p^)  and 
we  must  necessarily  have 

This  results  from  the  inequality  just  proved 

and  from  this  other  inequahty 

which  is  self-evident,  since  the  absolute  amount  of  the  cost 
of  production  cannot  change  except  by  decreasing  when 
the  quantity  produced  decreases. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  73 


The  value  of    or  the  rate  of  tax,  which  will  make  the 

gross  profit  of  the  treasury  a  maximum,  can  be  obtained 
from  the  following  equation : 

and  /'  is  furthermore  a  function  of  /  which  is  given  by  the 
equation 

39.  If  the  law  of  demand  and  the  productive  property 
are  such  that  the  producer,  whether  before  or  after  imposi- 
tion of  the  tax,  is  unable  to  supply  the  demand  which  would 
produce  the  greatest  profit,  he  will  sell  all  his  product,  as 
well  after  as  before  imposition  of  the  tax,  and  will  sell  it 
at  the  same  price,  because,  in  a  stable  condition  of  things, 
there  cannot  be  two  puces  corresponding  to  the  same  out- 
put.  The  tax  will  therefore  fall  entirely  on  the  producer. 

From  this  it  seems  as  if,  in  fixing  the  amount  of  this  tax, 
the  treasury  would  only  be  limited  by  the  condition  of  not 
entirely  absorbing  the  net  income  of  the  producer.  But 
this  consequence  would  be  inexact,  and  the  error  can  be 
proved  at  least  in  one  case  ;  namely,  that  where  <t>\D)  in- 
creases with  Dy  and  where  we  have  at  the  same  time 

'-p(t> h  A  and  /'  being  respectively  the  roots  of  the 
equations 

(0  ^(/)H-[/-*'(^)]^'(/)  =  o, 

and  F{p)  +  O -     (i))  -  i^F^p)  =  o. 

In  fact,  if  A  is  the  necessary  limit  of  production,  and  ir 

the  value  of  /  derived  from  the  relation  =  A,  it  would 

be  necessary  for  the  hypothesis  that  ir  >  /'^  and  a  Jortiori 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


74  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRtNCIPLES 

ir>A+^'  equal  to  ir  — We  should  there- 
fore  have 

But  this  last  inequality  certainly  cannot  hold  true  if  ^\£>) 
is  (according  to  the  hypothesis)  a  function  which  increases 
with  D  \  for  then,  /o  being  smaller  than  tt,  the  demand 
corresponding  to    is  greater  than  A,  and  ^^^^  is  greater 

thaii  would  therefore  be  less  than 

This 

A  Da 
value  of    would  therefore  cause  a  loss  to  the  producer  and 

consequently  could  not  be  the  root  of  equation  ^^i  j. 

40.  If  the  government^  instead  of  imposing  a  tax,  grants 
a  bounty  /  to  the  producer  under  a  monopoly,  the  price,  which 
was  /o  before  the  bounty,  will  fall,  and  will  become 
According  to  circumstances,  we  shall  have  /b  ~/'  < 
loss  to  the  public  treasury  will  be  iF(p*);  the  gain  to 
such  consumers  as  were  buying  before  the  bounty  will  be 
(/b— /')/^(/o)9  And  will  have  no  necessary  relation  to  iF{p')* 
As  for  the  consumers  who  only  buy  after  the  fall  in  price 
resulting  from  the  bounty,  it  is  impossible  to  assert  that 
the  premium  has  benefited  them  pecuniarily;  it  has  only 
diverted  their  money  from  one  line  of  use  to  apply  it  to  the 
line  thus  favoured. 

The  change  in  the  net  income  of  the  producer  which 
occurs  as  a  consequence  of  the  bounty  is : 

/F(p')  -  <^[/^(>')]  4-  iF(p')  -  [PoF(Po)  ^  ^^C/^C/o)]] 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


75 


Buty  since  /o  ^  value  of  /  which  renders  a  maximum  the 
fiinction 

it  always  follows  that 

SO  that  the  gain  resulting  from  the  premium  to  the  producer 
(and  in  general  it  is  the  interest  of  the  producer,  and  not 
that  of  the  consumers^  which  is  considered  in  establishing  a 
bounty)  is  essentially  less  than  the  public  sacrifice  at  the 
cost  of  which  this  gain  is  attained. 

41.  Taxation  may  be  imposed  according  to  a  rate  not 
specific  but  pro[)ortional  to  the  selling  price;  in  other 
words,  the  tax,  instead  of  being  expressed  by  the  constant  /, 
is  expressed  by  the  term  np.*  In  this  case,  if  the  com- 
modity were  produced  and  delivered  without  appreciable 
cost  between  producer  and  consumers,  the  price  being 
determined  by  the  condition  that  the  producer  shall  derive 
the  greatest  possible  profit,  or  that  (i  —n)pF{p)  shall  be 
a  maximum,  the  presence  of  the  constant  factor  (i  — ;/) 
will  not  alter  the  value  of  /  in  the  least ;  the  tax  will  iaX\ 
wholly  on  the  producer,  and  might  go  so  far  as  to  absorb 
all  his  net  income. 

In  the  opposite  case,  the  only  one  which  can  ordinarily 
be  realized,  the  condition  would  be  that  the  function 

(x-n)pF{p)^^{P) 

*  There  is  a  portion  of  the  cost  which  may  t>e  considered  to  act  as  such 
a  tax,  i^.  as  being  proportional  to  the  cost  of  the  commodity.  This  is  the 
portion  which  pays  the  interest  on  the  capital  employed  in  marketing  the 
commodity. 


Digitized  by  C 


76  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PETNCIPLES 


should  attain  a  maximum,  or  that  we  should  have 

i        I  —  tl  I 

so  that  imposition  of  the  tax  would  have  absolutely  the 
same  effects  as  if  all  the  items  of  cost  requisite  for  the  pro- 
duction of  the  commodity  and  its  distribution  to  the  con- 
sumers were  increased  in  the  proportion  of  i  -j  ^ — ;  a 

I  —  n 

very  simple  result,  and  one  which  merits  attention. 

Thus  a  tax  of  this  nature,  circumstances  being  otherwise 
unchanged,  will  be  the  heavier  the  higher  the  costs  of  pro- 
duction and  distribution  already  are,  or  the  smaller  the 
proportion  of  the  price  of  the  commodity  represented  by 
the  profit  of  the  monopolist 

The  gross  proiit  of  the  treasury  is  nfF{  f),  The  value 
of  n  which  makes  it  a  maximum  is  given  by  the  equation 

Ik  ' 

or  /'/•(/)  +  ^'  n  \F^p')  +/'/••(/)]  =  o. 

The  loss  borne  by  consumers  who  continue  to  buy  the 
commodity  will  t)e  (^/'  —  p^)F^p') ;  so  that  this  loss  will  be 
greater  or  less  than  the  gross  profit  to  the  treasury  accord- 
ing as  /'  — /o^  «/>  Qi  ^&  p\i  —  ny^p^ 

The  loss  borne  by  the  producer  will  be 


Dig'itized  by  G 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  77 


This  loss  alone  will  therefore  exceed  the  grossjrofit  of  the 
treasury^  as  in  the  other  kind  of  taxation. 

42.  There  remains  for  discussion  the  effect  of  taxation 
in  kind  on  the  price  of  an  article  under  a  monopoly.  We 
will  take  this  up  only  very  briefly,  as  this  form  of  taxation 
everywhere  tends  to  disappear,  owing  to  the  industrial 
development  of  nations.  We  will  distinguish  here  two 
liiffereiu  cases. 

It  is  possible  that  the  product  of  a  tax  in  kind  may  be 
applied  to  a  consumption  which  would  not  take  place  if  it 
were  not  for  the  tax,  and  to  one  which  has  no  influence  on 
the  demand  which  other  consumers  make  on  the  producer. 
I^t  us  first  suppose  the  amount  paid  in  kind  equal  to  a  con- 
stant K.  The  e(|uation  for  the  maximumi  from  which  the 
value  of  /  is  to  be  deduced,  instead  of 

will  become 

(i)     P<P)'<■\p-'^\F^p)^■K^\F\p)  =  o, 

SO  that  such  a  tax  will  raise  or  lower  the  price  of  the  article, 
according  as  the  function  ^\D)  increases  or  decreases  for 
increasing  values  of  D. 

Let  us  next  suppose  the  amount  paid  in  kind  to  be  pro- 
portional to  the  gross  production,  and  to  be  in  the  ratio  of 
« -f- 1  to  this  gross  production.  The  function  which  it  is 
the  producer's  interest  to  render  a  maximum  will  be 

Djg'itized  Go 


78 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


and  equation  (3)  will  be  replaced  by 

If^  on  the  other  hand^  the  law  of  the  consumption  of  the 
commodity  is  supposed  to  remain  the  same  before  as  after 

the  taxation  iu  kmd,  we  shall  have  for  the  function  which 
must  be  a  maximum  in  case  of  a  fixed  payment 

and  for  its  differential  which  determines  the  value  of 

An  exaction  proportional  to  the  gross  product,  or  a  /U/ie, 
would  give  for  the  function  for  the  maximum 

ii^n)pF(p)^i>lFip)l 

of  which  the  diflferential  would  be  the  same  as  the  first 
member  of  equation  (2).  Thus  the  price  of  the  com- 
modity, the  prpfitjo  the  treasury,  the  burden  on  consumers, 
and  the  loss  to  the  producer  would  be  absolutely  the  same 
as  it  the  commodity  had  had  imposed  on  it  a  tax  propor- 
tional to  the  price  in  the  ratio  of  if  -m. 


s 


Dig'itized  by  G 


OF  THE  7HE0RY  OF  WEALTH 


79 


CHAPTER  VII 

OF  THE  COMPEIITION  OF  PRODUCERS 

43.  Every  one  has  a  vague  idea  of  the  effects  of  compe- 
tition. Theory  should  have  attempted  to  render  this  idea 
more  precise ;  and  yet,  for  lack  of  regarding  the  question 
from  the  proper  point  of  view^  and  for  want  of  recourse  to 
symbols  fof  which  the  use  in  this  connection  becomes  indis- 
pensable;, economic  writers  have  not  in  the  least  improved 
on  popular  notions  in  this  respect.  These  notions  have 
remained  as  ill-defined  and  ill-applied  in  their  works,  as  in 
popular  language. 

To  make  the  abstract  idea  of  monopoly  comprehensible, 
we  imagined  one  spring  and  one  proprietor.  Let  us  now 
imagine  two  projirietors  and  two  springs  of  which  the  quali- 
ties are  identical,  and  which,  on  account  of  their  similar 
positions,  supply  the  same  market  in  competition.  In  this 
case  the  price  is  necessarily  the  same  for  each  proprietor. 
If  p  is  this  price,  D  =  F{p)  the  total  sales,  Dy  the  sales 
from  the  spring  (i)  and  />«  the  sales  from  the  spring  (2), 
then  Di^-  D.,  =  D,  If,  to  begin  with,  we  neglect  the  cost 
of  production,  the  respective  incomes  of  the  proprietors 
will  be  pD^  and  /A ;  and  each  of  them  independently  will 
seek  to  make  this  income  as  large  as  possible. 

We  say  each  independently^  and  this  restriction  is  very 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


80  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

essential,  as  will  soon  appear  ;  for  if  they  should  come  to 
an  agreement  so  as  to  obtain  for  each  the  greatest  possible 
income,  the  results  would  be  entirely  different,  and  would 
not  differ,  so  far  as  consumers  are  concerned,  iroia  those 
obtauied  in  treating  of  a  monopoly. 

Instead  of  adopting  D  =  as  before,  in  this  case  it 
will  be  convenient  to  adopt  the  inverse  notation  /  =  fiD^  ; 
and  then  the  profits  of  proprietors  (i)  and  ^2)  will  be  re- 
spectively expressed  by 

A  x/(A  -h  A),  and  A  x/(A  +  A), 

r>.  by  functions  into  each  of  which  enter  two  variables,  A 
and  A* 

Proprietor  (i)  can  have  no  direct  influence  on  the  de- 
termination of  A  *  all  that  he  can  do,  when  A  has  been 
determined  by  proprietor  (2),  is  to  choose  for  A  the  value 
which  is  best  for  him.  This  he  will  be  able  to  accomplish 
by  properly  adjusting  his  price,  except  as  proprietor  (a), 
who,  seeing  himself  forced  to  accept  this  price '  and  this 
value  of  Z>j,  may  adopt  a  new  value  for  /?2>  more  favourable 
to  his  interests  than  the  preceding  one. 

Analytically  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  A  will  be 
determined  in  terms  of  A  l>y  the  condition 

and  that  will  be  Uetermined  in  terms  of  by  the 
analogous  condition 

A  +  A)3  _  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


81 


whence  it  follows  that  the  final  values  of  Z>,  and  D^^  and 
consequently  of  D  and  of  will  be  detennined  by  the  sys- 
tem of  equations 

(1)  /(A  -h  A)  +  DJ\Dy  -h  A)  -  o, 

(2)  /(A  +  A)  +  ^»/'(  A  +  A)  =  o. 

Let  us  suppose  the  curve  mittx  (Fig.  2)  to  be  the  plot  of 
equation  (i),  and  the  curve  ^12^9  that  of  equation  (2)^  the 
variables  A  and  A  l>ciiig  represented  by  rectangular  co- 
ordinates. If  proprietor  (i)  should  adopt  for  A  a  value 
represented  by  oxx^  proprietor  (2)  would  adopt  for  A  the 
value  oyx^  which,  for  the  supposed  value  of  A»  would  give 
him  the  greatest  profit.  But  then,  for  the  same  reason, 
producer  (i)  ought  to  adopt  for  A  the  value  oxvl^  which 
gives  the  maximum  profit  when  A  has  the  value  oyx»  This 
would  bring  producer  (2)  to  the  value  oy\i  for  Af  ^i^d  so 
forth ;  from  which  it  is  evident  that  an  equilibrium  can  only 
be  established  where  the  coordinates  ox  and  oy  of  the  point 
of  intersection  /  represent  the  values  01  A  and  A*  1 
same  construction  repeated  on  a  point  of  the  figure  on  the 
other  side  of  the  point  1  leads  to  symmetrical  results. 

The  state  of  equilibrium  corresponding  to  the  system  of 
values  cx  and  oy  is  therefore  stabU;  i>.  if  either  of  the  pro- 
ducers;  misled  to  his  true  interest,  leaves  it  temporarily, 
he  will  be  brought  back  to  it  by  a  series  of  reactions,  con- 
stantly declining  in  amplitude,  and  of  which  the  dotted  lines 
of  the  figure  give  a  representation  by  their  arrangement  in 
steps.  ^ 

The  preceding  construction  assumes  that  omi  >  am^  and 
oni<oihi\  the  results  would  be  diametrically  opposite  if 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


82  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRIHCtPLES 


these  inequalities  should  ciiange  -^igu,  and  if  the  curves 
miUi  and  m^t^  should  assume  the  dispositioa  represented 
Pig*  3*  I'hc  coordinates  of  the  point  iy  where  the  two 
curves  inicisect,  would  then  cease  to  corie.spoii(]  to  a  state 
of  stable  equilibrium.  But  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  such  a 
disposition  of  the  curves  is  inadmissible.  In  fact,  if  Di  = 
equations  (ij  and  (2)  reduce,  die  first  to 


The  value  of  derived  from  the  first  would  correspond 
to  /  =  o ;  the  value  of  derived  from  the  second  corre- 
sponds to  a  value  of/  which  would  make  the  product pD^  a 
maximum.  Therefore  the  first  root  is  necessarily  greater 
than  the  second,  or  omx^^om^  and  for  the  same  reason 

44.  From  equations  (i)  and  (2)  we  derive  first  ^ 
(which  ought  to  be  the  case,  as  the  springs  are  supposed  to 

be  similar  and  similarly  situated),  and  then  by  addition : 


whereas,  if  the  two  springs  had  belonged  to  the  same  prop- 
erty, or  if  the  two  proprietors  had  come  to  an  understand" 


and  the  second  to 


/(A)  -  o. 


/(A)  +  DJ\D,)  =  o. 


2j{D)  +  DJ\D)  =  o, 
an  equation  which  can  be  transformed  into 

(3)  2/^=^0,  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE   THEORY  OF  WEALTH  S3 

and  would  have  rendered  the  total  income  Dp  a  maximum, 
and  consequently  would  have  assigned  to  each  of  the  pro- 
ducers a  greater  income  than  what  they  can  obtain  with  the 
value  of  /  derived  from  equation  (3). 

Why  is  it  then  that,  for  want  of  an  understanding,  the 
producers  do  not  sto]),  as  in  the  case  of  a  monopoly  or  of 
an  association,  at  the  value  of  /  derived  from  equation  (4), 
which  would  really  give  them  the  greatest  income? 

The  reason  is  that,  producer  (i)  having  fixed  his  produc- 
tion at  what  it  should  be  according  to  equation  (4)  and  the 
condition  Di^D^  the  otlier  will  be  able  to  fix  his  own 
production  at  a  higher  or  lower  rate  with  a  temporary 
benefit,  io  be  sure,  he  will  soon  be  punished  for  his  mis- 
take, because  he  will  force  the  first  producer  to  adopt  a 
new  scale  of  production  which  will  react  unfavourably  on 
producer  {2)  himself.  But  these  successive  reactions,  far 
from  bringing  both  producers  nearer  to  the  original  con- 
dition [of  monopoly],  will  separate  them  further  and  further 
from  it.  In  other  words,  this  rgndi^inn  is  not  one  of  st_^le 
equilibrium ;  and,  although  the  most  favourable  for  bothpro- 

ducerS,  it  can  only  he  main  tain  ^^H  Ky  m^gng  nTa  fomaL»n- 

gagement ;  for  in  the  moral  sphere  men  cannot  be  supposed 
to  be  free  from  error  and  lack  of  forethought  any  more  than 
in  the  physical  world  bodies  can  be  considered  perfectly 
rigid,  or  supports  perfectly  solid,  etc. 

45.  The  root  of  equation  (3)  is  graphically  determined 
by  the  intersection  of  the  line  y  =  2x  with  the  curve 

^  =  —  ^  ^  ;  while  that  of  equation  (4)  is  graphically  shown 
by  the  intersection  of  the  same  curve  with  the  line  y^x* 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


♦ 

84  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

But,  if  it  is  possible  to  assign  a  real  and  positive  value  to 
the  function   =  —  ^^"^  ^^"^  every  real  and  positive  value  of 

.V,  then  the  abscissa  ,v  oi  llic  inhi  point  of  intersection  will 
be  smaller  than  that  of  the  second,  as  is  sufficiently  proved 
simply  by  the  plot  of  Fig.  4.  It  is  easily  proved  also  that 
the  condition  for  tliis  result  is  always  reaHzed  by  the  very 
nature  of  the  law  of  demand.  In  consequence  the  root 
of  equation  (3)  is  always  smaller  than  that  of  equation  (4)  ; 
or  fas  every  one  believes  without  any  analysis)  the  result  of 
competitiop  tff_i;M"^^4U3,ces 

46.  If  there  were  3,  4, ...»  producers  in  competition, 
all  their  conditions  being  the  same,  equation  (3)  would  be 
successively  replaced  by  the  following : 

^  +  3/^  =o,/?  +  4/— =  0, .  .  •     +         =  0; 

and  the  value  of  p  which  results  would  diminish  indehuitely 
with  the  indefinite  increase  of  the  number  n. 

In  all  the  preceding,  the  supposition  has  been  that  natural 
limitation  ot  liRir  productive  j^owers  has  not  prevented  pro- 
ducers from  choosing  each  the  most  advantageous  rate  of 
production.  Let  us  now  adroit,  besides  the  n  producers, 
who  are  in  this  condition,  that  there  are  others  who  reach 
the  limit  of  their  productive  capacity,  and  that  the  total 
production  of  this  class  is  A;  we  shall  continue  to  have 
the  n  equations 

/(2>)+i?^'(^)  =  o, 


(5) 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


85 


■f 


which  will  give      =  i?,  =  ...  =  Z>„,  and  by  additiooi  / 


But  D  =  nDi  4-  \  whence 


or 


^  ^  dp 


This  last  equation  will  now  replace  equation  (^3)  and 
determine  the  value  of  p  and  consequently  of 

47.  Each  producer  being  subject  to  a  cost  of  production 
expressed  by  the  functions  4>i{^i)$  '"»i^n{^n)t  the 

equations  of  (5)  will  become 


If  any  two  of  these  equations  are  combined  by  subtrac- 
tion, for  instance  if  the  second  is  subtracted  from  the  first, 
we  shall  obtain 


As  —  is  essentially  negative^  we  shall  therefore  have  at 
dp 

the  same  time 


(6) 


/(I?)  H-  A/'  (i?)  -     (A)  -  o, 

AD)  -h  DJ'  (D)  -      cA)  =  o, 


{/{!))  4-        (/>)  -      (A)  =  o. 


A-A  = 


A;^Z?»  and  ^i'(A) ^♦I'iA). 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


86  TIJE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

Thus  the  production  of  plant  A  will  be  greater  than  that 
of  plant  whenever  it  will  require  greater  expense  to 
increase  the  production  of  B  than  to  increase  the  produc- 
tion of  A  by  the  same  amount 

For  a  concrete  example,  let  us  imagine  the  case  of  a 
number  of  coal  mines  supplying  the  same  market  in  com- 
petition one  with  another,  and  that,  in  a  state  of  stable 
equilibrium,  mine  A  markets  annually  20,000  hectoliters 
and  mine  15,000.  We  can  be  sure  that  a  greater  addi- 
tion to  the  cost  would  be  necessary  to  produce  and  bring  to 
market  from  mine  B  an  additional  1000  hectoliters  than 
to  produce  the  same  increase  of  1000  hectoliters  in  the 
yield  of  mine  A. 

This  does  not  make  it  impossible  that  the  costs  at  mine  A 
should  exceed  those  at  mine  at  a  lower  limit  of  produc- 
tion. For  instance,  if  the  production  of  each  were  reduced 
to  10,000  hectoliters,  the  costs  of  production  at  B  might  be 
smaller  than  at  A, 

48.  fiy  addition  of  equations  (6),  we  obtain 

or    (7)  [«/-S^;(Z?n)]-o. 

up 

If  we  compare  this  equation  with  the  one  which  would 
determine  the  value  of  /  in  case  all  the  plants  were  de- 
pendent on  a  monopolist,  viz. 

(8)  -0  +  ^[/»-*'(^)]=o, 

we  shall  recognize  that  ou  the  one  hand  substitution  of  the 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  7 HE  THEOKY  OF  WEALTH 


87 


term  ///  for  the  term  /  tends  to  dimimsh  the  value  of  / ; 
but  on  the  other  hand  substitution  of  the  term  {D^ 
for  the  term  {D)  tends  to  increase  it,  for  the  reason  that 
we  shall  always  have 

and,  in  fact,  not  only  is  the  sum  of  the  terms  <^J(Z>„) 
greater  than  ^'  (/>),  but  even  the  average  of  these  terms  is. 

greater  than  <!>'{£>),  i.e.  we  shall  have  the  inequality 

To  satisfy  one's  self  of  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  con- 
sider that  any  capitalist,  holding  a  monopoly  of  produc- 
tive property,  would  operate  by  preference  the  plants  of 
which  the  operation  is  the  least  costly,  leaving  the  others 
idle  if  necessary;  while  the  least  favoured  competitor  will 
not  make  up  his  mind  to  close  his  works  so  long  as  he  can 
obtain  any  profit  from  them,  however  modest.  Conse- 
quently, for  a  given  value  of  f,  or  for  the  same  total  produc- 
tion, the  costs  will  always  be  greater  for  competing  producers 
than  they  would  be  under  a  monopoly. 

It  now  remains  to  be  proved  that  the  value  of  /  derived 
from  equation  (8)  is  always  greater  than  the  value  of  / 
derived  from  equation  (7). 

For  this  we  can  see  at  once  that  if  in  the  expression 
we  substitute  the  value  D=F(p),  we  can  change 
4>'(D)  into  a  function  \p{p)  ]  and  each  of  the  terms  which 
enter  into  the  summational  expression  2  <^^{D^^  can  also 
be  regarded  as  an  implicit  function  of  /,  in  virtue  of  the 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


88 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


relation  D^F{p)  and  of  the  system  of  equations  (6).  In 

consequence  the  root  of  equation  (7)  will  be  the  abscissa  of 
the  point  of  intersection  of  the  curve 

(a)  y--^fv 

with  the  curve 

{h)     y^nx^  +         -I-     +  ^,(jr)] ; 

while  the  root  of  equation  (8)  will  be  the  abscissa  of  the 
point  of  intersection  of  the  curve  {a)  with  one  which  has 

for  its  equation 

As  has  been  already  noted,  equation  (a)  is  represented 
by  the  curve  MN  (Fig.  5),  of  which  the  ordinates  are 
always  real  and  pusitive ;  we  can  represent  equation  (/')  by 
the  curve  PQ^  and  equation  (^')  by  the  curve  FQ,  In 
consequence  of  the  relation  just  proved,  viz., 

we  find  for  the  value  x^o^  0P>  OP\  It  remains  to  be 
proved  that  the  curve  P^Q  cuts  the  curve  PQ  at  a  point  / 
situated  below  MN^  so  that  the  abs(  issa  of  the  point  Q  will 
be  greater  than  that  of  the  point  Q» 

This  amounts  to  proving  that  at  the  points  Q  and  the 
ordinate  of  the  curve  (b)  is  greater  than  the  ordinate  of  the 
curve  (^')  corresponding  to  the  same  abscissa. 

Suppose  that  it  were  not  so,  and  that  we  should  have 

or     (n  —  i)x  <  ^i(x)  4-  ^%{x)  -h     +  ^»(*)  —  ^{x)* 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


89 


«//(.v)  IS  an  intermerliate  quantity  between  the  greatest  and 
smallest  of  the  terms  ^i(jip),  ^%(x)^  ^J^x)  ;  if  we 

suppose  that  (/'h(^)  denotes  the  smallest  term  of  this  series, 
the  preceding  inequality  wiii  involve  the  following  inequality : 

Therefore  x  will  be  smaller  than  the  average  of  the  u  —  i 

terms  of  which  the  sum  forms  the  second  member  of  the 

f 

inequality ;  and  among  these  terms  there  will  be  some  which 

are  greater  than  x.  But  this  is  impossible,  because  pro- 
ducer (k),  for  instance,  will  stop  producing  as  soon  as  / 
becomes  less  than  ^i(Di)  or 

49.  Therefore  if  it  should  happen  that  the  value  of  p 
derived  from  equations  (6),  combined  with  the  relations 

(9)    A-^A+--f  i:^»  =  A  and  D^F^p), 
should  involve  the  inequality 

it  would  be  necessary  to  remove  the  equation 

from  the  list  of  equations  (6),  and  to  substitute  for  it 

which  would  deteriiuiie  Z?^  as  a  function  of  /.  The  remain- 
ing equations  of  (6),  combined  with  equations  (9),  will  de> 
termine  all  the  other  unknown  quantities  of  the  problem. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


90 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIFLLS 


CHAPTER  VIII 

OF  UNLIMITED  COMrtiillON 

50.  The  effects  of  competition  have  reached  their  limit, 
when  each  of  the  partial  productions  />»  is  inappreciable^ 

not  only  with  reference  to  the  total  production  D  —  F{  p)^ 
but  also  with  reference  to  the  derivative  F\p)j  so  that  the 
partial  production  could  be  subtracted  from  D  without 
any  appreciable  variation  resulting  in  the  price  of  the  com- 
modity. This  hypothesis  is  the  one  which  is  realized,  in 
social  economy,  for  a  multitude  of  products,  and,  among 
them,  for  the  most  iiiijiurtant  products.  It  introduces  a 
great  simplification  into  the  calculations,  and  this  chapter  is 
meant  to  develop  the  consequences  of  it 
According  to  this  hypothesis,  in  the  equation 

A  +  [/-**'(A)J-^=o, 

ap 

the  term  D,,  can  be  neglected  without  sensible  error,  which 
reduces  the  equation  to 

In  consequence,  the  system  of  equations  (6)  of  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  will  be  replaced  by 

<i>^{D,)  =  o,  /  -  <t>2'(n,)=o, -        =  o. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  91 


.  These  n  equations,  together  with 
.  (2)  A  +         -  -VD^^Fij), 

will  determine  all  the  unknown  quantities  /  and  D^^  D^^ 

If  we  conceive  of  all  the  equations  of  (i)  as  solved  with 
reference  to  Di,  I?2,,,.,D^,  the  first  member  of  equation 
(2)  will  become  a  function  of  p,  which  we  can  represent  by 
O  (/),  so  that  this  equation  can  be  written  in  the  very  sim- 
ple form 

(3)  n(^)-/'(/)  =  o. 

In  the  hypothesis  under  consideration,  all  the  functions 
^ft'CA)  intist  be  considered  to  increase  with  Other- 
wise the  gross  value  of  the  product 

vsuuid  be  less  than  the  costs  of  production,  whicii  are 

It  is,  moreover,  plain  under  the  hypothesis  of  unlimited 
competition,  and  where,  at  the  same  time,  the  function 
^a'(A)  should  be  a  decreasing  one,  that  nothing  would  limit 
the  production  of  the  article.  Thus,  wherever  there  is  a 
return  on  property,  or  a  rent  payable  for  a  plant  of  which 
the  operation  involves  expenses  of  such  a  kind  that  the 
(unction  <^*'(A)  is  a  decreasing  one,  it  proves  that  the  effect 
of  monopoly  is  not  wholly  extinct,  or  that  competition  is 
not  so  great  but  that  the  variation  of  the  amount  produced 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


92  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRlXCfPLES 

by  each  individual  producer  affects  the  total  production  of 
the  article,  and  its  price,  to  a  perceptible  extent. 

As  all  the  functions  (A)  are  supposed  to  increase 
with  D^,  the  expression  for  D„  derived  from  the  equation 
/  =  <t>k\^k)  it^'t^lf  a  function  of  /,  increasing  with  / ;  the 
function  which  we  have  denoted  by  0(/)  therefore  must 
also  necessarily  increase  with  /. 

51.  This  being  estabUshed,  if  we  conceive  of  all  of  the 
functions  ^k(Pi!)  as  being  increased  by  the  quantity  as 
would  take  place  in  consequence  of  the  establishment  of  a 
specihc  tax  on  the  aiucie,  equation  (^3)  would  be  replaced  by 

(4)  OU^-u)  =  F(j). 

Let  J/A^  (Fig,  6)  be  the  curve  of  which  tlie  cquaLioii  is 
y^F\^p)y  a  curve  of  which  the  characteristic  feature  is 
that  its  tangent  always  makes  an  obtuse  angle  with  the  posi- 
tive axis  of  abscissas,/,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  deriva- 
tive F\p)  is  always  negative.  l-,et  PQ  be  the  curve  of 
which  the  equation  is  ^  =  O  a  curve  of  which  the  char- 
acteristic feature  is,  on  the  contrary,  as  we  have  just  seen, 
that  its  tangent  always  forms  an  acute  angle  with  the  positive 
axis  of  abscissas.  Finally^  let  P^Q  be  the  curve  of  which 
the  equation  is 

which  is  related  to  the  curve  PQ  by  the  condition  that  the 
portions  intercepted  between  these  two  curves,  of  all  lines 
parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  abscissas,  such  as  VS^  are  equal 
to  u.  The  abscissas  d>7'and  OT^  will  denote,  respectively, 
the  roots  of  equations  (3)  and  (4),  roots  which  we  can 
•express  by     and  f^.    But  it  is  evident  from  the  shape  qf 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


93 


the  curve  MN,  that  OT  >  OT,  or  that  /'  > /,„  and,  there- 
fore, an  increase  in  the  cost  of  production  will  always  be 
followed  by  an  increase  in  the  price  of  the  article.  It  is 
equally  apparent  from  the  shape  of  the  curves  PQ  and 
P'Q,  that  TV  will  always  be  smaller  than  KS",  or 
f  —p^KUy  i>.  that  in  all  cases  the  rise  in  price  will  be 
less  than  the  increase  in  cost. 

In  the  figure  the  supposition  was  that  the  curves  FQ  and 
P^Q  turned  their  convex  sides  towards  the  axis  of  but 
the  result  of  the  coiistruction  would  be  the  same  if  the 
curves  turned  their  concave  side  towards  this  axis. 

An  analytical  form  can  be  given  to  the  demonstration  of 
the  theorem  in  question,  but  then,  for  ease  iii  t-lcuiunbtra- 
tion,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  increase  u  and  the 
difference  ff  —  />o  =  ^  both  as  very  small  quantities,  of  which 
the  squares  and  higlici  powers  can  be  neglected,  in  Una 
way  equation  (4)  will  reduce  to 

(a-«)o'(/o)-«^'(A). 

But  ^  greater  than  o,  and  F\p^  is  less  than  o ; 

wherefore  h  is  of  the  opposite  sign  to  6  —  which  involves 
the  two  conditions, 

3>o   and  8<fr. 

Moreover,  this  demonslraLiou  can  be  extended  to  any  values 
of  14  and  of    according  to  the  remarks  in  Article  32. 

The  more  the  curve  J/iV  approaches  a  straight  line  par- 
allel to  the  axis  ul  abscissas,  or  the  less  consumpuon  varies 
with  the  price,  the  more,  it  is  plain,  the  difference  /' — p^ 
will  approach  to  ecjuality  with  u. 


Dig'itizecfty  Go 


94  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

It  further  follows  from  this  that  the  charges  which  &ll  on 

the  article,  even  aUer  leaving  the  producers'  hands,  will 
always  diminish  the  price  received  by  the  producers. 

52.  To  calculate  the  influence  of  this  variation  on  the 

interests  of  producers  and  consumers,  it  is  necessary  to  note 
tliat  we  shall  have 

[«;(A)]«=A   and  [*;(A)]'=/-« 

if  we  designate  In  [<^/(Z>jt)]o  and  (A)]'  the  values 
of  (f>,'{JJk)  which  correspond  to  the  value  of  A  before  and 
after  the  increase  in  cost  u.   But  we  have 

p'-u<p^  whence  [«;(A)]'<[*;(A)]u; 

and,  therefore,  since  ^^'(A)  is  a  function  of  Ai  which 
increases  with  the  variable  A>  we  have 

[A]'<[AJo; 

and,  therefore,  (/  fortiori,  the  product  (/'  — ^^)[A]' 
smaller  than  /o[A]o* 

As  a  result  of  the  increase  in  cost  the  producer  {Jt^  will 
lose : 

1.  The  difference  between  the  price  and  the  price 
—    on  the  quantity  produced  [  A]'i  or 

(A-/  +  «)rA]'; 

2.  The  net  profit  which  he  was  receiving  on  the  quantity 
[A]<)—  [A]'>  by  which  the  increase  ia  cost  diminished 
the  production,  or 

A([A]o--  [A]')  -([<<»t(A)]o-[**(A)J'). 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  95 
The  total  loss  which  he  will  suffer  is  therefore 

ACA]«  -(/'  -  «)[A]'  -([**(A)Jo-[**(A)]'). 

This  loss  will  become  smaller  as  the  functioa  ^aXA)»  of 
which  <^>a(A)  denotes  the  integral,  increases  more  rapidly 
between  the  limits  of  definite  integration. 

llie  total  loss  borne  by  the  mass  of  producers  will  there- 
fore be 

P^^  -  (/  -u)U-^  C[^*(  A)]«  -  A)]'), 

the  characteristic  ^  denoting  a  summation  with  respect  to 
the  index  k. 
The  same  expression  can  be  put  in  the  form 

uD  +  AZ>o  -p'D'  -  S  ([**(A)]o  -  [**( A)]')  \ 

but  it  cannot  be  proved,  as  in  the  analogous  case  in  Arti- 
cle 38,  that  this  quantity  is  greater  than  tiD\  which  expresses 
the  receipts  from  the  tax^  when  2^  is  a  specific  tax  assessed 
on  the  article.   On  the  contrary,  as  we  always  have 

[♦»(A)]o>[«*(A)]', 

-since  (A)o>(A)'j  if  we  have  furthermore  f]y>p^f^ 
i.e,  if  the  value  of  /„  is  less  than  that  which  renders  pD  a 
maximum  (see  Article  24),  the  total  loss  suffered  by  pro- 
ducers will  necessarily  be  less  than  u£)** 

The  loss  borne  by  consumers,  who  buy  the  article  regard- 
less of  the  increase  in  price,  will  be  equal  to 

This  loss  alone  will  be  less  than  the  receipts  from  the  tax 
uU',  since  we  have  always /'—/»<  u. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


%  .  THE  MA  THEM  A  TICAL  PRINC/PISS 


53.  If  the  article  were  charged  with  a  tax  «/,  not  specific, 
but  proportional  to  the  selling  price,  or  burdened  with  new 
items  of  cost  which  operate  as  such  a  tax  (see  Article  41)^ 
the  equation 

would  be  replaced  by 

(5)  p^4^,{n,)-   ^^  =  0. 

When  the  differentiation  indicated  is  carried  out,  this  equa- 
tion becomes 

or  more  simply 

inasmuch  as,  according  to  the  hypothesis  of  indefinite  com- 
petition,      being  an  inappreciable  fraction  of  the  total 

production  is  a  quantity  likewise  inappreciable  and 

negligible.  Instead  of  equation  (3)  we  shall  therefore 
have 

(6)  0[(i-«)/]-^(/»)  =  o; 

i,e,  the  price  is  increased  by  such  a  tax  just  as  it  would  be  if 
all  the  necessary  expenses  for  production  and  distribution  of 

the  article  were  themselves  increased  in  the  ratio  of  i :  — ?  -  ; 

I  —  n 

a  result  absolutely  similar  to  that  which  we  obtained  for  the 
case  of  a  monopoly.   Thus  a  tax  of  this  nature  will  affect 
each  of  the  producers  the  more,  the  greater  the  expenses  of 
production  which  he  must  bear. 
The  same  observation  would  hold  good,  whether  the 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  'I HE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


97 


article  were  charged  with  a  tithe  or  with  a  tax  in  kind  pro- 
portional to  the  production,  such  as  was  the  tax  assessed  by 
the  Spanish  government  on  the  gold  and  sthrer  mines  of 
America.  For,  if  we  call  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  levied 
by  the  government  to  the  total  production,  and  if  we  sup- 
pose, as  it  is  natural  to  do,  that  the  tax  does  not  alter  the 
law  of  consumption  of  the  article,  equations  (5)  and  (6) 
will  be  applicable  to  this  hypothesis  also. 

54.  Let  us  consider  in  particular  one  of  these  producers, 
whose  production  is  expressed  by  D^,  The  net  revenue  of 
this  producer,  or  the  income  from  his  investment  (the  profit 
to  the  manager  being  included  in  the  operating  expenses), 
will  have  the  value 

(7)  /A-J'V;(A)^A, 

or,  if  we  substitute  for  /  its  value  <^^'(Z>jt), 

(8)  .  A  ~  J7 V  (A)  •  ^/A . 

This  is  the  expression  for  the  net  return  or  income  in 
money ;  but  if  it  w  ere  desired  to  have  an  expression  of  the 
return  in  kind,  or  the  quantity  of  the  article  produced,  the 
value  of  which  represents  the  net  return  of  the  owner  or 
producer  {k),  the  preceding  expression  should  be  divided 
by/=  ^t'(A)>  And  then  we  should  have 

9*  (A) 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  essential  characteristic 
of  the  function      A)  is  that  it  increases  with  A* 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


98 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


If  it  happens  ihaL  the  price  /,  and  consequently  D^^ 
increase,  all  other  circumstances  remaining  the  sarne^  it  is 
evident  that  the  rent  in  money  will  increase,  but  this  is  not 
so  manifest  and  it  has  even  been  denied  by  economists  as  to 
rent  in  kind.  But  if  we  differentiate  expression  (9)  with 
reference  to  and  if  we  make  the  diflerential  coefficient 
e(|iial  to  zero,  so  as  to  (leteriiunc  the  value  of  whieli 
renders  this  expression  a  maximum  or  a  minimum^  we  shall 
find  after  reduction 


a  condition  which  cannot  be  satisfied,  since  the  function 

from  its  nature,  increases  constantly  with  D^.,  Therefore 
expression  (9)  is  incapable  of  any  [maximum  orj  minimum 
value ;  and  since  it  evidently  begins  by  being  an  increasing 
function,  it  must  also  constantly  increase  with  Dy. 

The  rent  will  increase  if  all  items  of  cost  happen  to  fall 
for  the  individual  producer  {U)  without  any  perceptible 
influence  of  this  circumstance  on  tlie  total  (|naiuiiy  pro- 
duced and  on  the  price  of  the  article ;  but  in  case  the 
decrease  in  cost  affects  all  producers,  the  resulting  fall  in 
the  price  of  the  article  may  be  so  great  that  the  income  or 
rent  of  each  individual  producer  may  be  diminished. 


or  more  simply 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


99 


CHAPTER  IX 

'    OF  THE  MUTUAL  RELATIONS  OF  PRODUCERS 

55.  Very  few  commodities  are  consumed  in  jtist  the  form 
in  which  they  left  the  hands  of  the  first  producer.  Ordi- 
narily the  same  raw  material  enters  into  the  manufacture  of 
several  different  products,  which  are  more  directly  adapted 
to  consumption ;  and  reciprocally  several  raw  materials  are 
'generally  brought  together  in  the  manufacture  of  each  of 
these  products.  It  is  evident  that  each  producer  of  raw 
materials  must  try  to  obtain  the  greatest  possible  profit 
from  his  business.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  inquire  ac- 
cordini;  to  what  laws  the  profits,  which  are  made  by  all 
the  producers  as  a  whole,  are  distributed  among  the 
individuals  in  consequence  of  the  law  of  consumption  for 
final  products.  This  short  summary  will  suffice  to  make 
known  what  we  mean  by  the  influence  of  the  mutual 
relations  of  producers  of  different  articles,  an  influence 
which  must  not  be  confounded  with  that  of  the  comfieHHon 
of  producers  of  the  same  article,  which  has  been  analyzed 
in  the  preceding  chapters. 

To  proceed  systematically,  from  the  simple  to  the  com- 
plex, we  will  imagine  two  commodities,  {a)  and  (d)^  which 
have  no  other  use  beyond  that  of  being  jointly  consumed  in 
the  production  of  the  composite  commodity  {ad)  ;  to  begin 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


100 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


with,  we  will  omit  from  consideration  the  expenses  caused 
by  tiie  production  of  each  of  these  raw  matenals  taken 
separately,  and  of  the  costs  of  making  them  effective^  or 
of  the  foraiaiion  of  the  composite  roiuinodity. 

Simply  for  convenience  of  expression  we  can  take  for 
examples  copper^  zinc^  and  brass  under  the  fictitious  hy- 
pothesis that  ro|)per  and  zinc  have  no  other  use  than  that 
of  being  jointly  used  to  form  brass  by  their  alloy,  and  that 
the  cost  of  production  of  copper  and  zinc  can  be  neglected, 
as  well  as  the  cost  of  making;  the  allov. 

T.et  /  be  the  price  of  a  kilogram  of  brass,  py  that  of  a 
kilogram  of  copper,  and     that  of  a  kilogram  of  zinc ;  and 

:  Wo  the  proportion  of  copper  to  zinc  in  the  brass,  so  that 
we  should  have^  according  to  the  hypothesis, 

(a)  m^py  4-  m^p2  -  /. 

In  general,  let  /,  /„  and  p^  denote  the  price  of  the  unit 
of  the  commodity  for  the  composite  article  {^ab)  and  for 
the  component  commodities  (a)  and  (^) ;  and  and 
the  numbers  of  units,  or  of  fractions  of  the  unit,  of  each 
component  conmiodity  which  enter  into  the  formation  of 
the  unit  of  the  composite  commodity. 

Furthermore,  let 


the  demand  for  each  of  the  (  oniponent  commodities ;  if  we 
suppose  each  of  these  to  be  handled  by  a  monopolist^  and 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


* 

OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  101 


if  we  apply  to  the  theory  of  the  mutual  relations  of  pro- 
ducers  the  same  method  of  reasoning  which  served  for 
analyzing  the  effects  of  competition,  we  shall  recognize  that 
the  values  of  /i  and         determined  by  the  two  equations 

of  which  the  development  gives 

r  /^(w,/,  +  m^pi)  -h  mipxF\fn,p,  +  m^p^  =  o,  (i) 
1  F{mtpi  +  m^pi)  H-  m^J^\m^px  +  m^i^  =  o ;  (2) 

no  other  system  of  values  but  the  one  resulting  from  these 
equations  being  compatible  with  a  state  of  stable  equilibrium. 

56.  To  prove  this  proposition,  it  is  sufficient  to  show  that 
the  curves  m^UY  and  (which  would  be  the  plots  of  equa- 
tions (i)  and  (2),  under  the  hypothesis  that  the  variables  pi 
and  p2  represent  rectangular  coordinates)  assume  one  or  the 
other  of  the  dispositions  shown  by  Figs.  7  and  8  \  for,  if 
that  is  admitted,  we  can  show,  as  in  Chapter  VII,  and,  by 
the  same  construction,  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  dotted 
lines  of  either  figure,  that  the  coordinates  of  the  point  of 
intersection  /  (or  the  roots  of  equations  (i)  and  (2))  are  the 
only  values  of     and  p-i  compatible  with  stable  equilibrium. 

We  observe  that  when  p^  is  equal  to  zero,  px  has  a 
finite  value  Om^y  ue.  the  one  which  renders  the  product 
p\F{m^p^  a  maximum.  Thereupon,  as  /o  increases,  the 
value  of  /i,  which  will  procure  the  greatest  profit  for  pro- 
ducer (i),  may  continue  to  increase  (as  is  the  case  in 
Fig.  7),  or  to  decrease  (as  is  the  case  in  Fig.  8)  ;  but,  even 
under  the  latter  hypothesis,  it  can  never  become  absolutely 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


102  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRWCTPLES 

equal  to  zero.  The  one  case  or  the  other  will  occur  accord- 
ing to  the  form  of  the  function     and  according  as  we  find 

IF^(P)J  -  F{p) .  F^fi  < 

2[^'(/)r-^(/)-^'V)> 

In  this  inequality  /  denotes  a  function  of  pi  and  de- 
termined by  equation  (a). 

But  since  equations  (i)  and  (2)  and  the  preceding  in- 
equality are  symmetrical  with  reference  to  //ii/i  and  m^p^t 
it  will  result  that,  whenever  the  form  of  the  function  F  is 
such  that  the  ordinates  of  the  curve  «r,«i  continue  to 
increase  for  increasing  values  of  /j,  then  the  abscissas  /i  of 
the  curve  «f2^2  will  go  on  increasing  for  increasing  values 
of  Pii  so  that  the  two  curves  will  assume  the  disposition  rep- 
resented  by  Fig.  7.  On  the  contrary,  whenever  the  ordi- 
nates of  the  curve  tniUx  decrease  for  increasing  values  of 
Pxy  the  abscissas  pi  of  the  curve  m^n^  will  likewise  go  on 
decreasing  for  increasing  values  of  /j*  ^"^^  then  the  two 
curves  will  assume  the  disposition  represented  by  Fig.  S. 

57.  As  equations  (i)  and  (2)  can  be  considered  as 
determined,  in  consequence  of  the  previous  discussion,  we 
will  remark  that  they  yield  at  once 

Phpx  ^  m.pi  =  \p  \ 

that  is  to  say,  that  by  the  purely  abstract  hypothesis  under 
consideration,  the  profits  would  be  equally  divided  between 
the  two  monopolists  ;  and,  in  fact,  there  would  be  no  reason 
why  the  division  should  be  unequal,  and  to  the  profit  of  one 
rather  than  of  the  other. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


I 

OF  THE  THEORY  OE  WEALTH 


103 


By  addition  of  equations  (i)  and  (2)^  we  can  deduce 

while,  if  the  interests  of  the  two  producers  had  remained 
undistinguished,  /  would  have  been  determined  by  the 
condition  that  pF{p)  should  be  a  maximum^  i.^.  by  the 
equation 

(^')  ^(/)+/^'(/)  =  o. 

'i  o  prove  the  accuracy  of  this  distinction,  exactly  the  same 
method  of  reasoning  should  be  used  that  we  took  in  treating 
of  the  competition  of  producers. 

But  there  is  this  essential  and  very  remarkable  difference, 
that  the  root  of  equation  {c)  is  always  greater  than  that  of 
equation  (^'),  so  that  the  composite  commodity  will  always 
be  made  more  expensive,  by  reason  of  separation  of  inter- 
ests than  by  reason  of  the  fusion  of  monopolies.  An  asso- 
ciation of  monopolists,  working  for  their  own  interest,  in 
this  instance  will  abo  work  for  the  interest  of  consumers, 
which  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  what  happens  with  com- 
peting producers. 

Furthermore,  the  higher  value  of  the  root  of  equation  {c) 
than  of  that  of  equation  (^')  can  be  shown  by  the  same 
graphical  construction  which  served  to  establish  the  oppo- 
site result  in  the  chapter  in  uhich  wc  treated  of  competition. 

If  we  had  supposed  n  commodities  thus  related,  instead 
of  only  two,  equation  (c)  would  evidently  have  been 
replaced  by 

ft 

from  which  we  should  conclude,  that  the  more  there  are  of 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


104  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

articles  thus  related,  the  higher  the  price  determined  by 
the  division  of  monopolies  will  be,  than  that  which  would 
result  from  the  fusion  or  association  of  the  monopolists. 

58.  Such  a  form  might  be  given  to  the  function  F  that 
the  curves  represented  by  equations  (1)  and  (a)  would  not 
intersect  \  for  instance,  if  it  were 

^(^^  =  IT? 

equations  (i)  and  (2)  would  become 

d  —  m{p{  -J-  m^pg  =  o,  and  b  -f  m^pi  —  ni^pi  =  o, 

and  would  represent  two  conjugate  hyperbolas  (Fig.  9),  of 
which  the  limbs  m^rii  and  have  a  common  asymptote 
and  cannot  meet. 

A  passing  note  is  sufficient  for  these  peculiarities  of 
analysis,  which  cannot  have  any  application  to  actual  events. 

Another  peculiarity  of  the  same  kind  would  appear  if  we 
suppose  that  the  roots  of  equations  (i)  and  (2)  establish  a 
value  of  p,  and,  consequently,  a  value  of  D  which  exceeds 
the  quantity  which  one  or  other  of  the  producers  can  fur- 
nish. Let  A  be  the  limit  which  D  cannot  exceed,  because 
of  a  necessary  limitation  in  the  production  of  one  of  the 
component  articles,  and  n  the  corresponding  limit  of  / 
according  to  the  relation  D^F{p),  We  shall  therefore 
have 

i,e.  the  variables  />,  and  /o  can  be  the  coordinates  only  of  a 
point  situated  above  the  line  hih%  (Fig.  10),  which  would 
have  for  its  equation 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  TIIF.ORY  OF  WEALTH 


105 


and  consequently,  if  the  point  /,  where  the  two  curves 
and  «f{i»2  intersect,  falls  below  the  line  hji^  its  coordinates 
cannot  be  taken  for  the  values  of  /i  and  /2.  From  this  the 
conclusion  can  be  drawn,  if  necessary  by  aid  of  the 
graphical  construction  indicated  above,  that  the  values  of 
px  and  pi  are  indeterminate,  being  subject  only  to  this  con- 
dition, that  the  points  which  would  have  the  values  of  these 
variables  for  coordinates  fall  on  the  part  k^k^  of  the  line, 
which  is  intercepted  between  the  curves  m^ny^  and 

This  singular  result  springs  from  an  abstract  hypothesis  \ 
of  the  nature  of  those  which  we  can  discuss  in  this  essay. 
It  is  very  plain  that  in  the  order  of  actual  facts,  and  where 
all  the  conditions  of  an  economic  system  are  accounted  for, 
there  is  no  article  of  which  the  price  is  not  completely 
determined. 

59.  We  will  now  take  into  consideration  the  costs  of 
production  of  the  two  component  articles,  which  we  will 
represent  by  the  functions  <^,(Z>i)  and  ^^{D^.  The  values 
of/i  and     will  now  result  from  the  two  equations 

(^) 

■ 

which  will  become,  by  reason  of  equations  (a)  and  (^), 
(ei)  F{m^px + miP;;i+miF*(,mxpi + •     - (A)] - o, 

From  these  we  derive 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


106 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


or,  by  reason  of  the  condition 


A  [A  -  =  A[A  -  </>2'(A)]. 


From  this  it  follows  that  if  the  functions  <^^\D{)  and 
4>tiPi)  reduce  to  constants,  the  net  profits  of  the  two 
cooperating  producers  will  be  equal.  But  this  will  no 
longer  be  so  in  the  more  general  case  where  the  functions 

(A)  0s' (A)  vary  respectively  with  Di  and  The 
net  profits  of  the  two  producers  will  then  be  expressed  by 


the  net  profit  of  producer  (i)  will  be  greater  than  that  of 
producer  (2).  From  equation  {a)  and  equations  (^|)  and 
(/a)  there  can  further  be  deduced 

(J)    2  F{p)  +  F\p)lp  -  ///i^'(A)  -  /^^2<^;(A)]=  o, 

^hPi  =  i  [/  +         A)  -  ^a«s'(A)]# 
and       m^pi  =  i  [/  —  ///i<^i'(A)  +  ^«<h'(A)]  • 

But  if  there  had  been  a  fusion  of  monopolies,  equation  (/) 
would  have  been  replaced  by 


(/')     I^(P)  +  ^'(/)  [/  -  «i*/(A)  -  ^^/a*2'(A)]  =  o. 


A[A-^]aiidA[A-^]; 


so  that  if  we  have,  for  instance. 


*i'(A)>*i^  and  «,'(A)<^^ 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


107 


By  recourse  to  the  graphic  representation  which  has 
served  us  for  similar  cases,  it  wiU  easily  be  recognized  that 
the  root  of  equation  (/)  is  greater  than  that  of  equation 
and,  therefore,  that  an  increase  in  price  is  the  result 
of  separation  of  the  monopolies. 

60.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  neglected  to  account  for 
the  expenses  involved  in  putting  the  raw  materials  to  use  in 
the  formation  of  the  resultant  article,  as  well  as  the  trans- 
portation  of  this  resultant  commodity  to  the  market  where  it 
is  consumed,  the  taxes  which  may  be  imposed  on  it,  etc. 

But  if  we  suppose  that  these  expenses  are  proportional  to 
the  quantity  turned  out,  which  is  ordinarily  the  case,  and 
that  the  sum  of  these  expenses,  for  each  unit  of  the  result- 
ant article,  is  expressed  by  the  constant  equation  (a)  will 
be  replaced  by 

and  instead  of  equation  (/)  we  shall  have 

Thus  the  result  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  expenses  had 
been  borne  directly  by  producers  (i)  and  (2),  and  as  if  the 
burden  of  these  expenses  had  been  divided  between  them 
in  the  ratio  of  M|  to  m^. 

61.  By  a  less  restricted  hypothesis  than  the  one  which  we 
have  considered  till  now,  each  of  the  component  articles  is 
susceptible  of  various  uses  besides  that  of  cooperating  in  the 
formation  of  the  composite  article.  Let  F{p)  be,  as  before, 
the  demand  for  the  composite  article,  and  Fii^p^)  and  F^^p'i) 
the  demand  for  article  (i)  and  that  for  article  (2),  for  other 
uses  than  that  of  cooperating  in  the  production  of  the  com- 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


108  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


pobite  article.  The  values  of  /j  and  will  still  be  ^iven  by 
the  equations  {d)^  but  we  shall  have 

and  Z?2  =  /iC/a)  -h  m^itfhpx  +  Wj/j), 

by  reason  of  which  the  equations  (d)  become 

These  expressions  thus  become  too  complicated  to  make 
it  easy  to  derive  any  general  consequences  from  them. 
Without  further  delay  we  will  therefore  pass  on  to  a  case 
far  more  important,  and  which  can  easily  be  treated  in  as 
general  a  manner  as  is  desired.  This  is  the  case  where 
each  of  the  two  articles  concurrently  used  is  produced  under 
the  miiuence  of  unlimited  competition. 

62.  According  to  the  theory  developed  in  Chapter  VIII, 
we  now  obtain  two  series  of  equations  : 


A  —  ^i' A  =  o, 
A-*.'A  =  o; 


pi  -  ^1 A  =  o, 
P%  —    A  =  o, 

Ia-*«'a=o. 


Over  the  letters  ^  and  D  we  set  one  or  two  horizontal 
lines  according  as  they  relate  to  article  (i)  or  article  {2). 

The  subscripts  to  these  letters  serve  to  distinguish  the  pro- 
ducers in  each  of  the  two  series. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  109 


Together  with  the  equations  of  {a^  and  (Os)  the  two  fol- 
lowing equations  should  be  considered : 

(^,)        +     -f ...  H-  A  =         +  ^f^ntiPx  + 

If  we  deduce  from  the  equations  of  (a^  and  (dCf)  the 

values  of  Z>2,  ...  and  25i,  Z>2»  ...  as  functions  of/,  equa- 
tions (^i)  and  (^2)      assume  the  forms 

(3)  =     A)  +  mxF{mf,  +  iw,A)* 

(4)  =  ^2(A)  -h  m^F(niipi  -h  ^^xA), 

in  which  fiji  /]  )  denotes  a  function  of  p\  which  increases 
with  pn  and  fis(A)  another  function  of  p^  which  increases 
with  A* 

Suppose  that  the  production  of  article  (i)  is  subjected 
to  an  increase  of  expense  such  as  would  result  from  a 
specific  tax;  the  values  of  p\  and  pf,  which  before  the 
increase  in  expense  were  determined  by  equation^  (^3;  and 
(4),  will  become  /i  4-  ^  and  +  ^  and  we  shall  have^  to 
determine  ti  and  %^  the  equations 

(5)  Oi(A  +  «i-i^) 

(6)  0,(A  +  «i) 

If  we  admit  that  in  comparison  with  px  and  ^,  and 
5^  are  small  fractions^  of  which  the  powers  higher  than  the 


Digitized  b^OOgle 


110  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


first  can  be  omitted  in  our  calculations,  then  equations 
aod  ^6)  will  become,  in  virtue  of  equations  (3)  and  (4), 

and  —^mim^\mip^-{-mip^ 

To  simplify  the  notation,  we  will  write  0/  instead  of 
instead  of  F\miPi  -f  fUgPg),  and  so  on  through- 
out.  Finally,  let  us  put 

From  this  and  from  the  two  preceding  equations  we  can 
derive 

(^)      ^  =     •  ^12^  12^  -  i2i 7  ^  -  rn^'J  il^), 

and  (8)        =^  •  m^m.fl^F\ 

If  we  observe  that  the  quantities  O/  and  ikj  are  essen- 
tially positive,  whereas  the  quantities  F\  /i'>  ^^id  F^  are 
essentially  negative,  inspection  of  the  values  of  ^1  and  ^ 
will  now  permit  us  to  observe  the  following  results : 

I.  ^  is  of  the  same  sign  as  // ;  for  -  is  equal  to  a  fraction, 

u 

of  which  both  numerator  and  denominator  have  aU  their 
terms  positive. 

a.  81  is  smaller  than  u\  for  the  denominator  of  the  afore- 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


111 


said  fraction  contains  all  the  terms  of  the  numerator,  and 
besides  them  a  number  of  terms  which  are  all  positive* 
3.  8|  is  of  opposite  sign  to  Si;  for  the  denominator  of  the 

fraction     is  the  same  as  that  of  the  fraction  ^,  and  the 
u  u 

numerator  of  this  latter  fraction  is  a  negative  quantity. 

Although  we  only  obtained  these  results  by  supposing  //, 
Si  and  ^  very  small  with  reference  to  pi  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that  this  restriction  can  be  removed  by  supposing  that 
any  increase  of  expense,  of  whatever  kind,  takes  place  by 
a  succession  of  very  small  increments.  As  the  signs  of  the 
quantities  Q'  and  do  not  change  in  the  passage  from  one 
state  to  the  other,  the  relations  which  v#e  have  just  found 
between  the  elementary  variations  and  ^  will  also 

hold  between  the  sums  of  these  elements  (Article  32). 

In  consequence,  any  increase  in  expense  in  the  produc- 
tion of  article  (i)  will  increase  the  price  of  that  article,  but, 
nevertheless,  so  that  the  rise  is  less  than  the  increase  in  ex- 
pense ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  price  ol  article  (2)  will  fall. 

It  would  be  easy  to  show  the  necessity  of  all  these  results 
by  methods  of  reasoning,  independent  of  the  preceding 
calculations.  If  article  (i)  did  not  rise  in  price  when 
affected  by  an  increase  in  cost,  the  producers  of  it  would  be 
obliged  to  restrict  their  output  to  avoid  a  loss,  and  it  is 
impossible  that  the  price  should  iail  to  increase  when  the 
quantity  delivered  diminishes.  The  article  must  rise  there- 
fore, and  must  rise  less  than  the  increase  in  cost,  as  other- 
wise the  producers  would  have  no  reason  for  restricting  their 
output.  Finally,  since  there  results  a  smaller  consumption 
of  article  (i),  as  well  for  the  manufacture  of  the  composite 


Digitized  by  C 


112  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


article  as  for  aU  other  uses,  there  must  also  result  a  smaller 

consumption  or  production  of  article  (2)  ;  and,  as  this  article 
is  not  subjected  to  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  production, 
the  restriction  of  production  for  this  article  can  only  be 
caused  by  a  tlecrease  in  the  price. 

The  variation  in  the  price  of  the  composite  article,  result- 
ing from  the  opposite  variations  Si  and  S^  in  the  prices  of 
the  component  articles,  is  equal  to  m^x  -|-  ^nd  from 
equations  (7)  and  (8)  we  obtain 

-f  wA'  =  '^'i"  •  Q — 

It  results  from  this  expression  that  the  variation  in  the 
price  of  the  composite  article  is  of  the  same  sign  as  u  and 
^1,  and  that  it  is  less  than  mxU^  which  is  as  it  should  be,  on 
account  of  the  fall  in  the  price  of  article  (2). 

If  we  suppose  any  number  of  articles  used  concurrently, 
it  could  be  demonstrated  in  the  same  manner,  and  by  cal- 
culations which  would  offer  no  other  difiicuUy  than  their 
length,  (i)  that  an  increase  in  cost  occurring  in  the  pro- 
duction of  one  of  the  articles,  raises  the  price  of  this  article 

and  that  of  the  composite  article,  and  causes  ;i  fall  in  the 
prices  of  all  the  other  component  articles;  (2 J  that  the 
increase  in  the  price  of  the  article  affected  is  less  than 
the  increase  in  cost  or  than  the  tax  laid  upon  it. 

63.  Let  us  now  consider  the  case  where  the  increase  in 
cost  u  falls  directly  on  the  composite  article,  whether  it  is 
a  specific  tax  imposed  on  this  article,  on  an  increase  occur- 
ring in  the  cost  of  distribution  of  the  article  to  consumers. 
Equations  (3)  and  (4)  will  be  replaced  by 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


113 


and 

and  these,  when  treated  as  were  equations  (5)  and  (6)1  will 
give 

8,0,'  =  8,7?,'  H-  m^hiF*  +  mimAF'  -h 
and  =  W^s'  +  m^nij^F*  +  i«a*8^'  +  I 

torn  which  we  derive 

and 

in  wliich  the  polynomial  represented  by  Q  is  composed  of 
the  same  terms  as  in  the  preceding  article. 

From  these  expressions  we  easily  conclude,  in  virtue  of 
the  signs  of  the  quantities  ft'  and  F' : 

1.  That  both  81  and  8^  are  of  the  opposite  sign  to  u, 

2.  That  the  quantity  4-  is  numerically  less 
than  u. 

Moreover,  the  variations  81  and  8|  in  the  prices  of  the 

compuneni  articles  are  mutually  connected  by  this  very 
simple  relation : 

8i^miW-/^;) 
8,  m^Q,^-F,'y 

which  IS  independent  of  the  function  F.  Consequently, 
any  increase  of  expense,  or  any  tax  which  alTects  the  com- 
posite article,  will  lower  the  prices  of  the  component  com- 
modities, and  at  the  same  time  will  raise  the  price  of  the 
I 


1 

Digitized  by  Google 


114  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


compobite  article,  but  by  a  quantity  less  than  since  this 
rise  in  price  will  be  expressed  by 

and  bincc  m^i  4-  is,  as  we  have  just  seen,  numerically 
less  than    and  of  opposite  sign. 

These  results  can  readily  be  generalized,  whatever  the 
number  and  kind  of  the  component  commodities,  so  long  as 
they  are  produced  under  the  influence  of  unlimited  com* 
petition.  They  are  worthy  of  serious  consideration,  as  they 
have  all  the  certainty  of  mathematical  theorems,  without 
being  such  as  must,  on  that  account,  be  excluded  from  the 
number  of  practical  truths. 

64.  Let  us  go  on  to  the  case  where  article  (2)  has  a  limit 
to  its  production,  so  that  the  value  of  derived  from  equa- 
tions (3)  and  (4  )  would  correspond  to  a  demand  for  this 
article  which  its  producers  could  not  satisfy,  if  we  denote 
by  A2  this  limit  of  production,  the  values  of  px  and  p^  will 
be  determined  by  the  system  of  equations 

and  ^2  =     A)  +      ip^\P\  +  ^^A)- 

Under  these  circumstances  there  will  be  no  change  in  the 
equations  which  determine  the  values  of  px  and  p^,  if  we 

suppose  that  there  falls  on  article  (2)  a  tax,  or  an  increase 
in  the  cost  of  production,  denoted  by  u ;  consequently  these 
values  will  remain  the  same,  and  the  entire  increase  in  the 
cost  will  be  borne  by  the  producers  of  (2),  without  any  loss 
resulting  to  the  consumers  of  the  component  commodities, 
or  of  the  composite  article. 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  115 

If  the  tax  u  falls  on  article  (i),  both  of  the  old  prices  px 
and  pi  will  vary,  and  may  be  represented  by  /i  -f  Si  and 
p^  +  ^.  Equations  (5)  and  (6)  are  applicable  to  this  case 
by  replacing  the  funcdon  A  +  So)  in  the  second  of  these 
equations  by  the  constant  which  amounts  to  supposing 
the  derivative  Of'  equal  to  zero  in  the  formulas  derived  from 
these  equations. 

Thus,  under  the  hypothesis  that  the  variations  d^,  and  62 
can  be  treated  as  very  small  quantities,  we  shall  have : 

h=  ^  » 

and  ^^um,m.^^F\ 

SS  — 

«iOi  i-   —  y 

in  which  the  composition  of  the  polynomial  K  is  given  by 
the  auxiliary  equation 

From  these  equations  are  derived  the  following  conse- 
(]uences,  which  are  applicable  to  all  values  of  the  variations 

Uf  Si,  and  . 

I.  ^  is  of  the  same  sign  as  and  numerically  smaller ; 
the  article  affected  by  the  tax  increases  in  price,  but  by  an 

aniuunl  less  than  the  tax,  so  that  there  will  be  a  diminution 
in  the  quantity  produced  and  in  the  income  of  its  pro- 
ducers; 


f 

i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


116  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


2.  80  IS  of  opposite  sign  to  //,  so  that  the  article  which  is 
not  directly  affected  by  the  tax  falls  in  price,  to  the  disad- 
vantage of  the  producers  of  this  article^  even  though  the 
quantity  produced  does  not  vary  : 

3,  Mx^i  -h  nu^  is  of  the  same  sign  as  u ;  thus  the  com- 
posite article  will  rise  in  price,  the  rise  of  the  taxed  article 
more  than  compensating  for  the  fall  of  the  other  article. 

It  would  be  found  in  the  same  way  that  the  prices  of  both 
component  articles  would  fall  if  the  tax  or  the  increase  in 
cost  bears  directly  on  the  resultant  article. 

65.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  for  some  reason  the  limit  A2 
changes  and  becomes  A«  +  2^9  without  the  occurrence  of  any 
change  m  the  cost  of  production.  Treating,  according  to 
our  method,  the  variation  v%  and  the  resulting  variations  3| 
and  h%  to  begin  with  as  very  small,  we  shall  have : 


R 


From  these  expressions  we  conclude  that  whatever  the 
extent  of  the  variations,  raising  the  limit     depresses  the 

price  of  article  (2),  and  raises  the  price  of  article  t^i),  but 
in  a  less  degree,  so  that  it  brings  about  a  fall  in  the  price  of 
the  resultant  article* 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


01   THE  THEORY  Of  WEALTH 


U7 


CHAPTER  X 

OF  TKE  COMMUNICATION  OF  MARKETS 

66.  The  perfecting  of  commerce  and  of  means  of  trans- 
portation, and  the  abolition  of  prohibitory  laws  or  restrictive 
taxes,  may  put  into  communication  markets  which  were  pre- 
viously isolated  from  each  other,  either  wholly  or  only  with 
reference  to  certain  commodities.  The  object  of  this  chap- 
ter is  to  study  the  principal  consequences  which  the  estab- 
Hshment  of  such  comnumication  may  involve. 

It  is  evident  that  an  article  capable  of  transportation 
must  flow  from  the  market  where  its  value  is  less  to  the 
market  where  its  value  is  greater,  until  this  difference  in 
value^  from  one  market  to  the  other,  represents  no  more 
than  the  cost  of  transportation. 

By  cost  of  transportation  must  be  understood,  not  only 
the  price  of  necessaries  and  the  wages  of  the  agents  by 
whom  the  transportation  is  mechanically  carried  on,  but  also 
insurance  premiums,  and  the  profits  of  the  merchant,  who 
ought  to  obtain  in  his  business  the  interest  on  the  capital 
employed  and  a  proper  return  for  his  industry. 

To  compare  the  values  of  the  commodity  in  the  two 
markets,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  not  only  the  prices  of 
this  article  in  money,  but  also  the  rate  of  exchange  between 
the  two  markets,  or,  in  technical  terms,  between  the  two 


J 18  THE  MATHEMATICAL  FRtNCIPLES 


places^  which  may  be  respectively  regarded  as  the  commer- 
cial centres  of  the  markets  in  question.   For  instance,  if 
we  take  for  our  unit  of  value  the  value  of  one  gram  of  silver 
in  market      the  value  of  the  coiumodity  m  market 
expressed  in  grams  of  silver,  must  be  multiplied  by  the 
coefficient  of  exchange  from  ^  to  ^  (Chapter  III) ;  and  if 
this  reduced  value^  added  to  the  cost  of  transportation, 
gives  a  smaller  sum  than  the  value  of  the  commodity  in 
grams  of  silver  in  market     then  only  will  the  transporta- 
tion of  the  commodity  from  B  to  A  take  place. 

67.  It  would  be  a  complicated  problem,  and  at  the  same 
time  one  of  very  little  interest  for  economic  theory,  to 
determine  the  influence  of  the  communication  of  markets 
on  the  price  of  an  article  which  is  the  subject  of  a  monopoly, 
as  well  in  die  importing  as  in  the  exporting  market.  It  is 
easy  to  see  that  under  any  such  hypothesis  the  effects  of 
competition  would  be  combined  with  those  which  result 
properly  from  the  communication  of  markets ;  and  it  is 
simpler,  as  well  as  more  important,  to  consider  directly  the 
case  where  the  effects  of  monopoly  are  extinguished,  <>. 
where  the  production  of  the  article  in  both  markets  is  ruled 
by  the  laws  of  unlimited  competition. 

It  is  manifest  in  this  case,  as  the  production  must  always 
increase  in  the  exporting  market,  that  the  price  of  the  com- 
modity will  be  higher  there  than  before  the  outflow ;  and 
reciprocally,  as  the  price  must  fall  in  the  importing  market, 
the  quantity  produced  there  will  be  smaller. 

Before  communication,  the  prices  and  in  the  two 
markets  A  and  B  were  determined  by  equations  of  the 
form 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  119 


l«*(A)==-^*(A), 

in  which  the  characteristics  F  and  O  have  the  signification 
which  was  attributed  to  them  in  Chapter  VIII,  and  letters 

placed  as  indices  at  the  foot  of  these  characteristics  serve 
to  distinguish  the  functions  which  refer  to  market  A  from 
those  which  are  relative  to  market 

After  communication,  these  two  equations  are  to  be 
replaced  by  the  following, 

(2)  0.(  A')  -h  0,(  A'  +  c)  =     A')  +    (A'  +  c), 

in  which  A  represents  the  price  in  the  exporting  market 
Ar  and  c  the  cost  of  transportation  from  A  to  B, 

68.  One  of  the  interesting  questions  which  can  be  pro- 
posed is  to  know  whether  the  communication  of  markets 
always  increases  the  total  production,  or,  in  other  words 

analytically,  whether  we  shall  iiud  in  all  cases 

(3)  ^a(A')  -H  F,{p:  4-  e)  >  /;(A)  +  F,{p,\ 

To  settle  this  question  in  the  negative,  we  have  only  to 
consider  a  particular  case,  which  renders  comparison  of 
equations  (i)^  and  (2)  more  easy  \  namely,  the  case  where 
the  quantities  A>  A>  A'  vary  by  quantities  so  small 
that,  for  an  approximate  calculation,  it  is  possible  to  neglect 
the  squares  and  higher  powers  of  these  differences. 

Let 

A'==A  +  S  and  A=A  +  <^» 
whence,  therefore, 

A'-h€==A  +  «'  +  «-«- 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


120  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRtNCrPLES 


We  must  suppose  a>>e,  as  otherwise  the  establishment 
of  communicatioD  would  not  deteraiine  a  flow  from  A  to 

By  apj living  to  equation  (2)  the  method  of  substitution^ 
dcvelopiiieiit,  and  reduction,  of  which  we  have  already 
given  many  examples,  this  equation  will  become 

(4)  «i «.'(/.)  -  ^.'(  A)  J = (« ^  €  -  «)  j^;(A)  -  o;  (A)  { ; 

and  from  the  signs  which  are  the  essential  characteristics  of 
the  functions      and  O'  it  is  easy  hence  to  deduce : 

1.  That  6  is  of  the  same  sign  as  oi  —  c,  and  consequeutiy 
positive ; 

2.  That  we  have  8<uj--c;  which  otherwise  very  evi- 
dently results  from  the  fact  that  communication  must  raise 
the  price  of  the  commodity  in  the  exporting  market  and 
depress  it  in  the  importing  market. 

Substituting  now  their  values  for  and  /J  4-  e  in  in- 
equality (3),  this  becomes,  after  making  the  reductions, 

a•/^,'(A)  H-  (8  +  €-ai)/;'(A)>o. 

If  from  equation  (  4)  we  derive  the  value  of  (8-|-c  — w), 
and  cancel  the  common  factor  6,  which  is  positive,  the  pre- 
ceding inequality  will  become 

I'm  {Pm)  -T  .  ,  ,    >  O, 

or  more  simply,  by  eliminating  the  denominator,  and  chang- 
ing the  sign  of  the  inequality  because  the  denominator  is 

negative, 


L.ijiu<_L;d  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  121 


It  IS  evident  that  this  inequality,  and  consequently  ine- 
quality (3),  may  or  may  not  be  satisfied  according  to  the 
numerical  relations  of  the  functions      and  O'. 

There  is  therefore  no  contradiction  involved  in  admitting 
that  the  communication  of  markets  diminishes  the  total  pro- 
duction. 

And,  reciprocally,  the  isolation  of  markets  may  be  a 
.  cause  which  increases  the  quantity  of  an  article  delivered 
for  consumption.  We  intend  here  only  to  determine  this 
fact,  without  pretending,  which  would  be  absurd,  to  con- 
tradict the  opinion  which  has  been  very  generally  formed, 
of  the  advantages  for  the  community  procured  by  improve- 
ments in  the  means  of  comnuinication  or  by  the  extension 
of  markets.  This  question  will  be  the  subject  of  a  thorough 
disoission  further  on. 

It  is  well  to  remark  that  to  make  applicable  the  approxi- 
mate formulas  which  we  have  just  been  using,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  the  quantities  «9  and  e  should  be  very  small 
with  reference  to  the  original  prices  and  \  it  is  enough 
that  the  differences  8  and  —  c  should  be  very  small  with 
reference  to 

69.  Not  only  the  quantity  produced,  but  also  the  total 
value  of  the  quantity  produced,  may,  according  to  circum- 
stances, increase  or  diminish  in  consequence  of  communi- 
cation of  markets.  In  fact,  if  we  admit,  what  implies  no 
contradiction,  that  the  value  of  is  greater  than  the  value 
of  /,  which  would  render  the  function  pFa{p)  a  maximum, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  value  of  is  less  than  that 
which  would  render  the  function  pFf,{p)  a  maximum,  then, 
since  we  ha^'e 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


122 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


we  shall  also  have^  according  to  the  tendency  of  these  func- 
tions, 


In  general,  the  preceding  inequality  will  or  will  not  be 
satisfied,  according  to  the  numerical  relations  of  the  quan- 
tities vvliK  h  enter  into  the  inequality. 

70.  A  tax  on  exportation  or  on  importation  will  produce 
the  same  effects  as  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  transportation, 
equal  to  the  amount  of  the  tax.  Let  us  deiKUc  simply  by/ 
the  price  of  the  commodity  which  was  established  in  the 
exporting  market  before  the  tax,  or  the  root  of  the  equation 

0.(/)  -h        -!-€)  =  ^.(/)  -h        +  c). 

Let  u  be  the  tax,  which  we  will  at  first  suppose  to  be  a 
very  small  number  with  reference  to  /  and  /  +  c;  then 
=  /  -h  S  will  be  the  value  of  p  which  results  as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  tax,  while  the  development  of  the  equation 

=      -H  a)  -f  F^ip  +  ^  -h  £  4-  ) , 

in  which  we  only  retain  the  first  powers  ui  the  variations 
S  and  u,  will  give  us 


and 

and  a  fortiori 


(A'  +  e)/;(A'  +  e)<A^5(A), 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


123 


From  these  expressions  the  following  conclusions  ;ire 
derived : 

1.  8  will  be  a  negative  quantity,  and  numerically  smaller 
than  t  -\-  u\  ix,  the  tax  will  always  cause  the  commodity  to 
fall  in  the  exporting  market,  by  a  quantity  which  may  be 
greater  than  the  tax  itself,  but  will  always  be  smaller  than 
the  sum  of  the  cost  of  transportation  and  the  tax.  All  con- 
ditions being  otherwise  the  same>  the  more  considerable  the 
cost  of  transportation,  the  more  the  tax  will  affect  the  price 
in  the  exporting  market. 

2,  8  +  »  will  be  a  positive  or  a  negative  quantity  accord- 
ing as 

^  ->  -  P^P) 

and  consequently  may  increase  or  diminish  the  price,  ac- 
cording to  circumstances^  m  the  importing  market. 

In  the  ignorance  in  which  we  ordinarily  are  as  to  the 
numerical  relations  which  exist  between  the  quantities 
0«',  O^',  F^,  and  the  chances  will  be  in  favour  of  an 
increase  if  the  tax  exceeds  the  cost  of  transportation,  and, 
on  the  contrary,  ihe)  uull  be  m  la\  our  ui  a  decrease  li  liie 
cost  of  transportation  exceeds  the  tax. 

To  pass  from  the  h)rpothesis  of  a  tax  to  that  of  a  bounty 
granted,  whctlier  on  exportation  or  on  importation,  we 
have  only  to  consider  u  as  negative  in  the  equations  of 
(6) ;  and  then  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  two  cases, 
according  as  //  is  a  quantity  numericaiiy  smaller  or  greater 
than  uc.  according  as  the  rate  of  the  bounty  is  below  or 
above  the  cost  of  transportation. 

In  the  first  case  h  remains  a  negative  quantity,  numerically 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


124  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


smaller  than  the  difference  between  the  cost  of  transpor- 
tation and  the  bounty.  The  article  falls  as  well  in  the 
exporting  as  in  the  importing  market. 

In  the  second  case  the  bounty  raises  the  commodity  in 
the  exporting  market  by  an  amount  less  than  the  difference 
between  the  bounty  and  the  cost  of  transportation^  and  it 
always  lowers  the  commodity  in  the  importing  market.  , 

71.  In  short)  a  duty  always  lowers  the  price  in  the 
exporting  market,  and^  according  to  circumstances,  may 
lower  or  raise  it  in  the  importing  market.  On  the  con- 
trary, a  bounty  always  lowers  the  price  in  the  importing 
market,  and,  according  to  circumstances,  may  lower  or  raise 
it  in  the  exporting  market. 

Within  the  limits  here  expressed,  this  proposition  holds 
good  for  any  values  of  /,  €,  and  u  whatsoever,  without  any 
necessity  of  a  restriction  to  a  very  small  quantity  in  con* 
sidering  the  variation  //.  The  same  method  of  reasoning 
which  we  made  use  of  in  Article  32  suffices  to  prove  this. 

It  is,  moreover,  indifferent  as  to  the  determination  of 
prices,  and  for  the  interests  of  producers  and  consumers  in 
both  markets,  whether  collection  of  the  tax,  or  payment  of 
the  bounty,  takes  place  at  the  departure  of  the  commodity 
froui  the  territory  of  A  or  at  its  entrance  into  the  territory 
of  although  this  is  of  great  importance  to  the  financial 
interests  of  the  countries  to  which  these  territories  be- 
long. 

It  is  needless  to  mention  that  any  increase  in  the  cost  of 
transportation  would  act  in  the  same  way  as  a  tax,  and  any 
decrease  as  a  bounty. 

72.  It  sometimes  happens,  when  an  internal  revenue  tax 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  US 

is  imposed  on  a  commodity  in  the  country  of  its  origin, 
that  in  order  to  favour  its  exportation,  the  government 
reimburses  or  restores  the  amount  of  the  impost  to  the 
merchant  who  exports  the  commodity.  To  estimate  the 
results  of  this  combination,  let  us  observe  that  if  the  price 
/  of  the  article  in  the  exporting  market  were  determined 
before  imposition  of  the  tax  by  the  equation 

0.(/)  +  0,0>  +  e)  =  FJ^p)  +  FJ^  +  f), 

then  imposition  of  the  tax  without  restitution  of  the  im* 
post  when  the  commodity  is  exported^  would  involve  a  new 
price  p\  given  by  the  equation 

and  finally,  if/"  is  the  price  which  is  fixed  in  the  exporting 
market,  after  reimbursement  of  the  impost,      will  be  the 

root  of  the  equation 

Let  =/  -h  8.  If  we  neglect  the  squares  of  8  and  u, 
this  last  equation  will  give 

in\fi^'U  ^  ~  +   

w;       . +  o»'(/+ c)-y^;' V -he)' 

It  follows  from  this  that  8  is  of  the  same  sign  as  Uy  and 

numerically  stn  iM  -r,  so  that  ilie  combination  of  an  internal 
revenue  tax  with  restitution  of  the  impost  raises  the  com- 
modity in  the  exporting  market  and  lowers  it  in  the 
importing  market.  This  double  effect  can  only  be  attained 
by  an  increase  in  the  amount  exported,  and,  m  iact,  as 


126  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

it  is  easy  to  see,  the  quantity  exported,  which  has  for  its 
expression 

will  become,  after  the  variation  in  price  caused  by  the 
above-mentioned  combination, 

It  remains,  therefore,  to  be  proved  that 

0.(/-f8-»)-J^.(/  +  «)>0.(/)-/r(/), 
or,  by  developing  and  neglecting  the  squares  of  d  and 

(8-»).o;(/)-a./?;'(/)>o. 

By  substituting  for  h  its  value  in  terms  of  as  given  by 
equation  (7),  and  suppressing  the  common  &ctors,  and 
carefully  changing  the  sign  of  the  inequality,  when  the  lac- 
tors  suppressed  are  negative,  this  inequality  becomes 

-iV(/-l-€)+y?;'(/  +  «)<o, 

which  is  evidently  satisfied,  on  account  of  the  signs  of  Q! 
and  F\ 

These  results  may  be  extended  to  all  values  of  8  and  u, 
73.  in  all  the  formulas  of  this  chapter  it  would  only  be 
necessary  to  make  O.'    o  or  O^'  =  o,  if  the  quantity  pro- 
duced in  liiaiket  A  or  market  H  should  remain  constant 
owing  to  the  conditions  of  production. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  127 


CHAPTER  XI 

OF  THE  SOCUL  INCOME 

74.  S(i  far  we  hnve  studied  how,  for  eacii  coniiaudity  by 
itself,  ihe  law  of  deuiand  in  counectiou  with  the  conditions  of 
production  of  that  commodity,  determines  the  price  of  it 

and  regulates  tlic  iiicuriiLo  oi  Wr,  producers.  V^'e  couijidered 
as  given  and  invariable  the  prices  of  other  commodities  and 
the  incomes  of  other  producers ;  but  in  reality  the  economic 
system  is  a  whole  of  which  all  the  parts  are  connected  arid 
react  on  each  otlier.  An  increase  in  the  income  of  the  pro- 
ducers of  commodity  A  will  affect  the  demand  for  com- 
modities //,  C,  etc.,  and  the  incomes  of  their  producers,  and, 
by  its  reaction,  will  involve  a  change  in  the  demand  for 
commodity  A.  It  seems,  therefore,  as  if,  for  a  complete 
and  rigorous  solution  of  the  problems  relative  to  some  parts 
of  the  economic  system,  it  were  indispensable  to  take  the 
entire  system  into  consideration.  But  this  would  surpass 
the  powers  of  mathematical  analysis  and  of  our  practical 
methods  of  calculation,  even  if  the  values  of  all  the  con- 
stants could  be  assigned  to  them  numerically.  The  object 
of  this  chapter  and  of  the  following  one  is  to  show  how  far  it 
is  possible  to  avoid  this  difiiiculty^  while  maintaining  a  cer- 
tain kind  of  approximation,  and  to  cany  on,  by  the  aid  of 

Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


128 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


mathematical  symbols,  a  useful  analysis  of  the  most  general 
questions  which  this  subject  brings  up. 

We  will  denote  by  social  income  the  sum,  not  only  of 
incomes  properly  so  called,  which  belong  to  members  of 
society  in  their  quality  of  real  estate  owners  or  capitalists, 
but  also  the  wages  and  annual  profits  which  come  to  them 
in  their  capacity  of  workers  and  industrial  agents.  We  will 
also  include  in  it  the  annual  amotmt  of  the  stipends  by 
means  of  which  individuals  or  the  state  sustain  those  classes 
of  men  which  economic  writers  have  charactenzed  as  unpro- 
ductive, because  the  product  of  their  labour  is  not  anything 
material  or  salable.  Usage  would  doubtless  permit  the  use 
of  these  words  in  a  different  acceptation ;  but  we  thmk  that 
.  the  definition  which  has  just  been  given  is  better  qualified 
than  any  other  for  directing  the  line  of  argument  toward 
accurate  deductions  and  consequences  capable  of  appU- 
cation. 

Whenever  a  commodity  is  supplied  for  consumption,  in 
the  price  for  which  it  is  sold  there  should  be  found  shares 
pertaining  to  the  incomes  of  landk>rds  and  of  capitalists  who 
furnished  the  raw  materials  and  the  instruments  for  utilizing 
them,  and  the  profits  and  wages  of  the  various  industrial 
agents  who  have  cooperated  in  producing  the  commodity 
and  in  bringing  ft  to  market.  All  the  elements  into  which 
this  price  can  be  decomposed  are  distributed  into  various 
branches  of  the  social  income.  In  consequence,  if  p  de- 
notes the  price  of  the  unit  of  the  commodity,  and  2?  the 
number  of  units  annually  supplied  for  consumption,  the 
product  pD  will  express  the  sum  to  the  extent  of  which  this 
commodity  cooperates  in  making  up  the  social  income. 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  129 


This  part  of  the  income,  therefore,  will  increase  or 

diminish  in  consequence  of  variations  occurring  in  the 
price  and  consumption  of  the  commodity^  according  as  the 
product  //> increases  or  diminishes;  and  it  will  be  at  its 
highest  po-^hible  point  ^vl^en  the  product  pD  or  J>F{p) 
attains  its  maximum  value. 

75.  Let  us  denote  by  and  pi  two  different  values  of 
/,  and  by  and  Dy  the  correspondmi;  values  of  D.  Let 
us  ^rther  suppose,  to  make  these  ideas  more  precise,  that 

/i>/o,  and </,  A, 

so  that  an  increase  in  price  of  the  commodity  involves  a 

decrease  la  tiie  social  income,  or  at  least  in  the  portion  of 
iipD. 

This  diminution  of  income  will  be  differently  subdivided, 

according  to  circumstances,  between  the  various  pruducers 
who  cooperate  in  the  creation  of  the  commodity,  whether 
by  the  use  of  their  property  or  by  personal  work. 

For  the  veiy  reason  tluit  they  have  less  incuuie,  \\\v\  will 
have  less  money  available  for  their  own  consumptions,  which 
may  affect  the  demand  for  other  commodities,  diminish  the 
incomes  of  many  other  classes  of  producers,  and  cause  by 
its  reaction  a  new  diminution  in  the  social  income.  It  is 
important  to  obtain  an  accurate  idea  of  this  reaction,  which, 
vaguely  considered,  would  seem  to  hcU  c  110  limit. 

In  consequence  of  the  rise  of  the  commodity,  of  which 
the  price  has  passed  from  the  value  to  the  value  /i,  those 
consumers  who  have  continued  to  buy  the  commodity  not- 
withstanding the  rise  have  been  obliged  to  withdraw  fxom 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


130 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


the  consumption  of  other  commodities,  for  application  to 

the  demand  for  the  commodity  which  has 

risen,  a  sum  equal  to  (/i  —  A)  A 

On  the  other  hand,  those  consumers  whom 
the  rise  has  deterred  from  demanding  the 
commodity  which  they  previously  consumed 
have  had  at  their  disposal  for  other  demands 
a  portion  of  their  incomes  equal  to  /oC^o-^-^i) 

Subtracting  the  first  of  these  values  from 
the  second,  we  find  for  the  remainder  pj^xs  -/i^i 

i>.  a  sum  exactly  ecjual,  as  siiould  be  the  case, 
to  that  by  which  the  income  of  the  producers  of  the  com* 
modtty  was  diminished  by  the  rise  in  price. 

Ihus,  when  we  consider  the  producers  and  consumers 
of  the  commodity  in  question  throughout  the  world,  we  find 
that  the  same  annual  amount  remains  available  for  the 
sum  total  of  other  commodities.  The  possibility  then 
becomes  apparent,  that  this  amount  may  be  so  distributed 
that  the  demand  for  each  of  these  commodities  will  remain 
the  same  as  before ;  and  consei^uently  so  that  no  change 
will  occur  in  the  system  of  prices  (except  in  the  price  of  the 
commodity  which  has  risen),  nor  in  the  system  of  incomes 
(except  in  the  incomes  of  the  producers  who  cooperate  by 
the  use  of  their  property  or  by  the  personal  industry  in  the 
production  of  the  commodity  which  has  risen). 

76.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  of  course  this  exact  distribution 
is  not  admissible,  and  in  general,  on  the  contrary,  it  must 
be  the  case,  that  a  perturbation  experienced  by  one  element 
ot  the  system  makes  itself  felt  from  that  to  the  next,  and  by 
reaction  throughout  the  entire  system.   Nevertheless,  since 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  131 


the  varidtion  occurring  in  the  price  of  commodity  and 
in  the  income  of  its  producers,  leaves  intact  the  sum  total 
of  the  funds  applicable  to  the  demand  for  the  other  com- 
modi  ties  B,  C,  Dy  E,  etc.,  it  is  evident  that  the  sum 
diverted,  by  hypothesis,  firom  commodity  by  reason  of 
the  new  direction  of  demands,  will  necessarily  be  applied  to 
the  demand  for  one  or  several  of  the  commodities  C,  D, 

etc*  Strictly  speaking,  this  perturbation  of  the  second 
degree,  which  occurs  in  the  incomes  of  the  producers  of 
B^  Cy  D,  etc.,  would  react  on  the  system  in  turn  until  a  new 
equilibrium  is  established ;  but,  although  we  are  unable  to 
calculate  this  series  of  reactions,  the  general  principles  of 
analysis  will  show  us  that  they  must  go  on  with  gradually 
decreasing  amplitude,  so  that  it  may  be  admitted,  as  an 
approximation,  that  a  variation  occurring  in  the  incomes  of 
the  producers  of  while  modifying  the  distribution  of  the 
remainder  of  the  social  income  among  the  producers  of 
C,  Ey  etc.,  does  not  alter  the  total  value  of  it,  or 
only  alters  it  by  a  quantity  which  is  negligible  in  comparison 
with  the  variation  p^s^  —  /i  A>  which  is  experienced  by  the 
incomes  of  the  producers  of  A,  The  variation  of  the 
soc  ial  income  is  thus  rethu  ed  to  /^o^o  ~  /i-^^i,  an  error 
not  exceeding  quantities  of  tiie  second  degree^  to  use  the  lan- 
guage of  mathematicians. 

Not  only  do  the  preceding  considerations  justify  this 
simplification,  which  is  strictly  admissible  whenever  very 
small  variations  in  the  system  of  values  are  to  be  discussed, 
and  without  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  carry  deduc- 
tions any  further,  but  admitting  even  that  compensation 
does  not  take  place  in  a  particular  case,  ix^  that  the  varia- 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


132  THE  MATffE.\fATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

tion  /o^o  — /i A  caused  in  the  incomes  of  the  producers  of 
A  differs  sensibly  from  the  resulting  variation  in  the  social 
income.  As  no  reason  appears  why  one  rather  than  the 
other  should  be  the  greater  or  the  smaller,  it  would  still  be 
permissible  to  suppose  that  compensation  takes  place  when- 
ever these  considerations  are  not  applied  to  a  particular 
case,  and  when,  on  the  contrary,  only  the  average  results, 
the  general  laws  of  the  distribution  of  wealth,  are  under 
discussion. 

Some  readers  will  possibly  object  to  the  preceding  argu- 
ments, that  we  have  distinguished  the  consumers  who  cease 
to  buy  the  commodity  which  rises  from  those  who  continue 
to  buy  in  spite  of  the  increase  in  price,  without  considering 
the  consumers  who  only  reduce  the  demand  which  they 
made  for  the  commodity.  But  it  is  evident  that  for  each 
consumer  in  this  third  category  it  is  possible,  theoretically, 
to  substitute  two  others,  who  will  be  one  in  the  first  category, 
and  the  other  in  the  second.  The  simplificatton  which  we 
have  adopted,  therefore,  makes  no  real  difference  in  the 
discussion. 

77.  According  to  the  explanations  which  have  just  been 
given,  and  to  which  all  analogous  cases  can  be  referred,  we 
will  suppose  that  the  variation  in  the  price  of  commodity  A 
his  diminished  the  social  income  by  a  value  expressed  by 
/ii A  —  pi-Oi,  Room  must  be  made  here  for  an  essential 
observation,  without  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  give 
a  suitable  interpretation  of  the  abstract  theory  of  wealth, 
and  one  which  gives  the  clue  to  many  misunderstandings 
between  ^eculative  writers. 

The  consumers  who  demand  commodity  A,  after  as  well 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  133 


as  before  the  variation  in  price,  who  pay  p\Dy  for  the  same 
quantity  of  the  commodity  for  which  they  only  paid  pj^i 
before,  are  really  in  just  the  same  situation  as  to  fortune  as 

if  the  commodity  had  not  risen  and  their  in- 
comes had  been  diminished  by  (/i  —  pi^Di 

If,  then,  to  this  expression  we  add  the 
quantity  which  expresses  the  decrease  in  the 
income  of  the  producers  of  the  commodity,  i>.    /bZ?o  ~  p\^\ 
the  sura  {D^  —  Di) 

will  express  the  rea/  diminution  of  the  social 
income,  of  which  the  quantity  P^^—p\D%^  only  expresses 
the  nominal  diminution. 

Let  us  note  that  this  result  coincides  with  that  which 
can  be  obtained  directly,  and  in  the  simplest  manner,  by 
considering  that  the  rise  in  price  has  reduced  from  /7o  to 
Dx  the  annual  production  of  the  commodity,  and  by  this 
alone  has  destroyed  annually  a  value  equal  to  p^^D^  —  D^)^ 
so  that,  in  fact,  the  quantity  Dy  which  continues  to  be  pio- 
dnced  has  increased  in  vahie,  which  reduces  the  loss  l)orne 
by  the  producers ;  but  that  the  benefit,  which  for  them  is  to 
be  subtracted  from  the  loss  /o(i>o  — A)>  is  exactly  balanced 
by  the  loss  w'hich  this  rise  causes  to  the  consumers  who 
bear  it,  so  that  finally  the  loss  for  society  must  always  be 
valued  at  p^ip^  — 

It  must  also  be  observed  that  the  consumers  who  cease 
buying  commodity  A  after  the  advance,  and  who  transfer  to 
commodities  C,  etc.,  a  value  exactly  equal  to  the  one 
which  has  just  been  found,  i.e.  /^,iD^^~  D^,  experience  a 
loss  in  consequence  of  the  variation  in  the  price  of  A,  by 
being  led  to  make  a  different  use  of  this  portion  of  their 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


134  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


incomes  than  the  one  which  they  preferred  under  the  old 
system  of  pric  es.  But  this  kind  of  damage  cannot  be  esti- 
mated numerically,  as  can  that  which  the  producers  bear 
through  diminution  of  their  incomes,  or  the  consumers  by 
the  increase  of  the  sum  which  they  expend  to  buy  the  same 
quantity  of  the  commodity.  Here  comes  in  one  of  those 
relations  of  order  and  not  of  size,  which  numbers  can  indi- 
cate indeed,  but  cannot  measure.  As  our  discussions  only 
consider  measurable  things,  the  product  pJ^D^^  Di)  will 
be,  for  the  case  in  point,  the  measure  of  what  we  will  call 
the  actual  diminution  of  the  social  income,  in  contrast  with 
what  we  have  called  the  nominal  diminution. 

78.  If  /oA<AA»  a  remaining  always  smaller  than 
and  consequently      greater  than  Z>j,  the  same  considera- 
tions as  those  discussed  above  will  prove  that  the  social 
income  has  nominally  increased  in  consequence  of  the  rise 
of  the  commodity,  and  that  it  has  increaiied  by  a  quantity 
sensibly  equal  to  pxDx^ptiDny  or  to  the  increase  which 
occurs  in  the  incomes  of  the  producers  of  the  commodity 
which  has  risen.   Hut  if,  then,  from  the  loss  borne  by  the  con- 
sumers, a  loss  equivalent  to  a  diminution  of  in- 
come, and  of  which,  as  before,  the  expression  is    (/i  —  /o)  J\ 
we  subtract  the  nommal  increase  of  the  social 
income  piDx—p^y 
the  difference  /o(A~^j) 
will  give,  as  before,  the  measure  of  the  real 
diminution  of  the  social  income,  although  this  income  has 
received  a  nominal  increase. 

It  is  plain  that  this  nominal  increase  is  very  real  for  the 
producers,  among  whom  the  value /iZ^i  is  divided ;  but  they 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


135 


only  obtain  this  advantage  at  the  expense  of  consumers, 

whose  losses  more  than  compensate  for  the  benefit  received 
by  the  producers ;  so  that,  for  society  considered  through- 
out the  world,  there  is  an  increase  in  the  nominal  income 
and  a  decrease  in  the  actual  income. 

If,  therefore,  the  question  is  of  a  commodity  for  which  the 
cost  of  production  is  either  nothing  or  insensible,  the  most 

favourable  condition  for  a  nominal  increase  in  the  social 
income  would  be  for  this  commodity  to  fall  into  the  hands 
of  a  monopolist,  since  the  product  pD  would  then  reach  its 
maximum  \  alue  )  but  whatever  there  is  of  paradox  in  such 
a  proposition,  vanishes  when  attention  is  paid  to  the  distinc- 
tion which  has  just  been  made  between  the  nominal  and  the 

real  \'ariatiQns  of  income.  Evidently,  as  the  monopoU*  of 
such  a  commodity  is  divided  between  two,  tliree,  or  more 
producers,  the  commodity  will  gradually  M  in  price,  accord- 
ing to  the  formulas  given  in  Chapter  VII ;  the  consumption 
will  go  on  increasing,  and  the  social  income,  although  nomi- 
nally decreasing,  will  experience  an  actual  increase ;  as,  in 
fact,  common  sense  teaches  that  society  can  only  ^am  by 
the  weakening  or  extinction  of  such  a  monopoly. 

79.  Whenever  a  commodity,  besides  being  subject  to  a 
cost  of  production,  is  under  a  monopoly,  we  can  be  sure 
that  any  tax  or  any  increase  of  cost,  by  raising  the  price 
and  reducing  the  consumption  of  the  commodity,  will  cause 
to  the  social  income,  not  only  an  actual,  but  also  a  nominal 
diminution.  In  fact,  if  ^^D)  is  the  function  which  measured 
the  cost  borne  by  the  monopolist,  and  to  which  new  ex- 
penses are  now  added,  p<s  being  the  value  which  renders  the 
function      —  ^iJO)  a  maximum,  we  shall  have 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^le 


136 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


and  since  ^(  A)  is  greater  than  ^(A)»  because  A  u  greater 
than       therefore  rt'  fortiori p^.D^s  > piD^. 

But  when  a  commodity,  subject  to  a  cost  of  production, 
is  at  the  same  time  free  from  monopoly,  a  rise,  in  price,  due 
to  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  production,  while  ahvavs  ilimia- 
ishing  the  real  value  of  the  social  income,  may  increase  or 
diminish  its  nominal  value,  according  as  the  initial  value 
falls  below  or  above  the  value  tt,  which  renders  the  product 
pD  a  maximum,  and  which  would  be,  m  fact,  the  price  of 
the  commodity  if  there  were  no  cost  of  production,  and 
if  the  commodity  were  under  a  monopoly.  l  iberation  from 
monopoly  tends  to  make  /o  smaller  than  tt  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  cost  of  production  tends  to  raise  above 
TT.  It  is  evident  that,  according  to  circumstances,  one  or 
the  other  of  these  causes  which  act  in  opposite  directions 
will  prevail;  so  both  hypotheses  p^>w  and  p^<ir  m 
equally  admissible  a  priori  (Article  24). 

80.  It  is  evident  from  the  preceding,  how  it  is  possible 
that  a  tax  on  consumption  nominally  increases  the  social 
income,  while  it  diminishes  its  actual  value.  When  impo- 
sition of  a  tax  i  renders  positive  the  quantity  /i A  ~~ AAi 
which  then  expresses  the  nominal  increase  in  income,  the 
treasury  collects  a  portion  /A  the  value  produced,  p^D^ ; 
but  this  part,  which  in  our  day  no  longer  accumulates  in  the 
coffers  of  the  treasury,  whether  it  serves  to  pay  the  interest 
on  the  public  debt,  or  whether  it  is  spent  in  salaries  or 
largesses,  or  whether  it  is  used  to  buy  finished  products  for 
the  public  service,  still  goes  to  create  the  incomes  of  several 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


137 


classes  of  consumers.  As  regards  taxes  levied  directly  on 
income,  the  treasury,  supposing  that  it  has  no  foreign  tributes 
to  pay,  only  acts  as  an  intermediate  machine  designed  to 
change  (to  be  sure,  often  in  an  oppressive  and  unjust  man- 
ner) the  distribution  of  the  social  income,  without  imme- 
diately changing  the  total  value  of  it.  With  reference  to 
taxes  on  consumption,  the  treasury  plays  this  part  of  an  inter- 
mediate machine  for  the  portion  iDy  of  the  total  value  pro- 
duced, which  is  destined  to  pay  the  tax,  and  besides  this 
the  tax  causes  a  diminution  expressed  by  /o(-A  —  -^i)  i*!  the 
real  value  of  the  social  income. 

8i.  For  the  same  reason  that  an  increase  in  the  cost  of 
production  diminishes  the  real  value  of  the  social  income, 
while  diminishing  or  increasing  the  nominal  income  ac- 
cording to  circumstances,  a  decrease  in  cost  will  always 
increase  the  real  value  of  this  income,  while  increasing  or 
diminishing  the  nominal  income,  according  to  circum- 
stances. I^t  us  suppose  that,  in  consequence  of  a  reduc- 
tion in  the  cost  of  production  of  commodity  and  of  the 
fall  in  price  which  followed,  the  social  income 
has  nominally  decreased  by  /o-^o  ^PJ^\ 

'i  he  consumers,  who  made  the  demand  for 
this  commodity  before  the  fall,  will  be  in  the 
same  position  as  if  the  commodity  had  not 
changed  in  price,  and  the  sum  of  their  in- 
comes had  been  increased  by  (/o   A)  A 

Subtracting  the  first  expression  from  the 
second,  we  shall  find  for  remainder  the  posi- 
tive quantity  /i  {fix  —  A) 
which  wiU  express  the  real  increase  in  social 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


13S  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

income.   The  result  would  evidently  have  been  the  same 

if  the  tall  in  price  had  raised  the  nominal  value  of  the 
social  income^  or  if  we  had  had  P\Px  >  '9  theiv  it 
would  have  been  necessary  to  add  to  {p^^—p^Dn  the  posi- 
tive quantity  /i A  —  P^^Da,  winch  amounts  to  subtracting 

AA  --pi^i  ^  before. 

Moreover,  this  result  can  be  reached  directly  by  an  argu< 
ment  similar  to  that  of  Article  77.  The  fall  in  the  price 
has  raised  the  annual  production  of  the  commodity  from 
to  Di,  and  by  this  alone  has  annually  created  a  value 
equal  to  /i(A  —  A").  To  be  sure,  the  quantity  Dq^  which 
had  already  been  produced  previousiyi  has  £aUen  in  price, 
to  the  disadvantage  of  producers ;  but  this  loss,  which  for 
them  is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  profit  pi(  —  Do),  is 
exactly  balanced  by  the  profit  which  the  fall  grants  to  those 
consumers  who  were  buying  and  continue  to  buy  the  quan- 
tity At,  so  that,  in  the  end,  the  real  gain  for  society  must 
always  be  valued  at —  A). 

In  estimating  the  real  increase  in  the  social  income 
caused  by  a  fall  in  price,  no  account  is  made  of  the  advan- 
tage for  the  new  consumers  of  the  commodity,  which  con- 
sists in  employing  a  part  of  their  incomes  in  a  manner  more 

to  their  taste  ;  for  this  advantage  is  not  capable  of  numerical 
appreciation,  and  is  not  a  new  source  of  wealth  in  itself, 
although  it  may  finally  lead  to  an  increase  in  wealth,  if  the 
commodity  A  is  the  raw  mateiKil  of  other  products,  or  an 
instrument  which  serves  for  other  products. 

82.  Hitherto  we  have  supposed  that  a  rise  or  fall  in  the 
cost  of  production,  or  imposition  or  remission  of  a  tax, 
caused  an  increase  or  diminution  of  the  price  and  conse- 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  139 

queiuly  a  reduction  or  expansion  of  production,  whereas  the 
law  of  demand,  i>.  the  relation  which  exists  between  the 
quantities  D  and  remained  the  same.  But  the  direct 
argument,  employed  in  Articles  77  and  81,  would  be  equally 
applicable  if  the  variations  in  the  price  and  in  the  quantity 
produced  resulted  in  a  variation  in  the  form  of  the  function 
F{^p)y  which  expresses  the  law  of  demand, — a  change 
which  might  also  result  from  an  alteration  in  the  tastes  and 
needs  of  consumers,  as  well  as  from  an  alteration  in  the 
method  of  distribution  of  the  social  wealth.  Let  us  admit, 
therefore,  that  in  consequence  of  such  an  alteration,  a  por- 
tion //  of  the  social  income  has  been  diverted  from  ilie 
demand  for  commodity  Ay  and  applied  in  a  single  lump  to 
commodity  so  that  the  incomes  of  the  producers  of  the 
other  commodities  C,  D,  Ey  etc.,  will  not  experience  any 
alteration,  or  will  only  suffer  negUgible  variations.  Calling 
/i>o  and  Z^o  the  price  and  the  demand  for  commodity  A 
before  the  variation  occurred,  and  />,  and  what  tiicse 
quantities  become  after  the  variation,  we  shall  have 

In  the  same  way,  if  we  distinguish  by  primes  the  quantities 

relating  to  commodity  B  analogous  to  those  relating  to  com- 
modity Af  we  shall  have 

and  consequently 

( I )  /o^o  -AA  =// A'  -  A' A'. 

The  social  income  will  have  experienced  neither  an  in- 


Digitized  by  Google 


140  THE  MATHEMATICAL  FHINCIPLES 

crease  nor  a  diminution  in  its  nominal  value ;  but  on  one 
side  tliere  will  be  a  loss  in  its  actual  value  expressed  by 

A( A  -  A) ; 

and,  on  the  uther  hand,  aa  actual  gain  expressed  by 

/i'(A'-A'); 

so  that  the  actual  balance  will  be  favourable  or  unfavourable 
according  a:>  w  e  have 

(2)         A' (A'  -  A')  ^A(A  -  A), 

and  proportionally  more  favourable  or  unfavourable  accord- 
ing as  the  first  member  of  the  inequality  varies  further  from 
the  second  member,  while  equation  (i)  continues  to  remain 
satisfied. 

In  virtue  of  equation  (i),  we  can  replace  inequality  (2) 
by  the  following : 

(/u'-A')A'^(/i -A)  A. 

It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  articles  of  luxury,  of  which  the 
consumption  is  reserved  to  the  wealthy  classes  of  society, 
are  generally  characterized  in  the  economic  system  by  this 
property,  that  slight  variations  in  the  demand,  or  in  the 
competition  of  purchasers,  may  cause  very  considerable 
variations  in  prices,  because  the  wealthy  man  can  readily 
triple  or  double  the  price  which  he  sets  on  an  article  which 
strikes  his  ^cy.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  observed  that 
for  articles  of  general  consumption,  but  which  nevertheless 
are  not  considered  of  prime  necessity,  slight  variations  in 
price  correspond  to  considerable  variations  in  the  demands 
or  in  the  quantities  produced. 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  141 


In  consequence,  the  causes  which  tend  to  reduce  the 
great  inequalities  ia  the  distribution  of  wealth  will  tend  to 
cause  variations  in  the  economic  system,  of  which  the 
a^  er  igc  and  general  effect  will  be  to  increase  the  actual 
value  of  the  social  income. 

This  increase  in  actual  value  may  be  accompanied  by  an 
increase  in  noaiiiial  \  aluc,  if  commodity  B,  in  favour  of  which 
the  change  in  the  direction  of  the  demand  takes  place, 
is  the  raw  material  or  an  instrument  in  the  production 
of  new  commodities.  From  this  point  of  view,  modifica- 
tions in  the  economic  system  which  favour  increase  of  the 
labouring  classes,  by  inducing  more  abundant  production  of 
the  commodities  necessary  for  ihciii,  tend  also  to  an  in- 
crease in  the  actual  value  of  the  social  income,  as  we 
defined  it — an  income  of  which  the  wages  of  workingmen 
form  an  integral  and  raost  important  part. 

The  commodities  of  prime  necessity,  which  are  the  staples 
of  food,  seem  to  have  this  in  common  with  objects  of  luxury, 
that  enormous  variations  in  price  correspond  to  slight  varia- 
tions in  the  quantities  produced,  because  the  poorer  classes 
find  themselves  forced  to  sacrifice  all  other  demands  to  those 
for  these  commodities.  But  such  sacrifices  cannot  be  pro- 
longed without  causing  violent  disturbances  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  economic  system  and  of  the  population;  and, 
therefore,  when  only  average  values  are  considered,  inde- 
pendently of  temporary  disturbances,  it  is  found,  even  for 
the  commodities  of  prime  necessity,  that  great  differences 
in  the  quantities  produced  correspond  to  slight  variations 
in  prices. 

Just  because  a  considerable  temporary  increase  in  the 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


14 >  THE  MATHEMATICAL  FRINlIFLES 

prices  of  these  commodities  corresponds  to  slight  differ- 
ences in  consumption^  it  results  from  our  theory,  as  from 
the  plain  admonitions  of  common  sense,  that  such  an  in- 
crease  causes  a  real  reduction  of  the  social  income,  even 
when  it  nominally  increases  the  value  of  it.  But  our  theory, 
which  is  alwa3rs  in  agreement  with  common  sense,  shows 
that  a  very  different  verdict  must  be  given  concerning  any 
progressive  and  secular  advance  which  might  affect  the 
commodities  in  question. 

83.  The  same  principles  bring  us  to  an  analysis  of  what 
happens  when  a  new  commodity,  a  new  exchangeable  value 
rises;  so  to  s])eak,  to  the  surface  of  the  economic  sys* 
tem.  A  commodity  which  hitherto  did  not  appear  in 
the  circulation  of  wealth,  is  now  created  in  all  its  parts,  and 
the  quantity  annually  made  or  sold  is  valued  at  h.  Buyers 
of  this  commodity  therefore  direct  from  the  demand  for 
the  other  commodities  C,  etc.,  a  sum  h  drawn  from 

their  incomes ;  but  this  sum  is  returned  by  the  producers 
of  commodity  N  to  the  total  of  the  demands  for  com- 
modities Bf  C,  etc.  There  is  therefore  no  reason  why 
the  former  economic  system,  taken  as  a  whole,  should  feel 
any  perturbations ;  it  is  a  simple  juxtaposition,  so  to  speak, 
which  occurs;  the  social  income,  nominally  and  actually, 
is  increased  by  the  sum  ^,  which  constitutes  the  income  of 
the  producers  of  the  new  commodity. 

It  should  be  carefully  noted  under  what  conditions  such 
a  result  occurs,  for  it  would  be  easy  to  imagine  an  hypothesis 
which  would  lead  to  very  different  results.  Supposing,  for 
instance,  that  an  exchange  occurs  between  producers  of  N 
and  M,  so  that  the  former,  who  enjoy  an  income  h  arising 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  \\% 

from  purchases  by  the  latter  of  the  new  commodity,  employ 
exactly  this  income  in  purchasing  commodity  and  thus, 
give  rise  to  an  increase  corresponding  with  the  value  h  in 
the  production  of  this  commodity;  all  the  other  elements 
of  the  economic  system  may  have  remained  unchanged; 
but  the  social  income  will  have  increased,  as  well  in  nominal 
as  in  actual  value,  by  twice  the  amount  h ;  namely,  by  the 
entirely  new  income  of  the  producers  of  N  and  by  the 
increase  in  the  income  of  the  producers  of  M, 

By  thus  giving  attention  to  peculiar  and,  moreover,  im- 
probable hypotheses,  which  can  be  infinitely  varied,  the 
problem  under  consideration  in  this  article  would  become 
entirely  indeterminate.  To  make  it  admit  of  a  determinate 
solution,  it  is  necessary  to  start  from  the  only  probable 
hypothesis  of  the  condition  of  commercial  relations ;  it  must 
be  supposed  that  producers  of  the  new  commodity  sell  to 
any  consumers,  and  spend  the  incomes  which  this  market 
gives  them,  in  purchases  from  any  other  producers,  without 
intervention  of  any  such  conventions  as  those  by  which  the 
craftsmen  of  a  small  town  give  their  custom  to  each  other, 
and  without  natural  occurrence  of  results  similar  to  those 
which  would  arise  from  such  a  convention. 

But  results  of  this  kind  may  occur  whenever  producers 
are  divided  into  great  categories ;  as,  for  instance,  when 
the  class  of  landlords  or  managers  of  real  estate  is  opposed 
to  that  of  labourers  dependent  on  their  wages ;  and  espe- 
cially whenever  the  manner  of  distribution  of  wealth  estab- 
lishes a  sharply  dehned  distinction  between  these  two  classes. 
If  the  labouring  population  increases,  or  becomes  more 
industrious,  the  products  of  its  industry  will  be  almost 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


144  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


entirely  consumed  by  the  kndowning  class,  and  the  reward 
of  this  industry  will  be  almost  wholl)  employed  ia  making 
an  outlet  for  the  products  of  the  earth  and  in  encourag- 
ing and  extending  agricultural  industry.  The  rich  will 
see  their  wealth  increase  at  the  same  time  as,  and  even 
by  reason  of  the  feet  that,  they  Und  means  to  satisfy  new 
tastes.  The  social  incume,  in  which  we  include  the  wages 
of  all  workers  as  well  as  the  incomes  of  all  capitalists^  will 
therefore  increase  in  a  more  rapid  progression  on  account 

of  this  particular,  but  this  does  not  mean  thai  the  manner 
of  distribution  of  wealth,  by  reason  of  which  this  particular 
is  true,  is  preferable  to  others  for  the  ultimate  interest  of 

the  body  i>ulitic. 

If  we  omit  these  peculiar  cases  the  discussion  of  which 
eludes  our  theory,  and  which,  so  to  speak,  disturb  the  foun- 
dations of  the  economi(  system,  and  if  we  consider  what 
occurs  in  a  state  which  approaches  equilibrium,  we  find 
that  putting  in  circulation  a  new  commodity  should  have 
for  a  mean  result  to  increase  the  social  income  by  an 
amount  just  equal  to  the  value  of  the  quantity  of  this  com- 
modity annually  produced. 

84,  Whether  man  seeks  to  create  new  products  which 
shall  render  life  pleasanter  and  lighten  its  burdens,  or 
whether  the  refinements  of  social  life  by  exciting  new 
desires  give  value  to  articles  not  previously  in  request,  the 
result  will  be  the  same  from  the  standpoint  of  economic 
science,  although  the  moralist  and  the  statesman  may  give 
very  different  opinions  as  to  the  fate  of  a  people,  according 
as  they  observe  luxury  or  industrious  activity  to  prevail 
among  them.   It  has  been  truly  said  that  luxury  enriches  a 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


145 


nation,  in  this  sense  that  the  social  income  is  increased  by 
putting  in  circulation  new  products  which  would  not  have 

come  into  use  without  luxury  and  the  reUnements  of  social 
life.  It  has  also  been  said^  with  not  less  of  fruth,  that  luxury 
induces  the  ruin  of  a  nation,  not  only  in  the  moral  and 
political  sense,  but  also  in  the  commercml  acceptation  of 
the  wordy  when  the  production  of  articles  of  luxury  can 
only  take  place  at  the  expense  of  the  production  of  other 
commodities  which  are  the  intermediate  or  direct  instru- 
ments  for  further  products. 

Here  shouKl  be  introduced  the  distinction  between  un- 
productive and  reproductive  consumptions,  if  this  distinc- 
tion had  not  been  made  with  all  the  clearness  and  all  the 
developiiiciits  desiralile  l)y  Smith,  and  especially  by  J.  Ij. 
Say.  I'he  man  who  economizes  or  capitalizes  a  portion  h 
of  his  income  diverts  the  sum  h  from  the  demand  for  com- 
niodities  .i,  Z?,  C,  etc.,  which  only  offer  him  the  enjoyment 
of  an  unproductive  consumption,  to  apply  it  to  the  demand 
for  commodities  Z,  Ny  etc.,  which  will  be  converted 
into  instruments  of  [jiixIik  tion.  The  result  of  this  new 
direction  given  to  the  demand  will  be  to  encourage  certain 
callings  and  to  discourage  others,  to  increase  the  income  of 
ceriam  classes  of  producers  at  the  expense  of  other  pro- 
ducers ;  but,  in  virtue  of  the  principles  already  explained, 
when  account  is  taken  only  of  the  average  and  general 
effects,  the  social  income  will  remain  the  same.  Later, 
and  when  the  new  productive  property,  which  was  created 
by  the  saving,  begins  to  bear  fruit,  the  former  income  will 
be  increased  by  the  income  of. the  capital  //.  Of  course, 
saving  or  capitaiization  cannot  exceed  certain  limits^  and 

L 


Digiti  A  byi^i 


146  THE  MATHEMATTCAL  PRINCIPLES 


finally,  the  consumption  known  as  unproductive  is  the 
regulator  and  object  of  the  so-called  productive  con- 
sumption. What  are  the  insaperable  limits?  What  are 
the  relations  of  unproductive  to  productive  consumption? 
Theory  cannot  determine  this  a  priori;  but  in  practice,  just 
because  capital  finds  profitable  investment,  we  know  that  a 
nation  still  remains  where  saving  contributes  to  the  progress 
of  the  public  wealth  at  the  same  time  that  it  satisfies  indi- 
vidual inclinations  to  prudence  or  cupidity. 

85.  The  social  income  may  be  nominally  increased,  both 
by  the  creation  of  new  productive  property,  or  the  manu- 
facture of  a  new  circulating  value ;  and  by  a  change  in  con- 
ditions which  gives  a  small  value  to  some  article  useful,  but 
previously  enjoyed  gratuitously,  and  which  therefore  could 
have  no  value  in  exchange.  Thus,  there  is  no  contradiction 
in  suppu-^uii^  that  the  nominal  value  of  the  social  income 
would  increase,  if  substances  with  which  nature  has  abun- 
dantly endowed  us  in  quantities  beyond  our  requirements, 
such  as  water,  should  become  rare  or  should  require  expense 
for  production;  or  if  the  natural  forces  which  every  one 
fi-eely  uses,  such  as  the  motive  power  of  the  wind,  should 

become  susceptible  of  appropriation  and  a  rciiL  should  have 
to  be  paid  for  them  to  the  landlord.  But  whatever  paradox 
exists  in  this  statement  disappears  when  the  distinction  is 
considered  which  we  have  made  in  this  chapter  between  real 
and  nominal  valu'e.  It  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  enter  into 
further  developments  for  the  sake  of  an  objection  which  is 
purely  speculative  and  to  some  extent  scholastic. 

86.  We  have  to  answer  a  much  more  specious  objection 
which  applies  to  what  precedes.   It  will  be  said  that  when 


Digitized  by  Goo^^le 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


147 


the  production  of  commodity  A  decreases,  and  falls  for 
instance  ixom  to  Di^  the  value  of  the  quantity  —  £>i 
is  not  on  that  account  wholly  withdrawn  from  circulation ; 
that  the  raw  materials  which  went  to  its  manufacture  imd 
another  use  at  the  expense  of  a  reduction  in  price  to  hnd 
this  use  I  that  the  workmen  whose  labour  was  employed  in 
this  occupation  will  lend  their  hands  to  other  producers  at 
the  expense  of  a  more  or  less  important  reduction  in  the  rate 
of  their  wages ;  and  finally  that  the  capital  employed  in  this 
operation  will  find  another  field,  at  the  expense  to  the  capi- 
talists of  reducing  if  necessary  the  rate  of  interest  which 
they  demand.  At  the  first  sight  it  may  seem  that  we  have 
not  considered  this  essential  condition,  and  that  we  have 
reasoned  as  if  the  reduction  in  the  production  of  com- 
modity A  withdrew  from  circulation  a  value  exactly  equal 
to  that  of  the  quantity  by  which  the  producLion  ib  reduced. 

To  show  that  we  have  not  fallen  into  this  error,  let  us 
suppose  that  one  commodity  JIf  pisys  the  part  of  raw  mate- 
rial with  reference  to  several  commodities  A,  B,  C,  etc., 
which  go  directly  mto  consumption.  In  the  number  of  the 
producers  of  ^  should  be  included  those  of  the  producers  of 
J/ who  furnish  one  of  the  raw  materials  used  in  the  manu- 
facture of  A  (Article  74;,  to  an  extent  corresponding  with  the 
amount  which  they  furnish  for  this  use.  The  same  can  be 
said  concerning  commodities  C,  etc.  In  consecjuence, 
the  income  of  any  producer  of  M  may  be  decomposed 
into  several  parts,  for  the  first  of  which  he  is  ranked  among 
the  producers  of  A,  for  the  next  among  the  producers  of 
B,  and  so  on.  If  the  reduction  in  the  consumption  of 
commodity  A  induces  a  greater  production  of  commodity 


Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


148 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


B,  the  producer  of  M  may  find  in  the  increased  outlet  tor 
the  manufacture  of  the  conaposite  commodity  compen- 
sation for  the  loss  which  he  suffers  by  the  decrease  in  the 
outlet  for  the  manufacture  of  the  composite  commodity  A  ; 
but  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  an  imaginary  substitution, 
for  convenience  in  argument,  for  this  producer  of  of  two 
producers  Mi  and  J/^,  of  whom  the  one  furnishes  only  the 
raw  material  for  the  manufacture  of  commodity  A,  and  the 
other  for  commodity  B,  so  that  Mi  is  counted  only  among 
the  producers  of  -.4,  and  M2  among  the  producers  of  B. 
But  in  estimating  the  average  results,  we  considered  the 
transfer  of  the  funds  withdrawn  from  the  demand  for  com- 
modity A,  to  the  demand  for  commodities  B,  C,  etc. ;  so 
that  we  have  implicitly  considered  the  essential  condition, 
neglect  of  which  would  have  given  rise  to  the  objection 
which  we  are  endeavouring  to  refute  in  this  article. 

The  remark  just  made  concerning  commodities,  properly 
so  called,  which  act  as  raw  materials,  is  equall>'  applicable  to 
labourers'  wages,  and  to  the  return  on  the  capital  which  co- 
operates in  the  preparation  of  the  composite  commodities 
which  are  the  final  object  of  productive  industry.  When 
a  labourer  works  first  at  the  prodacLiuii  of  commodity  A, 
and  then  at  that  of  commodity  B,  after  the  reduction  which 
occurs  in  the  production  of  A,  he  should  be  ranked  in  the 
first  place  among  the  producers  of  Ay  and  in  the  second 
among  the  producers  of  B;  the  income  of  group  A,  which 
includes  labourers*  ^^  ages,  is  diminished,  and  that  of  group 
B  increases ;  with  reference  to  the  calculations  under  con- 
sideration, it  is  exactly  as  if  the  demand  for  labour  increased 
for  the  labourers  on  B  and  diminished  for  the  labourers  on 

Digitized  by  Goo^^Ie 


OF  THE  THEORY  Of  WEALTH 


149 


without  its  being  possible  for  the  same  workman  to  pass 
from  the  one  employment  to  the  other. 

Finally,  although  we  make  continuous  and  almost  exclu- 
sive use  of  the  word  commodity,  it  must  not  be  lost  sight  of 
(Article  8)  that  in  this  work  we  assimilate  to  commodities 
the  rendering  of  services  which  have  for  their  object  the 
satisfaction  of  wants  or  the  procuring  of  enjoyment.  Thus 
when  we  say  that  funds  are  diverted  from  the  demand  for 
commodity  A  to  be  applied  to  the  demand  for  commodity  B, 
it  may  be  meant  by  this  expression,  that  the  funds  diverted 
from  the  demand  for  a  commodity  properly  so  called^  are 
employed  to  pay  for  services  or  vice  versa.  When  the  j^opu- 
lation  of  a  great  city  loses  its  taste  for  taverns  and  takes 
up  that  for  theatrical  representations,  the  funds  which 
were  used  m  the  demand  for  alcoholic  beverages  go  to 
pay  actors,  authors,  and  musicians,  whose  annual  income, 
according  to  otir  definition,  appears  on  the  balance  sheet 
of  the  social  income,  as  well  as  the  rent  of  the  vineyard 
owner,  the  vine-dresser's  wages,  and  the  tavern-keeper's 
profits. 


Dig'itized  by  Goo^^Ie 


150  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


CHAPTER  XII 

or  VARIATIONS  IN  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME,  RESULTING  FROM  THE 

COMMUNICATION  OF  MARKETS 

87.  In  Chapter  X  we  investigated  the  effects  of  the  com- 
munication of  markets  ou  the  deterannation  of  prices  and 
the  incomes  of  producers ;  we  now  mean  to  take  up»  ac- 
cording  to  the  same  principles  which  underlay  the  theory 
developed  in  the  preceding  chapter^  how  communication^ 
how  commerce  between  two  markets,  or»  if  it  is  preferred, 
the  exportation  of  commodities  from  one  market  to  another, 
causes  the  value  of  the  social  income  to  vary,  as  well  in  the 
importing  as  in  the  exporting  market. 

This  question  derives  an  especially  strong  interest  when  ' 
commercial  relations  between  different  peoples  are  con* 
sidered,  as  being  essentially  subject  to  the  regulating  action 
of  governinents.  For  the  term  social  income  there  may 
then  be  substituted  national  income^  which,  however,  will 
not  denote  the  income  which  the  government  of  a  nation 
derives  from  taxation,  anil  which  serves  to  pay  public  ex- 
penses, but  the  sum  total  of  individual  incomes,  of  rents,  of 
profits,  and  of  wages  of  every  kind,  in  the  whole  extent  of 
the  national  territory. 

Here  we  are  evidently  approaching  the  question,  with  a 
view  to  which  all  systems  of  political  economy  have,  so  to 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


151 


speak,  been  constructed ;  the  question  which  for  two  cen- 
turies has  been  disnissed  by  theorists  and  by  statesmen. 
We  have  not  the  temerity  to  approach  it  from  the  states- 
man's standpoint ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  beUeve  that 
this  question,  when  considered  in  its  theoretical  aspect,  can 
be  reduced  to  very  simple  terms,  of  which  the  mere  state- 
ment, by  overthrowing  false  systems,  opens  the  way  to  the 
practical  knowledge  which  essentially  concerns  the  destiny 
of  nations.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  considerations 
which  we  are  here  examining  appear  to  us  something  more 
than  mere  intellectual  exercises  or  chimerical  abstractions. 

It  will  always  be  advantageous,  by  means  of  precise  sym* 
bols  and  a  more  rigorous  method  of  demonstration,  to  ex- 
plain, in  a  few  words,  the  difficulties  raised  by  volumes  of 
controversy. 

88.  Let  us  call  A  and  B  the  exporting  and  importing 

markets  ;  M  the  commodity  which  is  exported  from  A  io  B ; 
/.  and  the  price  and  the  demand  for  the  commodity  in 
market  A,  at  the  time  when  for  some  cause,  for  instance  on 
account  of  a  prohibition,  exportation  of  the  commodity 
could  not  take  place ;  and  the  phce  and  the  demand 
in  market  B  at  the  same  time  ;  /„'  and  the  price  and 
the  quantity  produced  at  A  after  estabhshment  of  communi- 
cation ;  and  Dt!  the  price  and  the  quantity  produced  at 
B ;  A  the  quantity  consumed  at  A  after  communication,  or 
the  demand  of  consumers  at  A  corresponding  to  the  price 
pj ;  and  £  the  quantity  exported,  so  that  DJ  =  A  -f- 

The  producers  ai  .  /  o])tciiu  an  increase  in  income  equal 

to  A' A'  —  A  A*  ^^'^  "^"st  suppose  A'  >A,  >  A»  and 
aforHoriy  pJDJ  >  A-^«*       ^^^^  wherei  in  con^e- 


Digitized  by 


152  THE  MATHEMATTCAL  PRINCIPLES 


quence  of  a  monopoly,  cominunicatioD  of  markets  causes 

the  price  to  fall,  even  in  the  exporting  market,  is  too  pecul- 
iar for  us  to  delay  over,  and^  moreover,  nothing  is  easier 
than  to  modify  the  arguments  which  follow,  so  as  to  meet 
this  special  hypothesis. 

The  consumers  of  market     who  continue  to  buy  com- 
modity     will  withdraw  from  the  portion  of  their  incomes 
formerly  devoted  to  the  other  commodi- 
ties    Pi  C  etc.,  a  value  equal  to  —     A  (i) 

On  the  other  hand,  those  whom  the  in- 
crease in  price  prevents  from  buying  can 
add  to  the  funds  which  they  previously 
devoted  to  the  demand  for  the  com- 
modities N,      Q,  etc.,  a  value  equal  to     /^(Z?^— A)  (2) 

Finally,  since  market  A  disposes  by 
export  of  a  value  equal  to  />J£,  it  will 
receive  in  return  an  equal  value  in  some 
commodity,  whatever  it  may  be.    By  the 
fact  of  exportation,  therefore,  a  value        ^JE  (3) 
is  withdrawn  from  the  demand  for  com- 
modities    P,  Qy  etc.,  on  the  home  market,  to  be  applied 
to  the  demand  for  commodities  of  foreign  origin,  and  goes 
to  make  up  the  income  of  foreign  producers.    But,  by 
adding  quantities  (i)  and  (3),  and  subtracting  from  the 
sum  quantity  (2),  we  obtain  for  result  (on 
account  of  the  relation  DJ  —  A-j-E),  i>.  a  value  exactly 
equal  to  that  by  which  the  income  of  the  producers  of  com- 
modity M  has  increased.    Therefore  the  sum  total  of  the 
funds  available  for  the  demand  for  commodities  JV,  P,  Q, 
etc.,  remains  unchanged.   We  can  therefore  admit,  thanks 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE   THEORY  OF  IVEALTff  153 

to  the  hypothesis  for  simplification  which  has  been  suffi- 
ciently explained^  that  the  national  income  at  Ay  or  the 
sum  total  of  the  incomes  of  the  producers  at  A,  has 
increased,  in  consequence  of  the  exportation  of  com- 
modity itfj  by  a  value  exactly 

equal  to  A' A'  —  A^a 

But  this  is  only  a  nominal  in- 
crease in  income.  The  con- 
sumers who  have  paid  at  the 
rate  for  the  quantity  of  the 
commodity  denoted  by  A,  in- 
stead of  paying  at  the  rate 
are  precisely  in  the  same  posi- 
tion as  if,  without  any  change 
in  the  price  of  this  commodity, 
their  incomes  had  been  re- 
duced by  ip.-pa)^ 

Subtracting  this  last  amount 

from  the  former,  we  have  for   

remainder  pJ{D:  -  A)  -    (A  -  A) 

(4)  =A'^-A(/^a-A); 

and  consequently,  according  to  our  ftindamental  principles, 
this  expression  will  be  that  of  the  actual  increase  of  the 
national  income.  We  have  A'>A»  ^^^^  other 
hand,  E>  D^  —  ^  \  therefore  this  increase  is  always  posi- 
tive and  can  never  turn  into  a  real  decrease. 

The  increase  would  be  exactly  p^E^  or  the  value  ex- 
ported, if  exportation  had  not  increased  the  price  of  the 
commodityi  and  had  not  reduced  the  consumption  in  the 


Digitized 


154 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


home  market.  This  may  happen  with  manufactured  arti- 
cles, and  in  this  case  the  real  increase  would  be  indistin- 
guishable  from  the  nominal  increase. 

In  deducing  the  real  mcreasie  in  income  due  to  exporta- 
tion of  commodity  we  have  not  considered  the  loss 
experienced  by  that  class  of  home  consumers  who  stop 
buying  the  dearer  commodity^  and  who  thus  make  a  use 
less  to  their  liking  of  a  part  of  their  incomes.  This  loss, 
as  has  been  explained,  is  not  capable  of  measurement,  and 
does  not  directly  affert  the  national  wealth  in  the  com- 
mercial and  mathematical  sense  of  this  term.  No  doubt  it 
may  affect  it  indirectly,  if  want  of  the  dearer  commodity 
hinders  production  of  some  other  commodity,  of  which  it 
is  one  of  the  raw  materials ;  but  for  the  simpliBcation  and 
general  applicability  of  theorv,  it  is  proper  to  eliminate  this 
secondary  effect  to  begin  with,  reserving  for  it  such  attention 
as  it  deserves,  when  we  pass  on  to  applications  and  to  par- 
ticular cases. 

Moreover,  by  a  direct  and  very  simple  method  we  can 
find  this  expression  (4),  which  has  just  been  given  as  that 
for  the  real  increase  of  the  national  revenue  due  to  the 
exportation  of  commodity  M, 

This  exportation  has  placed  market  A  in  the  enjoyment 
of  commodities  of  foreign  origin,  of  which  the  value  is  p^E. 
In  exchange  it  has  dispossessed  it  of  the  quantity  D^  —  Ck 
of  commodity  M,  of  which  the  value  was  /a(^a  —  ^)  \  tbe 
profit  is  p^E  —  A^^«  — 

As  to  the  increase  in  value  acquired  by  the  quantity  of 
commodity  M  which  continues  to  be  consumed  at  A,  if  any 
advantage  results  from  it  to  the  producers  of  that  market, 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


155 


this  advantage  will  be  exactly  balanced  by  the  loss  experi- 
enced by  consumers  of  the  same  market^  so  that  expression 

(4)  remains  as  the  measure  of  the  real  value  of  the  increaiie 
in  the  income  of  the  exporting  country. 

89.  Let  us  pass  on  to  the  effects  of  shipment  of  the  com- 
modity on  the  importing  market  B.  The  producers  of 
commodity  M  on  this  market  will  experience  a  decrease 
in  income  expressed  by  p^D^^p^D^\  We  shall  have 
A  -  A'»  a  >  A',  and  a  fortiori p,,D,,  >  A' A'- 

The  consumers  who  were  buying  before  the  fall  will  transfer 
to  the  demand  for  other  commodi- 

tie5  A',     T,  etc.,  a  .\  alue  e<iuai  to  (A  —  A  )  A  (S) 

while  consumers^  whom  the  re> 
duction  induces  to  buy,  will  with- 
draw  from  the  jwrtion  of  their 
incomes  devoted  to  the  demand 

for  those  commodities  a  value       A' (A'  +    ^  A)  (6) 

Finally,  since  an  equivaleni  ul 
the  value  p^E  must  be  withdrawn 
from  market  B  in  some  form  or 

other  of  couiiiiudiiy,  it  ;>liuuld  be 
considered  that  a  foreign  sum 

amounting  to  p^E    ( 7 ) 

is  added  to  the  funds  j)ieviously 

devoted  to  the  demand  for  commodities  A%  etc.,  other 
than       in  the  market  at  B.   Now,  if  we  add  quantities 

(5)  and  (  7),  and  from  their  sum  subtract  quantity  (6),  wc 
shall  find  for  result  AA-^A'A'^  &  value  precisely  equal 
to  that  by  which  the  incomes  of  the  producers  of  commodity 

^f  in  market  B  has  been  decreased.     I  heickire,  unless  it 


^yai^cJby  Google 


156  THE  MATHEMA  IICAL  PRINCIPLES 

is  necessary  to  repeat  a  demonstration  of  which  the  prin- 
ciple should  have  been  understood,  it 
will  be  recognized  that  this  same  value  /t  A  —  A^»' 
expresses  at  the  same  time  the  nommal 
diminution  of  the  national  income  of 
resulting  from  importation  of  com- 
modity M  from  A  to  B. 

It  must  be  observed  that  in  reality 
the  consumers,  who  were  buying  be- 
fore the  fall,  are  in  exactly  the  same 
condition,  after  the  decrease,  as  if 
their  incomes  had  risen  by  tlie  value  (A~A')^* 

Taking  the  difference,  we  find  the   

expression  A'  (A  -  A')  (8) 

which  is  that  for  the  actual  decrease 

of  the  national  income  of     owing  to  the  importation. 

We  do  not  consider,  as  an  amount  to  be  deducted  from 
this  actual  duiiinution  of  income,  the  advanUge  resulting 
to  consumers,  who  buy  as  a  consequence  of  the  reduction, 
from  their  thus  being  able  to  use  a  part  of  their  incomes 
more  to  their  liking.  This  advantage  is  incapable  of  valua- 
tion, and  can  only  increase  the  mass  of  wealth  indirectly, 
in  case  the  article  which  falls  in  price  is  the  raw  material 
or  the  instrument  for  further  products,  a  condition  which 
must  be  independently  considered  for  each  particular 
application. 

Moreover,  direct  considerations  bring  us  again  to  expres- 
sion (8),  which  we  have  given  as  that  for  the  decrease  in 
the  national  income  of  B,  in  consequence  of  the  importa- 
tion of  commodity  M,    In  fact,  market  B  obtams  the  use 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH  157 


of  the  value  of  the  imported  commodity,  a  value  expressed 
by  ph^i  but  for  this  it  parts  with  a  precisely  equal  value  of 
commodities  of  local  origin.  The  quaniuy  whicli  was 
being  produced  and  consumed  in  market  and  which  so 
continues  after  importation,  falls  in  value,  but  the  resulting 
loss  to  home  producers  is  just  balanced  by  the  advantage 
experienced  by  home  consumers,  who  buy  the  commodity 
at  a  lower  price.  As  the  quantity  ^  ceases  to  be 
produced  at  B  after  importation,  there  results  for  home  pro- 
ducers a  loss  equal  to  —  ;  but  this  loss  is  com- 
pensated for  up  to  the  point  of  {p^  —  p^^  (A  —  A  )  by  the 
advantage  to  home  consumers  who,  \\\  consequence  of 
importation,  are  able  to  procure  for  the  price  p^  the  same 
quantity  which  they  formerly  paid  for.  Therefore,  finally, 
the  real  loss  caused  by  importation  to  the  national  income 
of  B  is  equal  to  A'(A  -  A*). 

It  is  very  essential  to  notice  that  where  the  question  is 
of  an  exotic  commodity,  or  of  one  for  vvluch  the  natural 
conditions  of  production  do  not  exist  at  B^  on  account  of 
the  climate,  the  soil,  or  the  degree  of  wealth  or  intelligence 
of  its  inhabitants,  the  quantities  A  ^"^d  A'  become  equal 
to  zero  or  insignificant  In  this  case  the  national  income 
of  B  does  not  experience  either  a  nominal  or  an  actual 
diminution  in  consequence  of  importation,  while  in  the 
exporting  market  there  is  always  both  a  nominal  and  an 
actual  increase. 

90.  In  the  preceding  formulas  and  in  the  accompanying 
explanattons,*'it  jras  useless  to  consider  the  cost  of  transpor- 
tation, including  wages  of  the  agents  employed  in  the  opera- 
<tions  necessitated  by  the  actual  transfer,  merchants'  profits, 


Digitized  by 


156 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


and  interest  on  the  capital  employed  in  the  business.  As 
a  general  rule,  the  transportation  business  may  be  carried  on 
by  nations  foreign  to  both  of  Lac  inaikcL^  A  and  B,  and 
with  foreign  capital  1  he  sum  total  of  the  expenses  or  of 
the  profits  of  transportation,  equal  to  —  pj)^9  is  then 
a  source  of  income  for  a  foreign  nation,  and  is  distributed 
among  the  agents  and  capitalists^  who  cooperate  to  carry 
on  the  transportation.  If  the  operation  were  carried  out 
by  industrial  agents  of  and  with  capital  belonging  to 
that  nation,  it  would  be  necessary  to  add  this  quantity 
(A'  —  A')^  to  value  pJD^  —  which  expresses  the 
nominal  increase  in  the  national  income,  which  arises  from 
the  sole  fact  of  exportation  \  and  to  expression  (4),  which  is 
the  actual  increase.  This  last  expression  would  thus  become 


i)n  the  other  hand,  if  the  operations  of  transfer  were 
carried  out  by  industrial  agents  and  with  capital  belongmg 
to  nation  B,  the  value  {p,!  '-p^)E  should  be  subtracted 
from  ///Z?^',  which  expresses  the  nuimnal  decrease 

in  the  national  income  of  B^  which  results  from  the  fact 
of  importation ;  or  from  quantity  (8),  which  expresses  the 
real  decrease  of  the  same  income.  We  therciorc  iiave  in 
the  same  way 


A'  (A  -  A'>  -  (A'  -  A')  ^= A'^  -  A'  I   -  (A  -  A  '>  I  • 


Dig'itized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


159 


It  is  worthy  of  particular  attention,  that  in  consequence 
of  these  inequalities,  under  the  present  hypothesis,  the 
wages  and  profits  provided  by  the  carrying  on  of  transpor- 
tation will  more  than  compensate  nation  B  for  the  real 
diminution  of  the  national  income  which  results  from  im- 
portation. 

On  this  foUowb  tlie  far  more  important  corollary,  that  a 
transportation  business  between  two  fractions  of  the  same 
territor)',  if  carried  on,  as  is  usually  the  case,  by  industrial 
agents  and  by  capital,  both  belonging  to  tiie  country,  neces- 
sarily increases  the  real  value  of  the  national  income ;  for 
this  increase  in  income  is  expressed  by  the  formula, 

of  which  both  of  the  two  principal  parts  into  which  the 
large  brackets  divide  the  formula  must  necessarily  be  posi- 
tive, according  to  what  we  have  seen.  This  formula  can  be 
further  simplified  and  reduced  to 

(9;         A'1^^-(A~  A')i  A(A-A). 

Thus  it  may  ha[jpcn  that  the  free  passage  of  a  (.omn^odiM 
from  one  part  of  a  country  to  another,  as  we  have  seen  ui 
Chapter  X,  may  fail  to  increase  or  may  even  diminish  the 
total  ([uantity  produced  ;  it  may  fail  to  increase  or  may  even 
diminish  the  nominal  value  of  the  national  income ;  but 
it  must  necessarily  increase  the  real  value  of  this  income, 
as  we  have  determined  it  according  ti)  renditions  which 
have  nothing  arbitrary  about  them,  and  which,  on  the  con- 
trary, are  derived  naturally,  in  the  course  of  the  argument, 

from  the  data  ui  the  ^ue:3tiun. 


Digitized  b7  doogle 


160  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

III  conbequciice,  to  generalize  the  proposition,  the  highest 
development  of  communicatioDs  between  fractions  of  the 
same  territory  does  not  necessarily  raise  the  nominal  value 
of  the  national  income  to  a  inaxiirium,  neither  does  iL 
necessarily  bring  about  the  greatest  possible  production  or 
operation  at  the  fullest  capacity  of  the  national  resources ; 
but,  conditions  remaining  otherwise  the  same,  it  dues  neces- 
sarily raise  the  real  value  of  the  national  income  to  a  maxi- 
mum, and  brings  about  the  most  advantageous  working. 

So  far  as  I  know,  this  fundainental  principle  ot  poiitieal 
economy,  though  always  vaguely  understood,  has  never  been 
demonstrated  by  strict  reasoning  or  deduced  from  its  real 
premises.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  school  of 
Adam  Smith,  with  a  view  to  removing  the  barriers  between 
nation  and  nation,  has  always  argued  from  the  incontestable 
increase  in  wealth,  which  has  been  the  invariable  result  of 
removal  of  barriers  and  extension  of  ways  of  communication 
in  the  interior  of  any  single  territory ;  although  there  is  a 
fundamental  disparity  between  the  example  onered  as  proof 
and  the  case  to  which  it  is  desired  to  apply  it ;  as  results 
from  the  preceding  calculations  and  as  we  will  shortly  further 
explain. 

Between  parts  of  the  same  territory  the  business  of  trans- 
portation produces  an  increase  of  national  wealth  which  is 
the  more  apparent  when  the  commodities  in  point  cannot 
be  produced  or  can  only  be  produced  with  difficulty  on  the 
importing  market:  for  then  the  term  (Z^i  —  Z)/),  which 
enters  negatively  into  expression  (9),  becomes  equal  to  o, 
or  has  a  value  which  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the 
positive  terms. 


Digitized  by 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


161 


9r.  T.et  us  reiurii  to  the  case  where  commerce  goes  on 
between  one  nation  and  another ;  and,  as  before,  let  us  omit 
from  consideration  the  profits  of  transportation  which  may 
iiKire  to  the  credit  of  the  exporting  nation,  or  to  the  one 
which  importSi  or  to  a  third  nation. 

Let  us  fix  our  attention  solely  on  the  variations  in  national 
income  which  result  for  market  A  from  the  fact  of  expurui 
tion  and  for  market  B  from  the  fact  of  importation.  The 
results  have  been  clearly  demonstrated,  but  there  are  some 
explanations  to  be  added  to  prevent  specious  objections. 

It  will  be  said  that  it  is  impossible  for  exportation  of  a 
commodity  to  fail  to  involve  importation  on  the  exporting 
market  of  a  precisely  equal  value ;  and  reciprocally,  impor- 
tation on  a  market  involves  exportation  of  an  equal  value. 
Each  of  the  markets  A  and  B  should  therefore  be  consid- 
ered as  importing  and  exporting  at  the  same  tune,  and  then 
there  is  no  apparent  reason  why  the  wealth  of  the  former 
should  be  affected  by  the  establishment  of  communication, 
in  any  way  differently  from  the  wealth  of  the  latter.  The 
formulas  which  we  have  found  are  therefore  faulty  or 
incomplete,  and  the  consequences  deduced  from  them  are 
inexact. 

Moreover  (and  this  is  the  favourite  argument  of  writers  of 
the  school  of  Adam  Smith>,  it  should  be  inferred  fifom  the 
asserted  advantage  assigned  to  the  exporting  market,  and 
the  asserted  disadvantage  suffered  by  the  importing  market, 
that  a  nation  should  so  arrange  as  always  to  export  and 
never  to  import,  which  is  evidently  absurd,  as  it  can  only 
export  on  condition  of  importing,  and  even  the  sum  of  the 
values  exported,  calculated  at  the  moment  of  leaving  the 


162  TliL  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

national  market,  must  necessarily  be  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  values  imported^  calculated  at  the  moment  of  arrival  on 
'  the  national  market. 

AU  this  argumentation  disappears  beiore  a  few  considera- 
tions^ which  are  abstract  to  be  sure,  but  which  are  essentially 
related  to  this  subject. 

If  we  should  imagine  two  markets,  perfectly  isolated  at 
first,  and  between  which  the  barriers  should  be  suddenly 
removed,  it  would  ])robably  ha]) pen  that  the  removal  of 
the  barriers,  by  causing  exportation  of  certain  commodities 
Nf  ,  .  .  from  A  to  B,  would  cause  the  exportation 
of  certain  commodities  of  a  diftlTent  kind  A',  .S",  7",  .  .  . 
from  B  to  A,  In  order,  then,  to  appreciate  the  effect  of 
removal  of  the  barriers  on  the  national  income  of  A  and  on 
the  national  income  of  By  it  would  be  necesj^ai)  to  consider 
each  of  these  nations  as  acting  simultaneously  the  part  of 
an  importing  nation  and  that  of  an  exporting  nation,  which 
would  greatly  complicate  the  question  and  lead  to  a  com- 
plex result. 

The  hypothesis  which  we  have  been  discussing  hitherto 

was  not  of  this  kind ;  our  supposition  was  that  there  was  no 
cliange  in  the  facility  of  communications  between  markets 
A  and  B,  except  with  reference  to  commodity^.  It  might 
have  been  assumed,  in  fact,  that  Af  was  the  only  commodity 
of  which  exportation  was  prohibited,  and  that  the  prohibi* 
tion  had  just  been  removed.  What  will  be  the  effect  of  this 
removal  of  barriers  which  affects  only  a  single  commodity? 

Doubtless  the  quantity  £  of  commodity  M  cannot  pass 
from  A  to  B^  without  having  an  equal  value  imported, 
directly  or  in  some  roundabout  way,  from  ^  to  ^  ;  but  we 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE   THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


163 


have  c  uiihidered  this  foreign  demand  which  the  act  of 
importation  necessitates  on  market  and  we  have  shown 
that  this  increase  in  the  foreign  demand  was  more  than  - 
offset  by  the  impoverishment  of  the  home  producers  of 
commodity  M  m  consequence  of  importation,  and  by  the 
reduction  of  the  total  fund  which  home  consumers  could 
apply  to  the  collective  demand  for  commodities  A\  .V,  7^,  ... 
other  than  M.  VVe  have  likewise  considered  the  withdrawal 
of  a  portion  of  the  funds  previously  devoted  to  the  demand 
for  home  products,  whi(  h  occurs  on  market  for  the 
benefit  of  the  demand  for  commodities  of  foreign  origin ; 
showing  that  this  diversion  to  the  account  of  foreign  coun- 
tries was  more  than  offset  by  the  gain  in  wealth  of  home 
producers  of  commodity  M  in  consequence  of  exportation, 
and  by  the  increase  in  the  total  sum  which  home  consumers 
could  apply  to  the  demand  for  commodities  P,  Q 
other  than  M,  We  have  therefore  accounted  for  all  the 
data  ot  the  problem ;  and  as,  according  to  these  data, 
markets  A  and  B  are  not  placed  under  symmetrical  condi- 
tions, it  is  not  surprising  that  we  find  formulas  for  the  two 
markets  which  arc  unsymmetrical,  and  which  even  give 
results  of  opposite  tendencies. 

In  consequence,  absurd  as  it  would  be  for  a  nation  to 
export  continually  without  ever  importing ;  contradictory  in 
terms  as  this  attempt  would  be,  since  an  equivalent  of  the 
value  exported  is  always  imported,  whether  in  precious 
metals  or  otherwise,  and  the  form  is  of  no  importance  in 
this  respect;  nevertheless  this  theory  explains  the  action 
of  a  government,  which,  in  a  given  system  of  communica- 
tions and  business  relations,  raises  a  barrier  against  exporta- 


Digitized  by  Google 


164  THE  MATHEMATrCAL  PR/XCfPLES 


tion,  or  opposes  one  to  importation  of  a  certain  cora- 
modily. 

The  question  %vouM  no  longer  be  the  same  if  establish- 
ment of  a  harrier  tor  the  benefit  of  A  producers  might 
provoke,  by  way  of  retaliatioDi  the  establishment  of  another 
barrier  for  the  benefit  of  B  producers,  against  whom  the 
first  barrier  was  raised.  The  governuient  of  A  would  then 
have  to  weigh  the  advantage  resulting  from  the  first  measure 
to  the  citizens  of  A  against  the  drawbacks  caused  by  the 
retahation.  The  two  markets  A  and  B  would  thus  again  be 
placed  in  symmetrical  conditions,  and  each  should  be  con- 
sidered as  acting  the  double  part  of  an  exporting  and 
importing  iiiarkci. 

92.  It  is  evident  that  in  all  these  discussions  no  attention 
has  been  paid  for  a  single  moment  to  the  peculiar  role  of 
the  monetary  metals  ;  and  the  theory  would  be  the  same  if 
the  use  of  money  did  not  exist,  because  the  r61e  of  money 
is  an  accidental  phenomenon  in  the  theory  of  wealth.  We 
wiii  not  review  what  has  been  so  thoroughly  developed  on 
this  point  and  in  so  many  forms  by  Smith  and  writers  of  his 
school.  The  object  of  this  essay  is  rather  to  present  a  few 
new  views  than  to  arrange  truths  already  sufficiently  known. 
By  an  admirable  piece  of  dialectics  full  of  vigour  and  fiexi- 
hility,  Smith  utterly  ruined  the  system  known  as  the  balatu'e 
of  trade f  which  can  no  longer  be  sustained.  His  own  error, 
which  was  pushed  much  further  by  his  disciples,  was  to 
identify  with  this  system  the  theory  of  barriers,  which  does 
not  depend  on  it  in  any  way  \  and  this  error  arose  naturally 
because  the  parties  interested  in  maintaining  the  barriers 
were  compelled  to  entrench  themselves  behind  the  system 


i^ijiu^cd  by  Google 


OF  THE  TffEOKY  OF  WEALTH  ]65 


which  was  credited  at  that  time,  and  this  was  that  of  the 

balance  of  trade. 

All  the  objections  which  Smith  raises,  not  against  the 
system  of  the  balance  of  trade,  but  against  the  theory  of 
barriers  as  related  to  the  national  wealth,  find  an  answer  in 
the  principles  which  we  have  discussed.  We  will  quote  a 
comparison  which  has  become  a  kind  of  a  classic  among  his 
disciples.  "  By  means  of  glasses,  hot- beds,  and  hot-walls, 
very  good  grapes  can  be  raised  in  Scotland,  and  very  good 
wine,  too,  can  be  made  of  them."  Therefore  he  suggests, 
according  to  the  theory  of  barriers,  to  encourage  the  pro- 
duction of  wine  in  Scotland,  and  to  raise  the  rate  of  its 
national  income,  importation  of  French  and  Portuguese 
wines  ought  to  be  prohibited. 

The  answer  is  that  wine  thus  produced  in  Scotland,  sup* 
posing  it  to  be  drinkable,  would  be  held  at  so  high  a  price 
that  there  would  be  no  demand  for  it,  or  practically  none. 
We  should,  therefore,  fall  into  the  case  developed  in  Article 
89,  where  importation  of  the  foreign  commodity  does  not 
affect  the  national  income  at  all.  By  prohibiting  foreign 
wines,  Scotland  would  deprive  itself  gratuitously  of  the  en- 
joyments connected  with  the  constimption  of  these  wines.  It 
would  even  deprive  itself  of  an  appreciable  proht,  inasmuch 
as  Scotch  industry  and  capital  participate  in  the  commercial 
circulation  which  brings  French  and  Portuguese  wines  to 
the  Scotch  market.  The  rase  would  be  more  complicated 
if  importation  of  foreign  wines  caused  a  considerable 
diminution  in  the  consumption  of  other  spirits  of  home 
production,  such  as  the  Scotch  use  ;  but  it  is  probable  that, 
on  account  of  the  high  price  of  wine  in  Scotland,  which  is 


L.y,u<-ud  by  Google 


166  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

so  high  as  to  confine  its  use  to  the  wealthy  classes  of  society, 
the  demand  and  the  price  of  spirits  of  home  production  do 
not  experience  any  very  sensible  reduction  oNs  ing  to  impor< 
tation  of  these  wines. 

93.  It  is  further  objected  that  when  a  commodity  ceases 
to  be  produced  la  a  given  territory,  in  consequence  of  im- 
portation, or  is  only  produced  in  smaller  quantities,  the  raw 
materials  of  this  commodity,  the  capital  engaged  in  its  pro- 
duction, and  the  hands  employed  in  its  manufacture,  find 
other  employment ;  and  that,  reciprocally,  when  exportation 
encourages  production  of  a  commodity,  the  increase  in  pro- 
duction cannot  occur  without  diverting  hands,  capital,  and 
raw  materials  from  other  uses.  But  by  only  a  casual  glance 
at  this  discussion,  it  appears  that  we  are  arguing  as  if  tlie 
reduction  in  the  production  of  commodity  M  would  involve 
suppression  of  the  income  of  all  those  who  cooperated, 
either  by  furnishing  raw  materials  or  otherwise,  in  the  prep- 
aration of  the  commodity  of  which  production  ceases;  or 
as  if  increase  in  the  production  of  this  same  commodity 
created  out  of  whole  cloth  an  increase  for  all  those  who 
contribute  by  furnishing  raw  materials  or  otherwise,  in  the 
preparation  of  the  commodity  now  newly  produced. 

We  have  replied  to  this  objection  in  advance,  by  the  ex- 
planations given  in  Article  86,  and  we  have  shown  how  this 
circumstance  of  substitution  of  employment  has  been  im- 
plicitly considered, — a  very  important  matter,  doubtless,  for 
the  producers  immediately  concerned,  and  even  for  society 
at  largCj  m  the  oeiibc  that  it  renders  less  painful  the  transi- 
tion from  one  commercial  policy  to  another,  but  a  matter 
of  entire  indifference  when  there  is  only  under  consideration 


Digitized  by  Google 


QF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


167 


the  mathematical  appreciation  of  the  intiuence  of  the  change 
in  policy  on  the  social  income,  after  the  suffering  insepa- 
rable from  a  stale  of  transition  has  been  eluninated. 

94.  Let  us  borrow  another  example  from  a  celebrated 
author  of  the  school  of  Adam  Smith,  to  show  more  plainly 
the  disparity  between  our  principles  and  the  theoretical 
error  which  we  are  opposing.  The  transportation  of  hemp 
from  Riga  to  Havre,"  says  J.  B.  Say,*  "costs  a  Dutch  ship- 
owner thirty-five  francs  a  ton.  No  one  else  could  do  it  so 
cheaply ;  but  I  assume  that  the  Dutchman  can.  He  pro- 
poses to  the  French  government,  which  is  a  consumer  of 
Jvussian  hemp,  to  take  charge  of  this  transportation  for  forty 
francs  a  ton.  He  thus  evidently  reserves  a  profit  of  five 
francs.  I  further  suppose  that  the  French  government, 
from  a  desire  to  favour  French  ship-brokers,  prefers  to 
employ  French  vessels,  in  which  the  same  transportation 
will  cost  fifty  francs,  and  which  would  have  to  charge  fifty- 
five  francs  to  provide  the  same  profit.  What  will  happen  ? 
The  government  will  have  spent  fifteen  francs  a  ton  to  pro- 
vide a  profit  of  five  for  its  citizens ;  and  as  it  is  the  citizens 
who  also  pay  the  taxes,  from  which  the  public  expenses  are 
met,  this  operation  will  have  cost  Frenchmen  fifrieen  francs 
to  provide  a  profit  of  five  fi*ancs  for  other  Frenchmen.'* 

This  reasoning  would  be  unanswerable  if  the  French  ship- 
broker  should  charter  a  foreign  vessel,  for  instance  an 
American  ship,  manned  by  American  seamen,  and  victualled 
with  American  supplies,  to  go  to  Riga  for  Russian  hemp 
to  carry  to  Havre ;  in  fact,  then,  to  provide  a  profit  of  five 
francs  a  ton  for  the  French  ship-broker,  or  to  increase  the 
«  T^atU  d^Ecmomii  P^iHpu^  Book  I,  Cbapter  9 


Digitized 


168  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 


national  income  by  the  income  which  this  profit  would  annu- 
ally furnish  the  French  ship-broker,  the  country  would  dis- 
possess itself,  in  some  form  or  other,  for  the  benefit  of  foreign 
workmen  and  producers,  of  a  sum  of  fifteen  francs  a  ton,  over 
and  above  what  it  would  have  dispossessed  itself  of  by  em- 
plo)  ing  the  Dutch  ship-broker  and  the  Dutch  crew  instead 
of  takuig  the  French  ship-broker  and  the  American  crew. 

But  the  loss  which  such  a  combination  would  cost  the 
country  is  too  evident  for  this  to  be  what  Say  proposed  to 
discuss.  On  the  contrary,  he  expressly  admits  that  the 
French  broker  employs  crews  of  his  own  nationally ;  that 
the  hull  and  tackle  of  his  vessels  are  of  French  manu&ct- 
ure ;  that  their  provisions  are  articles  of  home  production ; 
andy  starting  from  this  hypothesis^  he  reasons  as  if  the 
national  income  had  only  been  increased  to  the  extent  of 
the  broker's  profits  by  the  operation  under  consideration. 

But  of  the  fifty-five  francs  per  ton  which  are  to  be  divided 
between  various  French  manu^cturers  and  producers,  why 
should  the  part  of  the  broker  be  picked  out  rather  than 
those  of  the  captain,  of  the  mate,  of  the  steersman,  or  of 
the  sailors  who  make  up  the  crew?  Or  again  than  those 
of  the  carpenter  or  the  rope-raaker  who  worked  on  the 
building  and  tackle  of  the  vessel  in  French  shipyards ;  or 
rather  than  those  of  the  French  landlords  whose  products 
were  used  in  the  equipment  and  victualling  of  the  ship? 
Where  is  the  essential  characteristic  which  distinguishes  the 
business  of  tl^e  broker  and  the  interest  on  his  capital  from 
the  business  of  other  agents  and  the  return  from  other 
investments,  which  cooperate  in  the  same  enterprise? 

This  difference  can  only  be  explained  by  tacitly  suppos- 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


169 


ing  that  the  French  ship-broker  would  be  unable  to  find 
employment  either  for  his  skill  or  his  capital,  in  case  the 
government  should  award  the  freight  to  the  Dutch  broker 
for  forty  francs ;  and  by  supposing,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
the  members  of  the  crew  would  find  employment  on  other 
vessels,  or  that  other  trades  would  offer  them  equivalent 
wages;  by  making  a  similar  supposition  for  the  ship- 
builders; and,  finally,  by  admitting  that  other  outlets  would 
be  found  for  the  commodities  which  entered  into  the  con- 
struction, the  gear,  and  victualling  of  the  French  vessels 
■  which  the  government  ceases  to  charter. 

But  the  supposition  made  concerning  the  ship-broker  is 
quite  as  gratuitous  as  the  opposite  supposition,  which  con- 
cerns the  other  home  producers  or  agents ;  and,  moreover, 
this  circumstance  that  for  certain  agents  or  producers,  other 
employments  and  other  outlets  may  be  substituted  for  the 
employment  and  outlet  which  are  cut  off, — this  circum- 
stance, we  say,  really  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question. 
France  dispossesses  itself,  in  one  form  or  another,  of  the 
value  of  forty  francs  per  ton  to  pay  the  Dutch  charter.  This 
value  stops  providing  the  income  ui  certain  French  workmen 
and  producers.  If  as  many  vessels  are  to  continue  to  be 
built,  equipped,  and  victualled,  it  will  be  necessary  for  funds 
to  be  diverted,  up  to  due  competition,  froin  other  demaiiiis. 
The  loss  will  be  thrown  back  on  other  classes  of  workmen 
and  producers,  but  the  M  in  the  national  income  will  be 
the  same,  with  reservation  always  of  the  reactions  and  per- 
turbations oj  the  second  order^  which  are  too  involved  for 
general  consideration. 

Under  the  present  hypothesis,  the  government  will  have 


Digitized 


170  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 

two  things  to  consider,  for  it  evidently  cannot  prefer  its  own 
citizens  to  foreigners  at  any  price ^  unless  interest  in  the  pub- 
lic safety  enters  into  the  question,  as,  for  instance  (as  J.  B. 
vSay  very  well  observes)  ,  if  encouragement  of  merchant  ship- 
ping were  indispensable  to  the  maintenance  of  the  navy, 
which  itself  could  not  be  abandoned  without  detriment  to 
security  and  political  power  of  the  Stale.  Except  fur  thi:^ 
major  consideration,  which  is  beyond  our  province,  the 
administration  will  have  to  consider  whether  the  encourage- 
ment given  to  national  merchant  shipping  is  not  excessive  : 

(1)  because  it  consumes  commodities  and  services  which 
might  be  used  in  a  more  remunerative  way,  i>.  more 
usefully  for  an  ultimate  increase  of  the  national  wealth; 

(2)  because  it  unjustly  burdens  the  public  treasury,  ue,  the 
citizens  at  large,  in  order  to  increase  the  income  of  certain 
special  classes  of  producers ;  for  it  is  not  enough  that  the 
national  income  increases,  and  that  thus  these  gain  more  than 
the  others  lose :  the  principles  of  equity  which  belong  to  all 
countries  and  all  times ;  the  principles  of  equity  which  more 
particularly  rule  the  country  and  the  time  in  which  we  live,  do 
not  permit  that  acts  of  the  public  authority  should  have  for 
their  tendency  to  increase  the  natural  inequahty  of  conditions. 

95.  We  have  just  laid  a  finger  on  the  question  which  is 
at  the  bottom  of  all  discussions  on  measures  which  prohibit 
or  restrict  freedom  of  trade.  It  is  not  enough  to  accurately 
analyze  the  influence  of  such  measures  on  the  national 
income;  their  tendency  as  to  the  distribution  of  the  wealth 
of  society  should  also  be  looked  into.  VVe  have  no  inten- 
tion of  taking  up  here  this  deUcate  question,  which  would 
cany  us  too  far  away  from  the  purely  abstract  diacu&siona 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  THE  THEORY  OF  WEALTH 


171 


with  which  this  essay  has  to  do.  If  we  have  tried  to 
overthrow  the  doctrine  of  Smith's  school  as  to  barriers^ 
it  was  only  from  theoretical  considerations,  and  not  in  the 
least  to  make  ourselves  the  advocates  of  prohibitory  and 
restrictive  laws.  Moreover,  it  must  be  recognized  that  such 
questions  as  that  of  commercial  hberty  are  not  settled  either 
by  the  arguments  of  scientific  men  or  even  by  the  wisdom 
of  statesmen.  A  higher  power  drives  nations  in  this  direc- 
tion or  that,  and  when  the  day  of  a  system  is  past,  good 
reasons  cannot  restore  its  lost  vitality  any  more  than 
sophisms.  The  skill  of  siatebinen,  then,  consists  in  temper- 
ing the  ardour  of  the  spirit  of  innovation,  without  attempt- 
ing an  impossible  struggle  against  the  laws  of  Providence. 
Possession  of  a  sound  theory  may  help  in  this  labour  of 
resistance  to  abrupt  changes  and  assist  in  easing  the  transi- 
Uun  from  one  system  to  another.  By  giving  more  light  on 
a  debated  point,  it  soothes  the  passions  which  are  aroused. 
Systems  have  their  fuiatics,  but  the  science  which  succeeds 
to  systems  never  has  them.  Finally,  even  if  theories  re- 
lating to  social  organization  do  not  guide  the  doings  of 
the  day,  they  at  least  throw  light  on  the  history  of  accom- 
plished facts.  Up  to  a  certain  point  it  is  possible  to  com- 
pare the  influence  of  economic  theories  on  society  to  that 
of  grammarians  on  language.  Languages  are  formed  with- 
out the  consent  of  grammarians,  and  are  corrupted  in 
spite  of  them;  but  their  works  throw  light  on  the  laws 
of  the  formation  and  decadence  of  languages ;  and  their 
rules  hasten  the  time  when  a  language  attains  its  per- 
fection, and  delay  a  little  the  invasions  of  barbarism  and 
bad  taste  which  corrupt  it. 


Digitized  by 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

OF 

MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


PROM  C£VA  TO  COURNOT 
(1711-1837) 

711    Ceva,  Giovanni.    De  re  nummaria,  quoad  fieri  potuit 

geometrice  tractata,  ad  lUustnssimos  et  excellen- 
tissimos  dominos  Praesidem  Quaestoresque  hu- 
jus  arciducalis  Caesaraei  Magistratus  Mantuae. 
Mantova,  4%  60  pp.  [Reviewed  by  F.  Nicolini, 
Ghm»  degH  ecotu^  Oct.  1878.  See  also  Palgrave's 
Diet.] 

717  MARiOTTfi,  Esme.  Kssaie  de  logique.  2d  ed.  In 
collected  works.  Leide.  [See  Principe  97  and 
11"**  partie,  art.  III.] 

738  BERNOLnijj,  Daniel.  Specimen  theoriae  novae  de 
mensura  sortis.  Commentarii  academiac  scienH- 
arum  imperialis  FttropoHtanae^  vol.  V,  pp.  175-92. 
[German  transi.9  1896,  by  A.  Pringsheim:  Die 

Grundlage  der  modernen  VVertlehre.  Versuch 

einer  neuen  Theorie  der  Wertbestimmung  von 

173 


Digitized  by 


174  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

Gllicksfallen  (Einleitung  von  Ludwig  Fick).  L.€ip- 
zig  (Duncker  &  Humblot),  60  pp.] 

1754  Anon.  [F.  Forbonnais].  ^l^mens  du  commerce^  2d 
ed.,  vol.  II,  chs.  viii,  ix,  Leyde  &  Paris,  12*'. 

1 764  Becc\ria,  Cesare.  Tentativoanalitico  sui  contrabbandi, 
1764-5.  Estratto  dal  fogiio  periodico  intitolato : 
li  caffe^  vol.  Brescia.  [Also  In  Custodi's  Scrittori 
classici  Italiani  di  economia  poHtica,  parte  rao- 
derna,  vol.  XII,  pp.  235-41,  Milano,  1804.] 

1 771  Anon,  [probably  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  Lloyd].  An 
essay  on  the  theory  of  money.   London,  161  pp. 

1781  Anon.  [A.  N.  Isnard].  Traits  des  richesses.  Lon- 
don &  Lausanne,  2  vols,,  xxiv,  344,  327  pp. 
[Slightly  math.] 

1786  Anon.  [Condorcet].  Vie  de  M.  Turgot,  pp.  162-9, 
London.    [Eng.  transl.,  1787,  pp.  403-9.] 

1792  SiLiu,  Guglielmo.  Saggio  sull' influenza  dell' analisi 
nelle  scienze  politiche  ed  economiche.  Niio\'a 
raccolta  d'  opuscoli  di  autori  Siciliani,  vol.  V  (  ?), 
Palermo. 

1801  Canard,  N.  F.     Principes   dcconomie  politique, 

ouvrage  couronn^  par  I'lnstitut.  Paris  (Buisson)» 
235  PP*  [Reviewed  by  Francis  Homer,  Edin- 
burgh Rev.y  no.  II.] 

1802  Kroncke,  Glaus.    Versuch  einer  Theorie  des  Fuhr- 

werks  mit  Anwendung  auf  den  Strassenbau, 
Giessen. 

1 803  SiMONDE,  J.  C.  L.   De  la  richesse  commerciale,  vol. 

I,  pp.  105-9,  Geneva. 

1804  Kronckk,  Glaus.     Das   Steuerwesen   nach  seiner 

Natur  und  seinen  Wirkungen  untersucht.  Darm- 
stadt &  Giessen  (Heyer),  xxxii,  440  pp. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ft 

MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  175 


1809    Lang,  Joseph.    Ueber  den  obersten  GrundsaU  der 

politischen  Oekonomie*  Riga. 
tSio   Kroncke,  Glaus.    Anlettung  zur  Regulirung  der 

Steuer. 

181 1    Lang^  Joseph.    Gruudlinien  dcr  politischen  Arith- 
metik.   Kursk  (Langner)^  xxii^  216  pp. 

1815  BuQUOY,  Georg  von.    Die  Theorie  der  Nationalwirth- 

schaft,  nach  einein  neuen  Plane  uml  nach  mehreren 
eigenen  Ansichten  dargestellt.  Leipzig,  4°.  [3 
Nachtrage:  1816,  1817  (524  pp.),  1818.] 

1816  Anon.  [L.  M.  Valeriani].   Apologia  della  formola 

/  =    trattandosi  del  come  si  determini  il  prezzo 

delle  cose  tutte  mercatabiii,  contro  cio  che  ne  dice 
11  celebre  autore  del  "Nuova  prospetto  delle 

scienze  ecuiioi niche."    Bologiui  (Marsigli),  62  pp. 

181 7  .\non.  [L.  M.  Valeriani j.    Discorso  apologetico  in 

cui  si  sostiene  recarsi  invano  pel  celebre  autore 
del    Nuovo  prospetto  delle  scienze  economiche  " 

contro  r  Apologia  della  formola  /  =  -  trattando 

si  del  come  si  determini  il  prezzo  delle  cose  tutte 
mercatabiliy  ci6  che  il  medisimo  ha  scritto  nel 

tomo  II,  il  pag.  114-117,  141-146,  e  nel  IV,  pug. 
214-219,  244-263  deli'  opera  suddetta.  Bologna 
(Marsigh)y  114  pp. 
1824  Anon.  [T.Perronet  Thompson].  The  instrument  of 
exchange.  Westminster  Rti\^  vol.  I,  pp.  171-205. 
[Reprinted  separately,  1S30,  27  pp. :  pobtscnpt  to 
same,  Westtnin,  Rev.,  1830,  vol.  XII,  pp.  5  25-33  j 
reprinted  1842  in :  Exercises,  political  and  others, 
vol.  Ill,  pp  295-343.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


176 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


1835  Cazaux,  L.  F.  G.  de.   El^mens  d'^conomie  priv^e  et 

publlque.  Paris  (Huzard)  &  Toulouse  (Doula- 

doure),  25 1  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 

1825  Fucco,  Francesco.    Saggi  economici,  ist  ser.,  vol.  2. 

Pisa,  1825-27.  [Math.?] 

1826  Rau,  K.  H.   Grundsatze  der  Volkswirthschaftslehre. 

[Subsequent  editions,   1833,   '37,  '41,  '63,  '68, 
Leipzig  &  Heidelberg.    Very  slightly  math.] 
1826    rHOMPSON,  T.  Perronet.    On  rent. 

1836  ThOnen,  J.  H.  von.    Der  isolirte  Staat  in  Beziehung 

auf  Landwirthschaft  und  Nationalokonomie,  oder 
Untersuchungen  Uber  den  Einfluss,  den  die  Ge- 
treidepreise,  der  Reichthuui  des  Bodens  und  die 
Abgaben  auf  den  Ackerbau  austiben.  i*'  Th., 
Hamburg,  viii,  290  pp.  [2d  ed.  of  same,  1842, 
Rostock,  XV,  391  pp.  ;  1"  fasc.  von  2^  Th.,  1850, 
Rostock,  vi,  285  pp. ;  a*""'  fasc.  von  2^'"^  Th,,  1863, 
Rostock,  ix,  444  pp.  French  transl.  by  Leverri&re, 
1 85 1,  Paris  (Guillaumin) ,  viii,  340  pp.;  French 
transl.  by  Wolkoff  (of  fasc.  of  iS^uj,  1857,  Parib. 
Slightly  math.] 

1829   Whewell,  William.    Mathematical  exposition  of 
some  doctrines  of  political  economy.  Cambridge 

Phiios,  Trans. f  vol.  Ill,  pp.  191-230,  4**  [Con- 
tinued, 1 83 1,  vol.  IV,  pp.  155-98;  1850,  vol.  IX, 
pp.  128-49,  and  Part  II,  pp.  [1-7]  ;  Italian  transl. 
in  BibHoteca  dett^  econ,^  ^^75)  3^  ser.,  vol.  II,  pp. 

1832    LuBt,  D.  G.    Argument  against  the  gold  standard. 
London,  iv,  192  pp. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  177 

FROM  COURNOT  TO  JEVONS 
(1838-1870) 

* 

GENERAL  TREATISES 

1838  CouRNOi*,  Augustin.  Kecherches  sur  les  principes 
math^matiques  de  la  th^orie  des  richesses.  Paris 
(  Hach ette) ,  X i ,  1 9  8  pp .  [  I talian  transl .  i n  BibHoteca 
deir  econ.,  i^75»  ^^er.,  vol.  II,  pp.  67-170.  Eng- 
lish transL,  by  N.  T.  Bacon,  in  :  Economic  classics. 
New  York  &  London  (Macmillan),  1897.} 

1844   Hagen,  K.  H.  System  of  political  economy.  Transl. 

from  Crerinan  by  J.  P.  Smith.    Loudon,  viii,  88  pp. 

1848  Mill,  J.  S.    Principles  of  political  economy.  [Bk. 

Illy  ch.  xviiiy  S  7,  very  slightly  math.] 

1849  EsM^NARD  DU  Mazei',  Camllle.    Nouveaux  principes 

(l'(^conomie  politicjue.  Paris  (Joabert),  ix,  456  pp. 
1849  WoLKOFF,  Mathieu.  ^Prdmisses  philosophiques  de 
I'^conomte  rationelle  des  soci^t^s.  Paris  (Guil- 
laumtn).  [3d  ed.,  186 1 :  Lectures  d'^conomie 
politique  laiiouelle,  12°,  309  pp.;  3d  ed.,  1808: 
Precis  d'^con.  poL  rat.  (math,  notes,  pp.  295-5  '> 
308-12).] 

1854   GossEN,  H.  H.    Entwickelung  der  Gesetze  des 

menschlichen  Verkehrs,  und  der  daraus  fliesseuden 
Kegeln  fiir  menschliches  Handeln.  Braunschweig, 
2  78  pp.  [Reviewed  by  Hooper,  Jour.  Ray*  Statist 
Soc.j  1879,  pp.  729-33 ;  by  Walras,  y<7»r.  desecon*^ 
1885,  4th  ser.,  vol.  XXX,  pp.  68-90.  See  also 
preface  to  Jevons's  rheory  Pol.  Econ.,  1879, 
and  Palgrave's  Dictionary.  Republished,  1888, 
Berlin  (Prager).] 


Digitized  by  Google 


178  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

1855  Jennings,  Ricliard.    Natural  elements  of  political 

economy.    London,  275  pp.  [Math.?] 

1856  Benner.     Throne  math^matique  de  r^conomie 

politique. 

1858  CouRCELLE  Seneuil,  J.  G.  Traits  tht^orique  et  pra- 
tique d'^conomie  politique.  Paris  (Amyot). 
[2d  ed.,  1867,  viii,  495,  538  pp.  X.  Very  slightly 
math.] 

i860  Du  Mesnil-Marigny,  J.  Les  libre  ^changistes  et 
les  protectionnistes  concili^s,  ou  solution  complete 
des  principales  questions  6conomiquea.  Paris 
(Guillaumin).  [2d  ed.,  i860,  ii,  413  pp.;  3d 
ed.,  1878.] 

1863  Du  Mesnil-marign%  J.  Cat^chisme  de  T^conomie 
politique.  Paris  (Guillaumin),  12%  355  pp. 
[Math,  notes.] 

1863  Mangoldt,  H.  von.  Grundriss  der  Volkswirth- 
schaftsiehre.   Stuttgart  (Engeihorn),  xvi,  224  pp. 

ON  VALUE,  TAXATION.  AND  DISTRIBUTION 

1838  TozER,  John.  Mathematical  investigation  of  the 
effect  of  machinery  on  the  wealth  of  a  community 
in  which  it  is  employed,  and  on  the  fund  for  the 
payment  of  wages.  Cambridge  Philos,  Trans, ^ 
vol.  VI,  pp.  507-22,  4°.  [Continued  under  title  : 
On  the  effect  of  the  non-residence  of  landlords, 
etc.,  ibid,^  1840,  vol.  VII,  pp.  189-96  ] 

1S44  DuPUiT,  E.  J.  De  la  inesure  dc  I'utilit^  des  travaux 
publics.  Annales  des  ponts  ct  c/iaussees,  2d  ser., 
vol.  VIII,  pp.  332-75,  Paris. 

1849   DcTPurr,  £.  J.   De  Pinfluence  des  phages  sur  Futility 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  179 


des  voies  de  communication.    Annates  des  ponts 

et  chausscesy  2(1  ser.,  no.  207,  ])p.  170-248,  Paris. 
1 85 1    £sM£NARD  DU  Mazet,  Camilie.  De  la  valeur  comme 

premiere  notion  de  T^conomie  politique.  Paris 

(Joubert),  23  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 
1853    Farr,  William.    Income  and  property  tax.  Jour. 

Roy,  StatisL  6oc,^  vol.  XVI,  pp.  3-44. 
1853   Hardy^  Peter.   An  expose  of  the  &llacy  "that  it  is 

just  to  tax  temporary  annuities  at  the  same  rate  as 

perpetual  annuities.''  A.^  ^ur.  Mag,  and Jour.Insi, 

Actuaries,  vol.  Ill,  pp.  195-204. 
1^53   JsLLicoE,  Charles.   On  the  true  measure  of  liability 

in  a  system  of  direct  taxation.   Assur.  Mag.  and 

Jour.  Inst,  Ai  tuaries,  vol.  Ill,  pp.  1-7. 
ICS56    WoLKOFF,  Mathieu.    Le  salaire  nature!  d'apres  M.  de 

Thtinen.    Jour,  des  eeon.,  2d  sen,  vol.  X,  pp* 

263-70. 

1857  Woi.KOFF,  Mathieu.  Xouvelles  observations  au  sujet 
de  Touvrage  de  M.  de  Thiinen  sur  le  salaire  naturel. 
Jour,  des  eeon.,  2d  sen,  vol.  XVI. 

1 85  9    BoccARDO,  Gerolamo.    Lavori  pubblici.  Dizion. 

econ.  polite  comnic^r^,  vol.  II,  pp.  65  2-3 /Torino,  4". 

1864  Fauveau,  G.    Considerations  math^matiques  sur  la 

th^orie  de  I'impdt.    Paris,  64  pp. 

1865  Knapp,  G.  F.    Zur  Prtifung  der  Untersuchungen 

Thiinen's  iiber  Lohn  und  Zinsfuss  im  isolirten 
Staate.  Braunschweig,  35  pp. 
1867  fiRENTANO,  L.  J.  Ueber  J.  H.  von  Thunen*s  natur- 
gemassen  Lohn  und  Zinsfuss  im  isolirten  Staate. 
[Inaugural  dissertation.  Gottingen,  59  pp.;  pp. 
48-59  math.] 

1867    FAUV£AUy  G.   Considerations  math^matiques  sur  la 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


theorie  de  la  valeur.  Jour,  des  ecoti.^  3d  ser.,  vol. 
V,  pp,  31-40. 

1868   jENKiNy  Fleerning.   The  graphic  representation  of  the 
laws  of  supply  and  demand  and  their  application  to 

labour.  [Reprinted  in  drain's  Recess  studies, 
1870,  pp.  151-85.  Edinburgh.  Also  in  Papers 
of  Fleeming  Jenkin,  London,  1887,  vol,  11^  pp. 
76-107.] 

1868  Marx,  Karl.    Das  Kapital.  Kntik  der  politischen 

Oekonomie.  Hamburg  (Meissner),  vol.  I,  xxvii, 
526  pp.  [2d  ed.,  1873 ;  3d  ed.  (ed.  by  F.  £ngels), 
1883  ;  vol.  II  (Engels),  18S5  ;  vol.  Ill  (Engels), 
1894  ;  vol.  I,  transl.  into  Russian,  1872  ;  into 
French,  by  M.  J.  Roy,  Paris  (Lachatre),  and  re- 
vised by  author,  1873 ;  into  English  from  3d  Ger- 
man ed.  by  S.  Moore  and  E.  Aveling,  and  ed.  by 
F.  Engels,  t886 ;  reprinted  in  Humboldt  libr,  sci., 
New  York,  1891.    Very  slightly  math.] 

1869  Schumacher,  H.    Ueber  J.  H.  von  ThUnen's  Gesetz 

vom  naturgemassen  Arbeitslohne.  Rostock,  84  pp. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

1839  Ellet,  C.   An  essay  on  the  laws  of  trade  in  ref- 

erence to  the  works  of  internal  improvement  in 

the  United  States,  viii,  248  pp. 

1840  Anon.  [J.  W.  Lubbock].    On  currency.  London 

(Knight),  viii,  43,  xxi  pp. 
1844    Hagen,  K.  H.    Die  Nothwendigkeit  der  Handels- 

freiheit  fiir  das  Nati  ^naleinkommen,  mathemaiix  h 
nachgewiesen.     Konigsberg  (Grafe  &  linger), 

3«  PP- 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


181 


1850    Lardner,  Dionysius.    Railway  economy.  London. 

[Chapters  xii  and  xiii  math.] 
1852   Jellicoe,  Charles.   On  the  contrivances  required  to 

render  contingent  reversionary  interests  marketable 

securities.    Assur,  Mag.j  vol.  II,  pp.  159-66. 
1854    VVoLKOFF,  Mathieu.    Opuscules  sur  la  rente  fonci^re. 

Paris,  231  pp. 

1856  Jellicoe,  Charles.  The  bank  of  England :  its  pres- 
ent constitution  and  operation.  Jour,  Roy,  Statist, 

Soc.y  vol.  XIX,  pp.  272-83.    [Very  slightly  rncith.J 
1859    Van  Houi  en,  S.    Verhandeling  over  de  Waarde. 
1863   MacLeod,  H»  D.   Credit.   MacLeod's  Dictionary 

of  pol.  econ.,  pp.  567-617.    [Very  slightly  math.] 

1866  Jevons,  W.  S.    Brief  account  of  a  general  mathe- 

matical theory  of  political  economy.  Jour,  Roy, 
Statist  Soc,  vol.  XXIX»  pp.  282-3. 

1867  WnrSTBiN,  Theodor.    Mathematische  Statistik  und 

deren  Anwendung  auf  National-Okonomie  und  Ver- 
sicherungs-Wissenschaft.  Hannover  (Hahn'sche 
Hofbuchh.),  55  pp. 

1868  Gray,  Peter.   On  rate  of  interest  in  loans  repayable 

per  instalments.  Jour,  Inst.  Actuaries^  pp.  91- 
102,  182-9. 

186S  Jenkin,  Fieeming.  Trades  Unions.  How  far  legiti- 
mate.  Nor&i  Brit  Rev.^  Mar.    [Footnote  math.] 

1870  LEFfevRE,  H.  Traits  th^orique  et  pratique  des 
valeurs  mobih^res  et  des  operations  de  bourse. 
Paris  (Lachaud). 

1870  Lef^vre,  H.  Th^orie  ^l^mentaire  des  operations  de 
bourse. 


Digitized  by 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


FROM  jEVONS  TO  MARSHALL 
(1871-1889) 
GENERAL  TREATISES 

187X    Jevons,  W.  Stanley.  The  theory  of  political  economy. 
London  (Macmillan),  xvi,  367  pp.    [2d  ed.,  1879  ; 

3d  ed.,  1888,  lii,  296  pp.  Italian  transl.,  1875, 
in  Biblioteca  deir  econ,,  Torino,  3d  ser.,  vol.  II, 
pp.  41 74-431 1.] 
1874  Walras,  L^on.  ^l^ments  d'^conomie  politique  pure, 
ou  th^orie  de  la  richesse  sociale.  ist  fasc,  Lau- 
sanne, Paris  &  Bale,  viji,  208  pp.  [2d  fasc.,  1877, 
pp.  209-407;  2d  ed.,  1889,  xxiv,  524  pp.;  jd 
ed.,  1896,  xxiv,  495  pp.  The  3d  ed.  contains  the 
2d,  3d,  4th,  and  5th  essays  in  the  list  cited  below 
under:  Theorie  math,  de  la  rich.  soc.  1883;  also 
reprints  of:  Theorenie  de  I'utiUt^  maxima  des 
capitaux  neufs.  Rev,  d'eton,  poL^  vol.  Ill,  1889, 
pp.  310-15  ;  Observations  sur  le  principe  de  la 
theorie  du  prix  de  MM.  Auspitz  et  Lichen,  ihid.^ 
1 890,  May-June.  [Answered  by  Messrs.  A.  &  L., 
ibid,^  1890,  p.  599-] ;  De  I'^change  de  plusieurs 
marchandises  entre  elles.  BuU,  see.  ingen,  civiis, 
Jan.,  1 89 1  [Eng.  transl.,  Ann.  Amcr.  Acad., 
Jul.,  '92.] ;  Theorie  g^om^trique  de  la  d<^ termi- 
nation des  prix.  (Rec.  inaug.  de  Tuniv.  de 
Lausanne.)  [Eng.  transl.,  ibid.']  ;  Note  sur  la  re- 
futation de  la  theorie  anglais  du  fermage  de  M. 
Wicksteed.  Recueil  pubL  par  rUnii\  de  Lau- 
sanne, 1 896.3 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


183 


1879  Marshall^  Alfred  &  Mary  P.  The  economics  of  in- 
dustry.   London,  xiv,  231  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 

1881    MacLeod,  H.  D.    The  elements  of  economics. 

London  (Longmans),  vol.  L  [vol.  11,  part  1, 
1886 ;  slightly  math.] 

1S81  Sacher,  Eduard.  GnindzUge  einer  Mechanic  der 
Gesellschaft,  I.  TheoretischerTheil.  Jena  (Fischer), 
246  pp. 

1883  Walras,  Leon.    Th^orie  math^matique  de  la  richesse 

sociale.  Lausanne,  4^,  256  pp.  [Reproduction 
of:  Principe  d'une  th^orie  math^matique  de 
*  r^change.  Orleans  (Colas),  1873,  24  pp.  (re- 
printed Jour,  des  econ,^  June,  1874,  pp.  5-21)  ; 
Equations  de  T^change.  Lausanne,  1875  ;  Equa- 
tions  de  la  production.  Lausanne,  1876 ;  Equa- 
tions de  la  capitalisation,  1876,  40  pp.;  Th^orie 
math^matique  du  bimetallisme.  Paris,  1876,  '81, 
'82,  Jour^  des  icon;  Theorie  math^matique  du 
billet  de  banque,  1879.  Bull  sac.  vaudaise  set, 
nat;  Theorie  math^matiqiie  du  prix  des  tcrres  et 
de  leur  rachat  par  I'^tat,  1880.  Bull.  soc.  vaudoise 
sci.  nat.  The  first  four  have  been  translated  into 
Italian  and  German,  viz. :  in  BibUoteca  econ,^  1878, 
3d  ser.,  vol.  II,  pp.  1289-1388,  and  as  Math. 
Theorie  der  Preisbestimraung,  Stuttgart  (Eiike), 
1881.] 

1884  PiBRSON,  N.  G.   Leerboek  der  staathuishoudkunde. 

Erste  deel.   Haarlem.   [Part  II,  1890 ;  2d  ed.  of 

Part  I,  1896,  671  pp.;  part  II,  1897.  Very 
slightly  math  ] 

1885  LAUNHARDTy  Wilhelm.    Mathematische  Begrtindung 

der  Volkswirtschaftslehre.   Leipzig,  viii,  216  pp. 


Digitized  by  Google 


184  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

1886  Newcomh,  Simon.    Principles  of  political  economy. 

New  York,  xvi,  543  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 

1887  Van  Dorsten,  R.  K.   Mathematische  onderzoekin* 

gen  op  het  gebied  der  staathuishoudkunde.  Ar 
chief  voor  politieke  en  sociale  rekenkunde.  i  deel, 
3de  en  4de  aflcvering. 

1887  Westergaard,  Harald.    Mathematiken  i  National- 

okonomiens  Tjeneste.  In  volume:  Smaa$krifte 
tilegnede  A.  F.  Krieger.  Copenhagen. 

1888  WiLKsiEED,  Philip  H.    The  alphabet  of  economic 

science.  I,  Elements  of  the  theory  of  value  or 
worth.   London,  xv,  142  pp.,  I2^ 

1889  Effertz,  Otto.   Arbeit  and  Boden.   6d.  I,  Berlin 

(Piittkammer  &  MOhlbrecht) .  [2d  ed.,  1890, 
xxii,  348  pp.  Bde.  II,  III,  1891,  xxxi,  304  and 
xxiv,  127  pp.] 

ON  VALUE,  TAXATION,  AND  DISTRIBUTION 

Value 

1873  Walras,  L^on.   Abstract  of  'Principe  d*une  thdorie 

matht^matique  d '^change '  [see  *  General  Treatises/ 
1 883] .  Bull,  soc,  vaudoise  des  set,  naL  Lausanne, 
vol.  XII,  pp.  317-21. 

1874  Zanon,  G.  a.   Sulla  teoria  materoatica  dello  scambio 

del  professorc  M.  L.  Walras,  Icttera  al  profcssore 
Alberto  Errera.  Estratto  dalla  Rassegna  di  agh- 
coltura,  industria,  e  commercio.   Padova,  7  pp. 

1875  FoNTANEAU,  E.    Dc  la  valeur.   Jour,  (utuaires 

fran(ais^  vol.  IV,  pp.  175-99,  267-77. 

1876  Westergaard,  liarald.    Den  moralske  Formue  og 

det  moralske  Haab.    Tidsskrijt  for  Math. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  185 


1876  Zambelu,  Andrea.  Xa,  teoria  tnatematica  della  scam- 

bio  del  Signor  Leone  Walras.    Lettera  diretta  al 

professurc  Eneia  dott.  Alberto.    Padova,  28  pp. 

1877  Moll,  C.  L.    Der  Werth.    Kine  neue  Theorie  des- 

selben.    Leipzig  (Felix),  48  pp. 
T879    Marshall,  Alfred.   The  pure  theory  of  (domestic) 

values.    Cambridge.  24  pp.    [Privately  printed.] 
1879    Marsh  AIL,  Alfred.    1  he  pure  theory  of  foreign  trade. 

Cambridge.    [Privately  printed.] 
1884.    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    The  rationale  of  exchange. 

Jour.  Roy.  Statist.  Soc.^  vol.  XLVII,  pp.  164-6. 

[Very  slightly  math.] 
1884    WiESER,  Friedrich  von.    Ueber  den  Ursprang  und 

die  Hauptgesetze  des  wirthschaftlichen  Werthes. 

Wien  (Holder),  xiv,   214   pp.     [Very  slightly 

math.] 

1886    Antonelli,  (i.  B.     Sulla  teoria  matematica  delta 
economia  politica.    Pisa,  31  pp. 

1888  Nicholson,  J.  S.   Article:  "Value."  Encycl.  Brit,, 

vol.  XXIV,  pp.  45-52.    [Slightly  math. J 

1889  Ausprrz  (Rudolf)  i\:  Ttkben  (Rkhard).  Unter- 

suchungen  tiber  die  Theorie  des  Preises.  Leipzig 
(Duncker  &  Humblot),  xxxi,  555  pp.  [Chapter 
I  appeared  in  1887  as:  Zur  Theorie  des  Preises, 
vii,  52  pp.] 

1889    Lehr,  Julius.   Grenzwert,  Grenznutzen  und  Preis. 
Jahrb,  Nationaloek,  u.  Siaiisi, 

1889    Lfhr,  Julius.  Zur  Lehrc  vum  Preise.  Vurteljahrschr, 

Volkswirth.  (Berlin ) . 
1 889   R06SI,  Giovanni.    La  matematica  applicata  alia  teoria 

della  ricchezza  sociale.  In :  Siudi  bibUcgr,  storici  e 

criiici  e  nuovo  ricerchc,  Reggio-Emilia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


186 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


1889  WiESER,  Friedrichvon.  Der  nattirUche  VVerth.  Wien, 
^37  PP*  [English  transl.  by  C.  A.  Malloch,  ed.  by 
W.  Smart,  1893,  London  &  New  York  (Macmillan), 
xiv,  243  pp.    Very  slightly  math.j 

1871  T  auveau,  O.  Kenderaent  maximum  de  i  imp6t  in- 
direct. Jour,  des  econ.^  3d  ser.,  vol.  XXIV,  pp. 

445-^- 

187 1  Irnkin,  Fleeming.  On  the  principles  which  regu- 
late the  incidence  of  taxes.  Proc.  Row  Soc»  EdiH' 
burgh f  sess.  '7i-'72,  pp.  618-31.  [Reprinted, 
1887,  in  Papers  of  Fleeming  Jenkin,  London,  pp. 
107-22.] 

1875  AtHARi),  A.  Induence  des  taxes  qtii  frappent  les 
obhgations  sur  leiir  prix  d'apres  un  taux  d'iiUerct 
d^termind.  Jour,  ties  actuaires  fran^ais^  vol.  IV, 
Jan.,  pp.  70-74. 

1877  l.F.HR.  Julius.  Kritist^he  Beuierkungcn  zu  den  wk  iiti- 
geren  fur  und  wkIci  den  progressiven  Steucrfuss 
vorgebracbten  GrOnden.  Jahrb.  Jiir  Nationaloek, 
und  Statist, 

1880  ScHAFiLi  R,  Hermann.  I'cber  die  Noruurung  der 
Einkom  111  e  ns  t  e u e  r .  V ierteljahrsckr,  Volkswii  Ihsch., 
FoUt  und  Kuiturgesch.^  17***  year,  vol.  IV,  pp. 
1-38. 

1S82  Pamaij*  >.M,  MaiTeo.  La  traslazione  dci  tributi. 
Roma  (Paolini). 

1887  Pantaleoni,  Mafifeo.  Teoria  della  pressione  tribu- 
taria  e  metodi  per  misurarla.  Parte  prima,  teoria 
della  pressione  tributaria.    Roma,  78  pp. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  1S7 


1889   Cohen  Stuart,  A.  J.    Bijdrage  tot  de  theone  der 

progressieve  inkomstenbelasting.  'S-gravenhage. 
1889   Mees,  a.  W.   De  progressieve  inkomstenbelasting. 

Economist, 

Disiribution 

1873  F.  61N6  og  Julius  Petersen.    Bestemmelse  af  den 

ratiunelle  Arbejdslon  samt  nogle  Bemaerknuiger  om 
Okonomiens  Methode.  Naiionaioek,  Tidssknjt 
(Copenhagen),  vol.  I,  pp.  296. 

1874  D'AuLNis  DE  BouRouiLL,  Johan.    Het  inkomen  der 

iiiaatschappij.  l^-ne  proeve  van  theorcUachc 
staathuishoudkunde.    Leiden,  xiii,  215  pp. 

1875  Falck,  Georg  von.    Die  thUnensche  Lehre  vom 

Bildungsgesetz  des  Zinsfusses  und  vom  naturge* 

massen  Arbeitslohn.     Leipzig  (Bidder),  55  pp. 

[pp.  18-55  math.] 
1879   Van  Den  Berg,  C.  P.  J.  De  theorie  van  het  arbeids- 

loon.    Utrecht,  35  pp.    [English  transl.,  1880, 

London,  25  pp.] 
18S3    Fantaleoni,  Maffeo.     Contributo  alia  teoria  del 

riparto  della  spese    pubbliche.     La  Rassegna 

ItaUana^  year  III,  vol.  IV,  no.  i,  pp.  25-60. 
1884   Schroeder,  E.  a.    Das  Untemehmen  nnd  der  Un- 

terneh merge winn.    Wien  (Gerold),  x,  92  pp. 

1886  Lehr,  J.  K.    Marx,  Das  Kapital,  Kritik  der  poli- 

tischen  Oekonomie.  Vierieljahrsch.  fur  Volks- 
wirtsch,  Bd.  XC,  pp.  1-38,  97-123;  Bd.  XCI, 
pp.  34-60. 

1887  GiDDiNGS,  F.  H.    The  natural  rate  of  wages.  PoL 

Sci,  Quarts  vol.  II,  pp.  620-37.  [Very  slightly 
math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


188 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


1S87  ScHMiin.  Conrad.  Der  naiuiiiche  Arbeitslohn. 
(Staatswiss.  Studien,)  Jena,  87  pp. 

1887  Walker^  F.  A.    The  source  of  business  profits. 

Quart  Jour.  Ecan.^  vol.  I,  pp.  265-88.  [Very 

slightly  maUi.] 

1888  MuNRO  &  others.    Report  of  the  committee,  consist- 

ing of  Professor  Sidgwick^  Professor  FoxweU^  Mr. 
A.  H.  D.  Acland,  the  Rev.  W.  Cunningham,  and 
Professor  Muuro  (Sect.),  on  the  regulation  of 
wages  by  means  of  lists  in  the  cotton  industry. 
Reft  Brit.  Assoc,  Adv.  Sd.  for  1887,  pp.  303-20. 

1889  Wood,  Stuart.   The  theory  of  wages.   Public.  Amer. 

Econ.  Assoc. ^  vol.  IV,  pp.  5-35.    [SHghtly  math.] 

MISCELLANEOUS 
Methodology 

1872  Marchand^  J.  Recherche  sur  la  ra^thode  it  adopter 
pour  la  discussion  des  6I6ments  de  la  statistique. 
Jour,  des  actuaires  fran^aisy  vol.  I,  pp.  267-73, 
393-409.  [Continued,  1873,  vol.  II,  pp.  58-7S, 
251-63;  1874,  vol.  Ill,  pp.  307-25.] 

1875  BoGCARDO,  Gerolamo.  Dell'  applicazione  dei  metodi 
quantitativi  alle  scienze  economiche,  statistiche  e 
sociale.  Saggio  di  logica  economica.  Bibl.  econ,, 
vol.  II,  pp.  i-lxxii.    [New  ed.,  1878.] 

1875  Jevons,  W.  S.   The  progress  of  the  mathematical 

theory  of  political  economy,  with  an  explanation 
of  the  principles  of  the  theory.  Traiuuttions  of 
the  Manchester  Statist.  Soc,  pp.  1-19. 

1876  Walras,  L^on.   Un  nuovo  ramo  della  matemattca. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


1S9 


DelP  applicazione  delle  matematiche  all'  economia 

politica.    Giorn.  degii  ccon.  (Fadova),  April. 

1878  Mandello,  Karoly.  Erkolcstan  menuyis^gtan  az 
6rt^kelm^letben.  [Ethics  and  mathematics  in  the 
•  theory  of  value.]  Nemze^azdasdgi  szemle.  {^Eccn, 
Review. ']    Budapest,    [Very  slightly  math.] 

1885  Marshall,  Alfred.  On  the  graphic  method  of  sta- 
tistics. (Read  at  Internat.  statist  cong.»  June  23^ 
1885.)   four.  Statist  Sac,  (London),  10  pp. 

1887  Helm,  Georg.  Die  bisherigen  Versiiche,  Mathematik 
auf  volksvvirthschaftliclie  Fragen  anzuwenden. 
Ges.  Jsis  in  Dresden^  Abth.  I,  pp.  3-13. 

1889  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.  Points  at  which  mathematical 
reasoning  is  applicable  to  political  economy. 
Nature,  Sept.,  pp.  496-509. 

1889  Edgeworth,  F.  V.  On  the  application  of  mathe- 
matics to  political  economy.  (Address  of  Pres. 
Sect.  F,  Brit.  Assoc.,  59th  meet.,  Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne,  Sept.  89.)  Jour.  Roy,  Statist.  Soe.,  Lon- 
don,  vol.  Lily  pt.  J,  pp.  538-76. 

Money 

1881  Fauveau,  G.  Comparaison  du  pouvoir  de  la  monnaie 
k  deux  ^poques  di(T<^rentes.  /ot/n  des  eeon.^  4th 
s^r.,  vol.  XIV,  pp.  354-9- 

1883  Edgevvorth,  F.  V.    The  method  of  ascertaining  a 

change  in  the  value  of  gold.  Jour.  Roy.  Statist, 
Sac.  (London),  vol.  XLVI,  pp.  714-18. 

1884  Jevons,  W.  S.  Investigations  in  currency  and  finance. 

Luudoii  ^Macmillan),  xliv,  428  pp.  [Slightly 
math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


190  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

1885  Lauxhardi,  Wilhelm.  Das  ^\'esen  des  Oeldcs  und 
die  VVahrungsfrage.  Leipzig  (EDgeliuann),  vi, 
75  PP*    [Very  slightly  math.] 

1887  Nicholson,  J.  S.   The  measurement  of  variations  in 

the  value  of  the  monetary  standard.  Jour,  Ray. 
Statist,  Soc. ,  pp.  150-66. 

1888  Edgeworth,  F.  V.    Some  methods  of  measaring 

variations  in  general  prices.  Jour.  Roy.  Statist 
Soc.f  pp.  346-68. 

1888  EixiEWORiH,  F.  Y.  Report  of  the  couiumicc  con- 
sisting of  Mr.  S.  Bourne,  Professor  F.  Y.  Edge- 
worth  (secretary),  Professor  H.  S.  Foxwell,  Mr. 
Robert  Giffen,  Professor  AUrcil  Mar:>hall,  Mr.  J.  B. 
Martin,  Professor  J.  S.  Nicholson,  Mr.  R.  H.  IngUs 
Palgrave,  and  Professor  H.  Sidgwick,  appointed  for 
the  purpose  of  investigating  the  best  methods  of 
ascertaining  and  measuring  variations  in  the  value 
of  the  monetary  standard.  iMeniorandum  by  the 
Sec,  RepU  Brit.  Assoc.  Adv.  Sd,  for  1887,  pp.  247- 
301.  [2d  report,  1889,  in  Reft  Brit  Assoc.  for 
1888,  ])p.  181-209  ;  3d  report,  1890,  in  Rep' t Brit, 
Assoc.  for  1889,  pp.  133-64.] 

1888  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.  rhe  mathematical  theory  of 
banking.  Jour.  Roy.  Statist  Soc.  (London) , 
Nfarch. 

1888  NicHOUSON,  J.  S.    A  treatise  on  money  and  essays  011 

monetary  problems.  [2d  ed.,  1893,  Ix)ndon 
(Black),  415  PPO    [Slightly  math,] 

1889  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.   Appreciation  of  gold.  Quart. 

Jour,  Econ.y  vol.  Ill,  pp.  153-69. 
1889-  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    Report  of  the  comnuttee  con- 
sisting of  Mr.  S.  Bourne,  Professor  F,  Y.  Edgeworth 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


191 


(serrelary),  Professor  H.  S.  Foxwell,  Mr.  Robert 
Giffeii,  Professor  Alfred  Marshall,  Mr.  J.  B.  Martin, 
Professor  J*  S.  Nicholson,  and  Mr.  R.  H.  Inglis 
Falgrave,  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring 
and  reporting  as  to  the  statistical  data  available 
for  detenuiaing  the  amount  of  the  precious  metals 
in  use  as  money  in  the  principal  countries,  the  chief 
forms  in  which  the  money  is  employed,  and  the 
amount  annually  used  in  the  arts.  Memorandum 
by  the  secretary  on  Jevons's  method  of  ascertain- 
ing the  number  of  coins  in  circulation.  Rep'i 
Brit  Assoc,  Adv,  Set,  for  1888,  pp.  219-32. 
1889    Macleod,  11.  D.     The  theory  of  credit.    Vol.  I. 

London  (Longmans),  xii,  336  pp.  [Very  slightly 
math.] 

Transportation 

1872    Launh.\rdt,  Wilhelm.    Kommerzielle  Trassirung  der 

Verkehrswege.  Hannover. 
^^73   J'^^^  i  Aim^.    Des  relations  entre  les  chemins  de  fer 

et  Tetat,  consideiees  an  ])oint  de  vue  financier. 

Jour,  iks  acli/ aires /ran^aiSy  vol.  II,  pp.  173-99. 

1876  Madsen,  C.  L.   Den  sandsyniige  Lov  for  den  Inter- 

nationale Telegraftrafik.  Copenhagen.  [Con* 
tinned,  1878,  Nationaloek,  Tidsskrift^  Bd.  XI,  pp. 
171-83.  Enghsh :  On  the  law  of  international 
telegraph  traffic.  Jour.  Soc,  Telegraph  Engineers^ 
vol.  VII,  pp.  198-215.   London  &  New  York.] 

1877  Madsen,  C.  L.   Nye  Unders6gelser  om  Loven  for 

den  inicination ale  Trafik.  Foredrag  i  det  Kge. 
danske  geographiske  Selskab.  Gtografisk  Tids- 
skrijt^  Bd.  I|  pp.  X93-201,  Copenhagen,  1877. 


Digitized  by  Google 


192  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

[French  transl.,  1877,  Recherches  sur  la  loi  du 
mouvement   t^l^grapiiique   international.  Paris 
(Dentu),  ix,  68  pp.,  avec  10  tableaux.] 
1878   C.  L.  Madsen  and  Harald  Westergaard.  Corre- 
spondence.  NaHanaloek,  Tldsskrift. 

1878  Westergaard,  Harald.    Den  sandsynlige  Lov  for  den 

Internationale  Teiegraftraiik*  Nationaloek,  Tids- 
sknft,  Bd.  XI. 

1879  Lehr,  Julius.   Eisenbahn-Tarilwesen  und  Eisenbahn- 

Monopol.  Berlin. 
1879    Madsen,  C.  L.     Danmarks,  Sveriges  og  Norgeti 

Samkvem  med  Udlandet^  1871-77.  Copenhagen, 

4®,  xxiv,  26  pp. 
1883    Lauxhardt,  Wilhelm.    Wirthschaftliche  I  ragen  des 

Eisenbahnwesens.  Cenit  alblati lier Bauverwaltung. 
1885    Lehr,  Julius*   Wirthschaftliche  Fragen  des  Eisen- 

bahnwesens.   Deutsche  Bauuitung  (Berlin). 
1887    Lau-n'hardt,  Wilhelm.    Theorie  des  Trassirens  der 

Eisenbahuen.    Heft  I,  1887,  iv,  112  pp. ;  Heft  II, 

i888.   Hannover  (Schmorl  &  Seefeld). 

1887  FiCARD,  A.   Traits  des  chemins  de  fer.   4  vols. 

Paris  (Rothschild).    [Parts  math.] 

1888  Hadley,  a.  T.    Railroad  transportation  ;  its  history 

and  its  laws.  New  York  &  I^ndon  (Putnam),  v, 
369  pp.  [Appendix  II,  math.,  3  pp.] 
1888  Ambrozavics,  B61a,  Der  gemeinschaftliche  Nutzen 
der  Eisenbahnen  und  dessen  Berechnung.  [French 
transl. :  Le  tarif  par  zones  des  chemins  de  fer 
hongrois  et  ma  theorie.  Bruxelles  (Weissen- 
bach), 1895.  Italian  transl.  by  Carlo  Nagel, 
MUaao  (ingegneri),  1895.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


193 


Unclassified 

1872  Marlhand,  J.  Recherche  bur  la  m^thode  k  adopter 
pour  la  discussion  des  ^l^ments  de  la  statistique. 
Jour,  des  aciuaires  fran^ais^  vol.  I,  pp.  267-73, 
393-409,  Paris.  [Continued,  vol.  II,  pp.  58-78, 
251-63  ;  vol.  Ill,  pp.  307-25.] 

1872  Marshail,  Alfred.  Review  of  Jevons's  "Theory  of 
political  economy."   Accuiemy^  vol.  I,  no.  4. 

1872  WrrrsTEiN,  T.    On  mathematical  statistics  and  its 

application  to  political  econouiy  and  insurance. 
Jour,  Ins  tit.  Actuaries  (London),  pp.  178-89. 
[Continued,  1873,  pp.  355-69,  41 7-35-] 

1873  LEFfevRE,  H.    Physiologie  et  m^canique  sociales. 

Jour,  des  acluaut's  /ran(ais,  vuL  II,  pp.  211— 
50,  351-88,  Paris.  [Continued,  vol.  Ill,  pp. 
93-118.] 

1873  PocHET,  L6on.    G^om^trie  des  jcux  de  bourse. 

Jour,  lies  actuaires  frai^ais,  vol.  II,  pp.  153—60. 

1874  AviGDOR,    S.  N.     Question   d'^conomie  sociale. 

Jour,  des  actuaires  franfais^  vol.  Ill,  pp.  300-6, 
Paris. 

1874  DORMOV,  Emile.  Les  matieres  premieres,  ^tablisse- 
ment  des  coetticients  d'^laboration.  Jour,  des 
actuaires Jran^ais^  vol.  Ill,  pp.  143-62,  Paris. 

1874  Lef^vre,  H.   Principe  de  la  science  de  la  bourse. 

M^thode  approuv^e  par  la  chambre  syndicale  des 
agents  de  change  de  Paris.    Paris,  113  pp. 

1875  Fleischhauer,  Oscar.     Theorie   und   Praxis  der 

Renteberecbnung.    Berlin  (Weidmann),  815  pp. 
1875    FoNTANEAU,  E.  Principes  de  chr^matistique.  Jour. 

des  actuaires  fran^ais fWo\.  IV,  pp.  75-83,  151-72. 
o 


Digitized  by  Google 


19^  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

[CoiUinued,  1876,  ibid^  vol.  V,  pp.  70-96, 
341-65-] 

1875   Laurent,  U.   Demonstration  simple  du  principe  de 
M.  Menier.  Jour,  des  aciuaires  fran^ais^  vol* 

IV,  pp.  84-7. 

1881  EDGEWORTUy  F.  Y.  Mathematical  psychics.  An  essay 

on  the  application  of  mathematics  to  the  moral 
sciences.    London,  viii,  150  pp. 

1882  Lalnhaki>t,  Wilhelm.    Dcr  z\\  LckmassigsLe  btaiulort 

einer  gewerblichen  Anlage.  Zeitschr,  des  V^^rdns 
deutscher  Ingen, 

1884  PoYNTiNG,  J.  H.   A  comparison  of  the  fluctuations 

in  the  price  of  wheat  and  in  cotton  and  silk  im- 
ports into  Cireat  Britain.  Jour,  Statist,  Soc,  vol, 
XLVII,  pp.  34-64. 

1885  Fauveau»  G.    Les  effets  de  la  liberty  du  travail. 

JouK  des  econ.,  4ih  sen,  vol.  XXXI,  pp.  345-9. 

1885  Lehr,  Julius.    Beitrage  fiir  Statislik  der  Preise,  ins- 

besondere  des  (leldes  und  des  Holzes.  Frankfurt. 

1886  Fauveau,  G.   £)tudes  sur  les  premiers  principes  de 

la  science  6conomique.  Jimr,  des  icon, 
1886    Grossmann,  JAidwig.     Die  Mathematik  im  Dienste 
der  Nationaloekonomie.    I.  T  ief,,  Wien,  4°,  80  pp. 
[IL  Lief.,  1887;  III,  1888;  IV,  1889;  V,  1890; 
VI,  1891  ;  VII,  1895.] 

1886  Lehr,  Julius.      W'aldvvertrechnung  und  Statistik. 

Handb.  Forstwiss.    Tubingen  (Lorcy). 

1887  Akin-Karoly.    Solutions  nouvelles  de  deux  ques- 

tions fondamentales  d'^conomie  sociale.  Rev, 
dhon poL    (Paris),  vol.  I,  pp.  345-65. 
1887    Chevsson,  tmile.    La  statistique  g^om^tnque,yi//^r. 
le  genie  civil  (Paris) .    [Also  separately  37  pp.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


195 


1887  Edgfworth,  F.  Y.  Metretike,  or  the  method  of 
measuring  probability  and  utility.  London  (Tem- 
ple Co.)- 

1887   Janson-Durville,  E.    Cours  de  math^matique  ap- 

pliqu^e  aux  operations  financieres.  Paris. 

1887  LtHK,  Julius.    Zur  Statistik  der  Preise.  Zeitschr, 

ForsL  und  Jagdwesen, 

1888  Lehr,  Julius.    Eine  Principienfrage  der  Forstwirt- 

schaft.  Vierteljahrschr,  fur  Voikswirisch.^  Bd. 
XCIX,  pp.  36-80,  143-71. 

1889  Bohm-Baw£RK,  Eugene.    Positive  Theorie  des  Kapi- 

tals.  Iimsbrtick  (Wagner).  [Transl,  into  English 
(with  preface  and  analysis)  by  Wm.  Smart,  \xm- 
don  (Macmillan),  1891,  xl,  428  pp.  Appendix 
(2  pp.)  math.] 

1889  Launhardt,  Wilhelm.  Die  Abldsung  der  Baulasten 
und  die  Vergleichung  der  Bau  AusfUhrungen  in 

Materialien  von  \  ersrhiedener  Dauer.  Zeitschr. 
des  Hannover,  anhiiek.  und  ingen,  Verein, 
1889   WiCKSTEED,  P.  H.   On  certain  passages  in  Jevons's 
"Theory  of  political  economy.'*     Quart,  /our. 
£con,t  Apr.,  pp.  293-314. 


Uiyiiizeo  by  Google 


1%  BrBLIOGRAPIIV  OF 

FROM  MARSHALL  TO  THE  PRESENT  TIME 

(1890 -1 897) 
GENERAL  TREATISES 

1890   Marshall,  Alfred.   Principles  of  economics.  Vol.1. 

London  ( Macmillan),  770  pp.  [2d  ed.,  1891  : 
3d  ed.,  1895.]    [Math,  footnotes  and  appendix.] 

1890  Pantaleoni,  Maifeo.   Principi  di  economia  pura. 

Florence  (Barbera),  16*,  376  pp. 

1 89 1  Westergaard,  Harald.    Indledning  til  Studiet  af 

Nationaloekonoraien.  Copenhagen  (Phihpsen), 
88  pp. 

1892  Francke,  Adolf.    Mathematische  Gnindlagen  der 

Wirthschaftslehre.    Berlin  (Ernst),  51  pp. 

1892  Pai  i  FN,  S.  N.    The  theory  of  dynamic  economics. 

PublicaL  Univ.  Penn,  (Philadelphia),  vol.  HI,  no. 
2,  viii,  153  pp.  [Slightly  math.] 
'1892  Pareto,  Vilfredo.  Considerazioni  sui  principii  fonda- 
mcnlali  delT  economia  politica  pura.  Gioni.  (/e^/i 
econ^  May,  pp.  389-420 ;  June,  pp.  485-512 ; 
Aug.,  pp.  117-57*  [Continued,  1893,  Jan.^  pp. 
1-37  ;  Oct.,  pp.  279-321.]  . 

1893  Devine,  E.  T.    Economics.    An  elementary  pres- 

entation of  the  newer  theories  of  production  and 
consumption.  Philadelphia,  100  pp.  [Slightly 
math.] 

1893        FERTZ,  Otto.  Katechismus  der  politischeii  Oecono- 

mie,  Basel  (Miiller),  xii,  212  pp. 
1893    Lehr,  Julius.   Grundbegriffe  und  Gnindlagen  der 

Voikswirthschaft.    Leipzig  (Hirschfeld),  xiv,  375 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECOSOMIC^  197 


pp.   [I.  Abt.,  I.  Bd.  of  Frankenstein's  Hand-  und 

Lehrblicher  der  Staatswiss.] 
1896    Hadley,  a.  T.    Economics;  an  account  of  the  re1a< 
tions  between  private  property  and  public  wel- 
fare.   New  York  (Putnam),  xi,  496  pp.  [Slightly 

math.  I 

1896  Parlto,  Vilfredo.    Cours  d'^conomie  politique,  pro- 

fess^ k  I'universit^  de  Lausanne.  Lausanne  (Rouge), 
vol.  I,  viii,  430  pp.  [vol.  II,  1897,  426  pp.] 

1897  Walras,  Leon.    Etudes  d'^conomie  politique  appH- 

qu6e.  (Th^orie  de  la  production  de  la  richesse 
sociale.)  [Contains:  Th^orie  mathematique  du 
billet  de  banque,  1879.  BuU^  soc.  vaudoise  set. 
nat.y  1879 ;  D'une  methode  de  r^gularisation  de 
la  variation  de  valeur  de  la  monnaie.  IHd.^  1885  ; 
Contribution  a  I'^tude  des  variations  des  prix. 
[In  collaboration  with  Alfred  Sbion.]  Jbid.^ 
1885  ;  Monnaie  d*or  avec  billon  d'argent  regu- 
lateur.  Brussels,  1884  ;  Theorie  de  la  monnaie. 
Lausanne,  1886,  xii,  124  pp.  Note  sur  la  solution 
du  probl^me  mon^taire  anglo-indien.  Rev.  dUcan, 
poLf  T887.  p.  633.  [Eng.  transL,  1888,  in  Reft 
Brit,  Assoc.  for  1887,  p.  849.J 


ON  VALUE,  rAXATION,  AND  DISTRIBUTION 

Value 

1890  JuRiscH,  Konrad  W.  Mathettiaiische  Diskussion  des 
Entwickelungsgesetzes  der  Werterzeugung  durch 
industrielle  Produktionsgruppen.  Vierteljahrschr, 

Volkswirths.^  Poll  I.  mi  J  Kulturgesch.  (Berlin), 
27.  Jahrg.,  Bd.  Ill,  pp.  46-84,  158-96. 


Digitized  by  Google 


198  BTBUOGRAPHY  OF 

1891    Berry,  Arthur.    Alcune  brevi  parole  sulla  teoria  del 

baratto  di  A.  Marshall.    Giorn.  degii.  econ.,  June, 

PP«  549-53-    [Slightly  math.] 
1891    Edgeworth^  F,  Y.    La  throne  mathdaiatique  de 

Voffre  et  de  la  demande  et  le  coiit  de  production. 

Revue  d^econ.  pol.,  Jan. 

1 89 1  Patten,  S.  N.     Die  Bedeutung  der  Lehre  von 

GrenzQUtzen.   Jakrb.  Naiionaloek.  u.  SiaHst^ 
Folge,  Bd.  II,  pp.  481-534. 

1892  Clark,  J.  B.    The  ultimate  standard  of  value.  Yale 

Rev.f  vol.  1,  pp.  258-75. 

1893  CuNYMGHAME,  Henry.   Some  improvements  in  sim- 

ple geometrical  methods  of  treating  exchange 
value,  monopoly,  and  rent.     Econ.  Jour.,  vol.  II, 

PP-  35-52. 

1892    Fisher,  Irving.   Mathematical  investigations  in  the 
theory  of  value  and  prices.    Tram*  Conn,  Acad, 

(New  Haven),  vol.  IX,  pp.  1-124. 

1892  Pareto,  Viliredo.    La  teoria  dei  prezzi  dei  Signon 

Anspitz  e  Lieben  e  le  osservazioni  del  Professor 
Walras.    Giom.  degli  econ.^  Mar. 

1893  Patten,  S.  N.    Cost  and  expense.    Annals  Amer, 

Acad,  Polit.  and  Soc,  Sci.^  vol.  Ill,  pp.  35-67. 
1893    Ross,  E.  A.   The  total  utility  standard  of  deferred 

payments.   Annah  Amer,  Acad,  PoUt,  and  Soc, 

Sei,y  vol.  IV,  pp.  89-105.    [Slightly  math.] 
1893    WicKSET.L,  Knnt.    l^eber  ^Vert,  Kapital  und  Rente 

nach  den  neueren  nationaloekonomischen  Theo- 

rien.   Jena  (Fischer),  xvi,  143  pp. 
'    1893   ZucKERKANDL,  Robert.   Die  statistische  Bcstimmung 

des  Preisniveaus.    Handwort.  Staatswiss.  (Jena), 

Bd.  V,  pp.  242-51.    [Slightly  math. J 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS  199 

1894    Barone,  Enrico.    A  proposito  delle  indagini  del 

I'  isher.     Giorn.  de^li  econ..  May,  pp.  413-39. 
1894    Baronk,  Eurico.    Sulla'' Consumer's  Rent"  Giorn, 

degti  econ,^  vol.  IX»  pp.  211-24. 
1894    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.   Theory  of  international  values. 

Econ.Joiir.,  pp.  35-50,  4-^4-43j  606-38. 
1894    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    Professor  J.  S.  Nicholson,  on 

"  Consumer's  rent."    Econ,  Jour,,  vol.  IV,  pp. 

1 5 1-8.    [Slightly  math.] 
1894    PARtiO,  Vilfredo.    II  massimo  di  utilita  date  dalla 

libera  concorrenza.    Giorn,  degli  econ,,  vol.  IX, 

pp.  48-^6. 

1894   pARETO,  ViUredo.    Teoria  matematica  dei  cambi 

forestieri.    Giorn,  degli  econ.^  Feb.,  pp.  142-7  v 
1894    Schroder,  H.  Der  wirtschaftliche  Wert.  Begriff  und 
Normen.    Berlin  (Puttkammer  &  MUhlbrecht), 
iv,  103  pp.    [Slightly  math.J 

1894  WiCKSTEED,  P.  H.    Degree  of  utility.  Palgrave's 

Dirt.  pol.  econ,  London  ( Macmillan),  vol.  I,  pp. 
536-7.    [Very  slightly  math.] 

1895  Fetter,  Frank.  The  exploitation  of  theories  of  value 

in  the  discussion  of  the  standard  of  deferred  pay- 
ments. Annais  Atner.  Acad,  Polit,  and  Soc,  Sci., 
vol.  V,  pp.  882-96.    [Slightly  math.] 

189s  Pareio,  Vilfredo.  La  legge  della  domanda.  Giorn, 
degii  econ.,  vol.  X,  pp.  59-68. 

1895  Pareto,  Vilfredo.  Teoria  matematica  del  coin- 
mercio  interuazionale.  Giorn,  degli  econ,,  Apr., 
pp.  476-98. 

1895   Taylor,  W.  G.  L.   Some  important  phases  in  the 

evolution  of  the  idea  of  value.  Jour,  PoL  Econ., 
vol.  Ill,  pp.  414-33.    [Slightly  matli.J 


Digitized  by  Google 


200 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 


1896  Werxickf.   Johr^nnes.     Der  objective   Wert  und 

Preis.  Gnindlegiing  einer  reelen  Wert  und 
Preistheorie.  Jena  ( Fischer) »  116  pp.  [Slightly 
math.] 

1S96    WicKSTEEP,  P.  H.     Final  degree  of  utility.  Pal- 
grave's  Diet.  pol.  econ.,  London  (Macmillan), 

vol.    Wy   pp.  59-61. 

1897  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    La  teoria  pura  del  monopolio. 

Giorn.  degii  econ.,  July,  pp.  13  31- 
1897    Taylor,  VV,  G.  L.    Values,  positive  and  relative, 
Ann,  Amer,  Acad.  PoUt  and  Soc.  Set.,  Jan.,  pp. 
70-106. 

Taxation 

1892  Seugman,  E.  R.  a.   On  the  shifting  and  incidence 

of  taxation.    Pudl  Amer,  Eeon,  Assoc^  vol.  VTI, 

nos.  2,  3.    [Slightl)  iiuiLii.] 

1893  West,  Max.    The  theory  of  the  inheritance  tax. 

FoL  ScL  Quarts  vol,  VIII,  pp.  436-44.  [Very 
slightly  math.] 

1894  Baron  F,  Enrico.     Di  alcuni  teoremi  fondamentali 

per  la  teoria  matematica  dell'  imposta.  Giorn. 
degii  econ,^  pp.  201-xo. 
1894  Grohmann,  E.  Versuch  etner  stetig  steigenden  Scala 
fiir  die  progressive  Einkommensteuer.  Z^itschr. 
fur  Volkswirtsch.^  Socialpolit.  und  VerwalLt  vol. 
Ill,  pp.  610-18. 

1894  Johnson,  E.  R.   Relation  of  taxation  to  monopo- 

lies. Annals  Amer.  Acad.  P&Ut  and  Sac.  Sci,, 
vol.  IV,  pp.  68-93. 

1895  KoRNER,  A.    Indirecte  Besteiierung  und  industrielle 

Technik  in  ihren  Wechselbesiehungen.  Zeitschr, 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


201 


Jur  Voikswirthsch,^  Sacia^UL  und  VerwalL^  vol. 
rV>  PP-  ^  93-235-    [Slightly  math.] 
1896    Carver,  T.  N.    The  shifting  of  taxes.     Yaie  Rev., 
vol.  V,  pp.  258-71.    [Slightly  math.j 

1896  WiCKSELL,    Knut.     Finanztheoretische  Untersu- 

chungen  nebst  Darstellung  und  Kritik  des  Steuer- 
wesens  Schwedens.    Jena  (Fischer),  xii,  352  pp. 

1897  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    The  pure  theory  of  taxation. 

Econ.Joun,  vol.  Vll,  pp.  46-70 ;  pp.  2a6-38. 

DisinbuHon 

1 891    Berry,  Arthur.    The  pure  theory  of  distribution. 

RepL  Brit,  Assoc,  for  1890,  pp.  923-4. 
1 89 1    HoBSON,  John  A.    The  law  of  the  three  rents. 

Quart.    Jour.    Econ,^    vol.    V,   pp.  263-88. 

[Slightly  math.] 

1891  Johnson,  W.  E.   Exchange  and  distribution.  Printed 

by  Cambridge  [  Eng.]  Economic  Club,  8  pp. 

1892  Lehr,  J.    Die  Durchschnittsprofitrate  auf  Grundlage 

des  Marx'schen  Wert^esetzes.  Viertcljahrschr.  fur 
Voiksiinrfsch,  (Beriiu),  Bd.  CXIII,  pp.  145-74 ; 
Bd.  CXIV,  pp.  68-92. 

1892  WicKSELL^  Knut.     Kapitalsztns  und  Arbeitslohn. 

Jahrb.  Nationabek,  u.  Statist.,  3**  Folge,  Bd.  VI, 
pp.  852-74. 

1893  Clark,  J.  B.   Surplus  gains  of  labor.   Annals  Amer. 

Acad.  Polit,  and  Soc.  Sd.,  vol.  Ill,  pp.  79-89. 

liSy^    CoMiMONS,  J.  R.    The  distil ijution  of  wealth.  Lon- 
don (Macraiilan),  258  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 

1894  Anon.   Examples  showing  the  relation  of  the  rate 

of  profit  to  surplus-value.  Jour,  PaL  Econ.^ 
vol.  II,  pp.  327-9. 


Diyilizeo  by  ^OO^lC 


202  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

1894  Carver,  T.  N.  The  theory  of  wages  adjusted  to 
recent  theories  of  value.  Quart.  Jouk  Econ.^ 
vol.  VIII,  pjx  377-402.    [Math,  note.] 

1894  HouRwicn,  I.  A.  Rate  of  prolUb  imder  the  law  of 
labor-value.   Jour,  Pol,  Econ.,  vol.  II,  pp,  235-50, 

1894  Johnson,  W.  E.,  and  Sanger,  C.  P.  On  certain  ques- 
tions connected  with  demand.  Printed  by  Cam- 
bridge [Eng.]  Economic  Club,  8  pp. 

1894  K.0MORZYNSKI,  Job.  von.  ThOnen's  naturgemasser 
Arbeitslohn.  Zeitschr^  fur  VoUtsw,^  Soci€UpoUi* 
und  VerwalLy  Bd.  Ill,  Heft  I,  pp.  27-^2. 

1894  WicKSTEFi),  P.  H.     Essay  on  the  co-ordinauoii  of 

the  laws  of  distribution,    Loudon  (Macmillan), 

S^PP- 

1895  Beasdsley,  Charles,  Jr.   The  effect  of  an  eight  hours* 

day  on  wages  and  the  unemployed.  Quart.  Jour. 
Rcon.y  vol.  IX,  pp.  450-9.  [Slightly  math.] 
1895  Carver,  T.  N.  The  ethical  basis  of  distribution  and 
its  relation  to  taxation.  Annals  Amer.  Ac€ui. 
/WSf/.  and  So€.  Sci\,  vol.  VI,  pp.  79-99.  [Math, 
note.] 

1895  Lexis,  Wilhelm.  The  concluding  volume  of  Marx's 
Capital.  Quart*  Jour,  Econ,^  vol.  X,  pp.  1-33. 
[Very  slighdy  math.] 

1895  Moore,  H.  L.    Von  Thiinen's  theory  of  natural 

wages.    I.  The  classical  theory  and  Von  Thiinen's 
formula.    Quart  Jour.  Econ.^  vol.  IX,  pp.  291-  « 
303.    II.  Criticisms  of  the  formula:  natural 
wages  =V^jP.    7/^/^/.,  pp.  388-408. 

1896  Barone,  Enrico.   Studi  sulla  distribuzione  ;  la  prima 

approssimazione  sintetica.     Gtam,  degU*  ecan,^ 
Feb.  and  Mar. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


203 


1896  Pareto^  Vilfredo.  La  courbe  de  la  repartition  de  la 
richesse.    (Extrait  du  recueil  public  par  k  ^cult^ 

de  droit  de  Tuniversit^  de  Lausanne,  a  Toccasion 
de  I'exposition  nationale  Suisse.  Geneve,  1896, 
pp.  373-87.)  Lausanne  (Viret-Genton),  4^ 
1896  Pareto,  Vilfredo.  La  ciirva  delle  entrate  e  le 
osservazione  del  Professor  Edgeworth.  Gwm. 
(ffgli  econ.y  vol.  XIII,  pp.  439-48. 

1896  Walras,  L^on.  fitudesd'6conomiesociale.  (  Th^orie 

de  la  repartition  de  la  richesse  sodale.)  Lausanne 
(Rouge)  &  Paris  (Pichon),  viii,  464  pp.  [In- 
cludes :  Theorie  mathematique  du  ])rix  des  terres 
et  dt  Icur  rachat  par  I'etat,  BuU,  soc,  vaudoise 
scL  nat^  1880.] 

1897  Bei^ini,  R.    Di  alcune  curve  descritte  da  fenomeni 

economici  avcnti  rela/ione  colla  ciirva  del  reddito 
o  con  quella  del  patriraonio.  Giom,  degli,  econ., 
Mar.ypp.  177-214. 
1897  Edgeworth,  F«  Y.  La  curva  delle  entrate  e  la 
cun'a  di  probability.  Giom.  degli  econ.^  Mar.,  pp. 
215-18.  [Answered  by  Vilfredo  Pareto,  ibid,^ 
pp.  219-20.] 

1897  Parbto,  Vilfredo.  Aggiunta  alio  studio  suUa  curva 
delle  entrate.  Giom,  dqfi  econ,,  vol.  XIV,  pp. 
1 5-26. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Aletkodolo^ 

1892    Efpkrtz,  Otto.   Methodologie  der  politlachen  Oeco- 
nomie.   Theil  I,  Wien  (Seidl),  in,  92  pp. 


i^iy  u^ud  by  GoOgle 


20i 


BIBLIOuKAPlIY  OF 


1893    Patten,  S.  N.    The  scope  of  political  economy. 

Yak  Rev,^  vol.  II,  pp.  264-87.  [Very  slightly 
math.] 

1893  VoiGT,  A.     Zahl  und   Mass  in   der  Oekonomie, 

eine  kritische  Untersuchung  der  mathematischen 
Methode  und  der  mathematischen  Freisblldung. 
Zeitschr*  gesammte  Staatsw*^  no.  4. 

1894  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.   Curves.   Palgrave's  Diet.  poL 

econ.,  London  (Macmillan),  vol.  I,  pp.  473-4. 
1S94    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.     Demand  curves.  Palgrave's 

Diet.  pol.  econ.,  vol,  I,  pp.  543*>4. 
1894   Edgeworth,  F.  Y.    Dupuit.    Palgrave's  Diet.  pol. 

econ.,  vol.  I,  pp.  654-5.    [Slightly  math.] 
1894    Flux,  A.  W.    Diagrams.   Falgrave's  Diet.  pol.  econ., 

vol.  I,  pp.  574-6. 
X894    Grossmann,  Ludwig.    Compendium  der  praktischen 

X'olkswirthschaft  und  ihrer  mathematischen  Disci- 

pUneu.    Wien  (Grossmann). 
1896    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.  Functions.  Palgrave's  Diet.  pol. 

econ.,  vol.  II,  pp.  167-9. 
1896    ICdgeworth,  F.  Y.    Go^bcu.    Palgravc'b  Diet.  pol. 

econ.,  vol.  II,  pp.  231-3. 
1896    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.   Least  squares.  Palgrave's  Diet. 

pol.  econ.,  vol.  II,  p.  587. 
1896    Pareto,  Vilfredo.    II  modo  di  figurare  i  fenomeni 

economic!.    Giorn,  degli econ,,  vol.  XXi,  pp.  75-87. 

Man^ 

1893  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.  Recent  attempts  to  evaluate  the 
amount  of  coin  circulating  in  a  country.  Econ, 
Jour,f  pp.  162-9.   [Slightly  math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


205 


1892  Ross,  Edward  A.   Sinking  funds.    /V/^/.  Amer.  Econ, 

Assoc.,  vol.  VII,  nos.  4^5,  106  pp.  [Very 
slightly  math.] 

1893  HoxiE,  R.  F.    The  compensatory  theory  of  bimetal- 

lism. Joi(f'-  Pol.  Eco?i.y  vol.  I,  pp.  273-6. 

1894  Fisher,  Irving.    Die  mechanics  of  bimetallism. 

Eeon,Jou>%  vol.  IV,  pp.  527-37. 

1894  Nicholson,  J.  S.   The  efTects  of  the  depreciation  of 

silver,  with  specicil  rcfeicnct:  to  ihe  Indian  cur- 
rency experiment.  Econ,  Jour,^  vol.  IV,  pp.  59— 
68.    [Slightly  math.] 

1895  Clark,  J.  B.   The  gold  standard  of  currency  in  the 

light  of  recent  theory.    Pol.  Sci.  Quart.,  vol.  X, 
pp.  389-403.    [Slightly  math.] 
1895    DES  EssARS,  Pierre.    La  vitesse  de  la  circulation  de  la 
monnaie.  J&ur,  soc,  statist  de  PhriSj  pp.  143-52. 
[Ital.  trans.    Giom.  degU.  econ.    Slightly  math.] 

1895  EDGL:vv<^Rrif,  F'.  Y.    Thoughts  on  monetary  reform. 

Econ,  Jour.,  vol.  V,  Sept.,  pp.  434-51. 

1896  Edgeworth,  F.  V.    A  defeiice  of  index  numbjsrs. 

Econ.  Jour.,  vol.  VI,  pp.  132-42.   [Slightly  math.] 
1896    Edgeworth,  F.  Y.     Index  Numbers.  Palgrave*s 
Diet.  pol.  econ.,  vol.  II,  pp.  384-7.  [Slightly 
math.] 

1896  Fisher,  Irving.  .Appreciation  and  interest :  a  study 
of  the  influence  of  monetary  appreciation  or  depre- 
ciation on  the  rate  of  interest,  with  applications  to 
the  bimetallic  controversy  and  the  theory  of  in- 
terest. PubL  Amer,  Econ,  Assoc,  vol.  XI,  no.  4, 
100  pp.    [Part  I  math.] 

1896  Lindsay.  Die  Preisbewegung  der  Edeimetailen. 
Jena  (Fischer),    [Slightly  math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


206  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF 

1 S96    SoLVAVy  Ernest.    Principe  et  raison  d'etre  du  compta- 

bilisnie  social.  AnnaUs  de  V  ins  tit  11 1  des  set,  soc, 
(Brussels),  18  pp.    [Slightly  math.] 

1896  Zagnonf,   Arturo.     Moneta  e   costi  comparati. 
•      Ghm,  degU  econ,y  pp.  264-71. 

1897  Bowi.KV,  A.  L.    Import  and  export  mdex-numbers. 

Econ,  Jour.,  vol.  VII,  pp.  274-8. 
1897    WicKSELL,  Knut.  Der  Geldzins  und  die  Warenpreise. 
Jena  (Fischer).    [Slightly  math.] 

TransportaHan 

1890   CoLSON,C.   Transports ettariis.  Paris  (Rothschild)^ 

479  PP-    [Slightly  math.] 
1890    Launhardt,  Wilhelm.    Theorie  der  I  .irifbildung  des 
Eisenbahnen.    Berlin  (Springer) »  viii,  84  pp. 

1890  LiLL,  Eduard.   Das  Preisgesetz  und  seine  Anwend- 

ung  auf  den  Eisenbahnverkehr.  Wien  (Spiel- 
hagen). 

1891  L-AUNHAiUiT,  Wilhelm.   1  )ie  Zw  eckmassigste  Hohe  des 

Personenfahrgeldes  auf  den  Eisenbahnen.  Zeitschr^ 

des  Hanntyi^er.  architek,  und  ingen,  Verein. 
1891    Pareto,  VilUcclo.    Deir  utile  che  procurano  a!  paese 

le  ferrovie.    Gwrn.  degli  econ.y  vol.  IV,  pp.  154-62. 
1893    Perozzo,  Luigi.   Utilita  differenziale  delle  fenovia. 

AtH  delia  Ra,  Accad.  dei  Limei^  Jan. 

1893  Weichs,  F.  von.  Uber  das  W'ebcn  und  die  Cinnullagen 

der  Eisenbahn-Gutertarife.  Zeiisckr,  Jur  die  ge- 
sammte  Staa/sw.,  pp.  42-97. 

1894  CooLEY,  C.  H.   The  theory  of  transportation.  /W/. 

Amer.  Ecou.  Assoc. ,  vol.  IX,  148  pp.  [Very 
slightly  math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


207 


1896    iJE  Benedetfi.    Costo  delle  ferrovie.    Giorn.  della 
soc.  degli  ingegn,    Rome,  1896-97. 

Unclassified 

1890    CuGiN,  E.    Th^orie  et  pratique  de  Tiiitt^r^t  et  de 

ramortissement.   Paris  (Guiilaumin). 
1890   Marie,  L^on.   Traits  math^matique  et  pratique  des 

operations  financieres.    Paris  ((iauthier-Villars) . 
1890    Vautuier,  L.  L.  Quelques  considerations  ekmeataires 

sur  les  constructions  graphiques  et  leur  emploi  en 

statistique.  Jour,  soc,  siat  de  Paris y  31st  year, 

pp.  i66-(n.    [Slightly  math.] 
1890    Westergaard,  Harald.    Die  (JrundzUge  der  Theoric 

der  Statistik.   Jena  (Fisciier),  vi,  286  pp.  [pp. 

202-24  economic*] 

1890  X.    Di  alcuni  errori  di  matematica  che  trovansi 

nell'opera  del  Prof.  Toria  "  Analisi  della  propneta 
capitalista.    Giorn,  degii  eeon,,  Aug. 

1 89 1  Edgeworth,  F.  Y.   Osservazioni  sulla  teoria  mate- 

matica dell*  economia  politica  con  riguardo  speciale 
ai  Principi  di  economia  di  Alfredo  Marshall.  Giorn, 
degU  econ.f  Mar.,  pp.  233-45. 

1891  JuRiscH,  K.  W.  Die  Abhangigkeit  zwischen  Kapital 
und  Zinsfuss.  Vierieljahrsckriftf&r  Volkmirtschaft 
(Berlin),  Bd.  CXI,  pp.  1-38. 

189a  ScHULL£RN-ScHRATr£NUOF£N,  Hermann  von.  Die 
Gesetzgebung  liber  den  Glaubiger-Concurs  vom 
Standpunkte  der  Volkswirtscha(t.  Zeitsekr,  fitr 
Volkswirisciiaft,  Socialpolitik  und  Wnvaltung, 
Bd.  I,  Heft  3,  pp.  420-71.  [Very  slightly 
math.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


2U8  BIBLIOGHAPHY  OF 

1592  BiLGRAM,  Hugo.   Comments  on  the  Positive  theory  of 

capital.  Quart.  Jour,  Econ,^  vol.  VI,  pp.  190-206. 

1892  CiARKy  J.  B.  Patten's  Dynamic  economics.  Annals 

Amer.  Acad.  PoUt  and  Soc,  Sct\,  vol.  III,  pp. 

30-44- 

1893  Pareto,  \  iitredo.    Di  un  errore  del  Cournot  uel 

trattare  I'economia  politica  coUa  matematica. 
Giom,  degli  econ.^  Jan.,  pp.  1-14. 
1093    Carver,  T.  X.    The  place  of  abstinence  in  the 
theory  of  interest.    Quart,  Jour,  Ecan,^  vol.  VIII, 
pp.  40-61. 

1893  Helm,  Georg.    Eine  Anwendung  der  Theorie  des 

Tauschwerthes  auf  die  W'anrscheinlichkeitaiecli- 
nung.    Zeitschr,  Math,  und  Fhys,  (Leipzig),  pp. 

374-^- 

1593  Pareto,  Vilfredo.    La  mortalita  infantile  e  U  costo 

dell'  uomo  adulto.  Giorn.  degli  econ.,  vol.  VII, 
pp.  451-6. 

1894  Barone,  Enrico.   Sur  trattamento  di  quistioni  di- 

namiche.    Giorn,  degU  econ,^  Nov.,  pp.  407-35. 
1894   Clark,  J.  6.    A  universal  law  of  economic  variation. 

Quart.  Jour.  Econ,,  vol.  VIII,  pp.  261-79. 
1894    Edgeworth,  F.  V.    Average,    l^ilgrave's  Diet.  ]>ol. 
econ.    London  (Macmillan),  vol.  I,  p.  74*  [Very 
slightly  math.] 

1894  Lewis,  W.  O.  The  adaptation  of  society  to  its  en- 
vironment. Annals  Atner.  Acad,  Polit.  and  Soc, 
Sa,,  vol.  IV,  pp.  37-64.   [Very  slightly  math.} 

1894  Pareto,  Vilfredo.  Throne  math^matique  des  changes 
ctraiigers.    Assoc .  fra nc.  ar<.:/u.  sci. 

1894  WiCKSTEED,  P.  H.  Dimensigas  of  economic  quanti- 
ties.  Palgrave*s  Diet  pol  econ.,  voL  1,  pp.  583-5 . 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATHEMATICAL  ECONOMICS 


209 


1895    Barone^  Enrico.  Sopra  un  libro  del  Wicksell.  Giom, 

degU  econ,^  Nov.,  16  pp. 
1895    Sanger,  C.  P.  Recent  contributions  to  mathematical 

economics.    Ecoti.  Joun^  vol.  V.,  pp.  H3-38. 
1895   Sanger,  C.  P,   The  fair  number  of  apprentices  in  a 

trade.    Econ,  /our,^  vol.  V,  pp.  616-36. 
1895    Haynes,  John.   Risk  as  an  economic  factor.  Quart 

Jour.  Econ,,  vol.  IX,  pp.  409-49.    [Very  slightly 

math.] 

1 895  Yule,  G.  U.    On  the  correlation  of  total  pauperism 

with  proportion  of  outrelief.  Econ.  Jour.,  vol.  V, 
pp.  603-8  [continued,  1896,  vol.  VI,  pp.  613-21]. 

1896  BmcK,  L.  U.    Konsumenter  kontra  Producenter. 

NaUonaloek^  Tidsskrift^  pp;  419-41.  [Slightly 
iiuith.] 

iii96    Clark,  J.  B.    1  he  unit  of  wealth.    In  Staatswiss. 

Arbeiten  Festgaben  fUr  Karl  Knies,  pp.  3-20. 

Berlin  (Haering).    [Slightly  math.] 
1896    PAriEN,  S.  N.    The  theory  of  social  forces.  Suppl. 

to  Annals  Amer,  Acad.  Folit.  and  Soc,  Sd.,  Jan., 

pp.  1-151.    [Very  slightly  math.] 
1896   MoNTEL,  Enrico  de.     Le   leggi  dell'  interesse 

Scansano  (Olmi),  23  pp. 

1896  WuLFF,  Julius.    Have  Forbrugere  og  Producenter 

modsatte  Interesser?  Nationaloek,  Tidsskri/i,  pp. 
596-621. 

1897  Fisher,  Irving.    Senses  of  "  capital."    Econ,  Jour,^ 

vol.  VII,  pp.  199-213.    [Very  slightly  math.] 
1897    Wicksell,  Knut.    Review  of  Vihredo  Pareto's  Cours 
d'6:onomie  politique.  Tome  I.    Zeitschr.  fur 
Volkswirthschaft,  SocialpoHHk  und  Verwaiiung, 
Bd.  VII,  Heft  1,  p.  160.    [Math,  note.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 

Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


INDEX  OF  WRITERS 


[References  are  to  pages.  Figures  in  parentheses  give  the  number 
of  times  a  name  occurs  on  the  same  |>age,  when  this  is  more  than  once. 
First  and  second  digits  are  not  repeated  in  consecutive  references.  Thus, 
I24i  6,  9  (al^  83,  stands  (or  ii^L  iz6.  I2i  (2),  183.] 


Achard,  rS6. 
Akin-Karoly,  iq4. 
Ambrozavics,  192. 
Anonymous,  ij^       S  liL  ^ 
AntoneUi.  i8.t;. 
Auspitz,  1 8,^. 
Avigdor,  193. 

Barone,  199  (3^  aoo.  2,  8^  9. 
Bcardsley,  202. 
Beccaria,  174. 
Benini,  203. 
Benner,  178. 
Bernouilli,  173. 
Berry,  198^  201. 
Bilgram,  208^ 
Bing,  182^ 
Birck,  aoQ. 
Boccardo,  179.  88. 
Bohm-Bawerk,  195. 
Bowley,  2qL 
Brentano,  179. 
Buquoy,  175. 

Canard,  174. 
Carver,  201.  2  (2),  8* 
Cazaux,  176. 
Ccva,  173. 
Cheysson,  194 
Clark.  198,  201^  ^  8  (2I,  9. 


Cohen  Stuart,  187. 
Colson,  2q6- 
Commons,  201. 
Condorcet,  174. 
Cooley,  2q6. 
Courcelle  Seneuil,  178. 
Cournot,  177. 
Cugin.  207. 
Cunynghame,  198. 

D'Aulnis  de  Bourouill,  182. 
De  Benedetti.  207. 
Des  Essars,  205. 
Devine,  iq6. 
Dormoy.  193. 

Du  Mesnil-Marigny,  12?  (2^ 
Dupuit,  128  (2). 

Edgeworth.  185.  9  (3).  90  (s).  4.  5. ' 

8^  (2L  200.  I. 1  (7),  5  (3).  7. 8. 

Effertz,  184.  96,  203. 
Ellet.  180. 

Esm^nard  du  Mazet,  I22i  2i 

Faick,  187. 
Farr,  179. 

Fauveau,  129  (2^  86,  9,  94  (2K 
Fetter,  199. 

Fisher,  198,  205  (2),  9. 
Fleischhauer,  193. 
211 


212 


INDEX  OF  WRITERS 


Flux.  204. 
Fontaneau,  184, 
Forbonnais,  124. 
Francke,  rga. 
Fucco.  176. 

Giddings,  187. 
Gossen,  177. 
Gray,  181. 
Grohmann,  200. 
Grossmann,  204 

Hadley,  132^  2. 
Hagen,  122^  8a 
Hardy,  123. 
Haynes,  20Q. 
Helm,  18$.  208. 
Hobson, 
Hourwich,  202. 
Hoxie,  20 j^. 

Isnard,  174. 

Janson-Durville,  19^. 
Jay.  131,  ~^ 

Jellicoe,  172.  ^  tlL 
Jenkin.  180,  ^  6. 
Jennings,  178. 
Jevons.  181.  2,8^  g. 
Johnson,  E.  R..  200. 
Johnson.  W.  E..  ^  2 
Jurisch.  192^  202, 

Knapp.  I7Q. 
Komoryyuski,  202, 
Komer,  200. 
Kroncke.  124  ^ 

Lang,  125  (a). 
Lardner.  181. 

Launhardt,  183,  22.  L  2  (aL  4i  5, 

(2)- 
Laurent,  194. 
Lef^vre.  (2). 
Lehr,  185  (2), 6, 2, 22  (a).  4  (2). 5 

61  20I. 


Lewis,  202. 
Lexis,  202. 
I  Lieben.  185. 
Lill.  2Q6. 
Lindsay,  20;;. 
Lloyd,  174. 
Lubbock,  iSq. 
Lub6,  176. 

MacLeod,  181^  91. 
Madsen.  191  (2).  2  fa). 
Mandello,  182. 
Mangoldt,  128, 
Marchand,  188,  2i 
Marie,  207. 
Mariotte,  173. 

Marshall.  183.  ,5  (2),  9,  23^6 
Marx.  iSq. 
Mees.  187. 
Mill,  I2Z, 
Moll.  185^ 
I  Montel.  209. 
I  Moore.  202, 
I  Munro,  188. 

Newcomb,  184. 
Nicholson.  185,  20  [2).  205. 

Pantaleoni,  iM  f2|^  7,  96, 
Pareto.  106,2,8.2(1!.  202(iL4.6. 
S  (3)- 

Patten.  126,8  (2),  204.  9. 
Perozzo.  206. 
Petersen.  187. 
Fh'card.  19a. 
Pierson,  183. 
Pochet.  193. 
Poynting.  £24. 

'  Rau,  176. 
2q6  I  Ross.  128,  205. 
,  Rossi,  185. 

Sacher,  183. 
|2) .  Sanger,  202.  2  (a) . 
,  Schaffler,  iM. 


^       d  by  Google 


INDEX  OF  WRITERS 


213 


Schmidt,  iSS. 
Schroder,  E.  A.,  187. 
Schroder,  H^^  199. 
Schullem-Schrattenhofen,  207. 
Schumacher,  r8o. 
Seligman,  2Qcl 
Silio,  I74» 

Simon,  132  (under  VValras). 
Simonde,  174. 
Solvay,  2q6. 

Taylor,  199,  200. 
Thompson,  17^,  6. 
Thiinen,  176. 
Tozcr,  12?, 

Valerian  i,  125  ^a). 
Van  den  Berg,  187. 
Van  Dorsten,  184. 
Van  Houten,  i8t. 
Vauthier,  ao7. 
Voigt,  20^ 


Walker,  ififi.  ' 

Walras,  182,  ^  4.  8, 92.  ao3- 
Weichs,  206. 
Wernicke,  aoa 
West,  2Qa 

Westergaard,  184       92  (a),  6,  207. 

W  he  we  II,  176. 

Wicksell,  iq8.  ail  (2),  6,  2: 

Wicksteed.  184,  95.  9,  200,  2,  8^ 

Wieser,  iS.s,  6. 

Wittstein,  181^  23. 

Woikoff.  177.  9  (2).  ai. 

Wood.  lSS. 

Wulff.  209. 

X..  207. 


\ 


Yule,  309. 

Zagnoni,  aod. 
Zambelli.  185. 
Zanon.  184. 
Zuckerkandl,  iq8. 


^      d  by  Google 


1 


tl 


d  by  Google 


\ 


C^oogle 


THE  BORROWER  WILL  BE  CHARGED 
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IFTHIS  BOOK  IS  NOT 
RETURNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON  OR 

BEFORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED 
BELOW.  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE 
N,OTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE 
Lk)RRO\X  ER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES. 


